A Matter of Oaths
Helen S. Wright

All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this
book, or portions thereof, in any form.
Copyright © Helen Wright 1988, 1990
Cover artwork © Helen S. Wright 2009
from an original drawing by Evelyn Thomas

For Mum, who would not have been surprised.

From introductory material for new members of
the Guild of Webbers:

The web is based on a simple concept: a direct link
between mind and machine. The systems of a ship
become an extension of the webber’s body. But this
simplicity is deceptive, and will vanish the first time
you enter the shub. Breathing a liquid does not come
naturally, and is only the first step…
When you have mastered survival in the shub, you will
be ready to take the next step. Through sockets at
your neck and wrists, your nervous system will be
linked to the ship, and to the other men and women
who share the web with you. Through the sockets at
your wrists, you will communicate with your webmates. Through the socket at your neck, you will help
to control and monitor the ship. It will take several
months to learn this use of your nervous system, and
several years before you can claim to have mastered
the techniques…
Having a web is a privilege and a responsibility. You
must never forget that your web-mates’ lives depend
on your self-control. Leave all other concerns behind
you when you step into the shub. Forget your body.
Focus only on control on the web…

The Oaths between the Guild of Webbers,
its Members, and the Emperors Julur and Ayvar
The Member’s Oath to the Guild
I solemnly dedicate myself to the Guild of Webbers. On
my honour, on my life and on any lives I have to
come, by all that is sacred to me, I swear:
That my loyalty is to the Guild before all others, and
then to those to whom the Guild owes loyalty.
That my obedience is to the law of the Guild before
all other laws, and then to the laws to which the Guild
gives obedience.
That I will serve the Guild to the best of my ability,
and in every way that I am able to serve.
That I will cherish each member of the Guild,
respecting their beliefs and taking responsibility for
their well-being.
That I will keep this oath so long as I shall live.
The Guild’s Oath to the Emperors
We solemnly dedicate ourselves to the worlds that
bore us and to the people of those worlds. On our
honour, on our lives and on any lives we have to
come, by all that is sacred to us, we swear:
That our loyalty is to our people before all others,
and then to the Emperors who govern our people.
That our obedience is to the law of the Guild before
all other laws, and then to the just laws to which our
people give obedience.
That we will serve our people to the best of our
ability, in every way that we are able to serve,
respecting their beliefs and taking responsibility for
their well-being.
That we will cherish each member of the Guild,
respecting their beliefs and taking responsibility for
their well-being.
That we will keep this oath so long as one of us
lives.

The Emperors’ Oaths to the Guild
I, the Emperor Julur, solemnly dedicate myself to the
worlds of the Old Empire and to the people of those
worlds. On my honour and on my immortality, I swear:
That my loyalty will be to my people before all
others.
That my laws will be just.
That I will serve my people to the best of my ability,
in every way that I am able to serve, respecting their
beliefs and taking responsibility for their well-being,
and causing no harm to any unless for the protection
of the Old Empire.
That I will cherish the Guild of Webbers, and each
member of the Guild, respecting their beliefs and
taking responsibility for their well-being, causing harm
to no member of the Guild unless for the protection of
the Twin Empires.
That I will keep this oath forever, or forfeit the
loyalty of the Guild of Webbers.
I, the Emperor Ayvar, solemnly dedicate myself to the
worlds of the New Empire and to the people of those
worlds. On my honour and on my immortality, I swear:
That my loyalty will be to my people before all
others.
That my laws will be just.
That I will serve my people to the best of my ability,
in every way that I am able to serve, respecting their
beliefs and taking responsibility for their well-being,
and causing no harm to any unless for the protection
of the New Empire.
That I will cherish the Guild of Webbers, and each
member of the Guild, respecting their beliefs and
taking responsibility for their well-being, causing harm
to no member of the Guild unless for the protection of
the Twin Empires.
That I will keep this oath forever, or forfeit the
loyalty of the Guild of Webbers.

Ship Identification
OE-S32176040-8
Commissioned
Assigned

Bhattya
Patrolship class 89/F
240/5003, Keruil Zone
089/5043, Achil Zone (refitting)

Specification
Web
Drive

Standard 20+4
Samansa
(High Performance Option)
Class 2 weaponry
Class 2 shielding

Armament
Crew

6 senior; 30 junior; 2 apprentices
Commander
Captain
Webmaster
First Officer
Second Officer
Third Officer
Juniors
Apprentices

OE-P3987-49596
OE-P2143-95277
OE-P5971-17529
Vacancy
OE-P7921-58712
OE-P6417-75249
…
(No vacancies)
…
(No vacancies)

Rallya
Vidar
Joshim
Jualla
Lilimya

172/5043
ACHIL ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

―Now, there‘s pretty,‖ Rallya said appreciatively,
seeing the young webber who had paused just
inside the entrance to the Guildhall rec-room. He
must be recently arrived in the zone; otherwise she
would have noticed him before, with his distinctive
curly hair, contrasting shades of grey and brown,
and that short, svelte figure.

―He is, isn‘t he,‖ Vidar agreed, turning to look.
―Young for you though, Rallya,‖ he added, grinning
at her with the immunity of ten years of close
friendship.
―Looking isn‘t touching,‖ Rallya defended herself.
She leaned back, tipping her seat onto two legs, to
get a better view. The stranger was looking around
as if a familiar face would be welcome but
unexpected. He noticed her continued scrutiny and
nodded a courtesy to her rank, the cocky little scut,
before moving out of sight behind a group of
juniors.
―Anybody else notice his insignia?‖ Joshim
asked.
Rallya nodded. The stranger wore them on his
upper left arm, the only distinguishing marks on his
plain grey tunic. He had a Second‘s badge and two
Oath markers but no ship‘s patch: a shipless Second
who had crossed the Disputed Zone once.
―Looks young for a Second,‖ Vidar commented.
―Probably just made it before he came across and
that wasn‘t so long ago.‖
Joshim shook his head. ―That second Oath
marker isn‘t new, nor is the Second‘s badge,‖ he
pointed out. ―It might be worth talking to him.‖
Rallya looked at him in tolerant amusement. ―We
need a qualified First, remember? Not a pretty
Second to feast our eyes on.‖
―We‘ve eliminated all the available Firsts and
most of the unavailable ones,‖ Joshim argued.
―Unless we want to sit in dock for the foreseeable
future, we‘ll have to find a Second ready to be
bumped up.‖
―We haven‘t talked to Chennya‘s First yet,‖
Rallya objected.

―Now who‘s looking for pretty?‖ Vidar teased.
―Anyway, she‘ll be on patrol for another six days.‖
―And Vasir‘s Three are courting her,‖ Joshim
added. ―Their First accepted the Captain‘s berth on
Hashil.‖
Rallya frowned. She wanted Lina, Chennya‘s
First, a skilful webber with the reputation for being
a steady influence in the web-room, and with the
potential for command rank in a few years‘ time.
However, if she was being courted openly, etiquette
prevented Bhattya‘s Three from making an
approach. At least until she was settled with Vasir,
Rallya corrected herself, and Bhattya could not
wait that long. They would have to let her know,
discreetly, that they were waiting to make an offer if
she turned Vasir away. There was no doubt that she
would welcome such an offer; a berth with Bhattya
was a considerable prize. The problem would be
getting Joshim to agree to the theft.
―It won‘t cost us anything to talk to the stranger,‖
Vidar was saying. ―Until we broadcast the fact that
we‘re considering Seconds for promotion, we‘ll
have nobody else to talk to.‖
―And if we do, we‘ll be inundated,‖ Rallya
predicted sourly. ―Every Second in the zone will be
haunting the Guildhall trying to catch our eye. Or
crowding us out of our own web-room, visiting
their long-lost acquaintances and being bootlicking polite in the hope of impressing us.‖
―Nobody who knows your reputation will be
licking your boots, Rallya,‖ Vidar promised her.
―Not unless they‘ve finished with their teeth.‖
Rallya snorted unwillingly. ―I‘d still be happier
with a qualified First,‖ she insisted. ―We haven‘t
explored all the possibilities yet.‖

Joshim sighed and gave her the look that meant:
I know what you‘re thinking and the answer is no.
Rallya scowled and shrugged unrepentantly.
―You didn‘t have so many principles when I stole
you from Samchaya,‖ she accused him. ―Go on,
then, ask the pretty boy if we can talk to him.‖ As
Bhattya‘s Webmaster, it was Joshim‘s right to
make the first approach to any webber they chose to
court. ―Anything rather than spend the evening
being bullied by you two.
―Now I know I‘m getting old,‖ she muttered as
Joshim left the table. ―Ten years ago I‘d never have
given in so easily.‖
―You‘re only trying to lull us into thinking you‘ve
given up on Lina,‖ Vidar said cheerfully.
―She‘s still the best prospect we have,‖ Rallya
muttered rebelliously. ―Better than a over-pretty
Second.‖ She hooked one foot around a spare seat
at a neighbouring table and pulled it into position
next to her. ―Emperors, the child can‘t be more than
twenty-five.‖
―Thirty,‖ the stranger said, arriving behind her in
time to hear. He spoke Empire Standard with a soft
accent and a tinge of amusement, as if his age had
been mistaken before and he was used to it.
―Commander Rallya, Captain Vidar, this is
Second Officer Rafell. Rafe.‖ As Joshim made the
introductions, Rafe nodded the appropriate
greetings.
―We‘re glad you could join us. Sit down, please,‖
Vidar invited. ―May we buy you a drink?‖
―Thank you, but no.‖ Rafe took the seat that
Rallya had procured for him and waited with a hint
of wariness for the next move. A webber being
courted by a Three was temporarily their equal,
although most webbers were cautious enough not

to take advantage of that fact. Still, to refuse a drink
was unusually cautious.
―Do you drink?‖ Rallya asked curiously.
―Yes, ma‘am, but not when I‘m hoping for some
web-time in the near future,‖ he explained.
―On the station waiting list?‖ Joshim asked.
―Yes, sir.‖
―Take the drink,‖ Joshim advised. ―Half the
station‘s web is out of action – current leakage into
the monitor circuits. The rest is fully occupied
running the station. Every shipless webber in the
zone is on the waiting list. The average wait is five
days.‖
―Then a glass of veyu will do no harm,‖ Rafe
conceded.
―May I have a word, Joshim?‖ The interruption
came from Amsur, the Guildhall Webmaster.
―Can it wait?‖ Joshim asked.
―No. It will only take a few minutes. I‘m sure
Second Officer Rafell will excuse you,‖ Amsur
insisted.
―Of course.‖ Rafe tilted his head in polite
permission for Joshim to leave. ―Webmaster Amsur
would not interrupt without good reason.‖
As Amsur led Joshim out of hearing, Rafe took
the veyu that Vidar passed to him and set it down
untouched. Rallya studied his wrists and neck. His
web-bands were grey tarket hide, which was a good
sign: any webber worth the name bought the best
bands they could afford. Tarket was expensive: a set
of bands like that cost fifty days‘ pay for a Second;
but it was comfortable, long-lasting and the best
protection there was.
―Whose work?‖ she asked, indicating the pattern
tooled into the bands.
―Mosir.‖ Rafe shrugged dismissively. ―A conceit.‖

―An expensive conceit,‖ Rallya commented
sharply, doubling her estimate of how much the
bands had cost. ―Aristo?‖ she guessed.
Rafe shrugged again. ―Maybe,‖ he said carelessly,
glancing across to where Amsur and Joshim were
parting. ―Shall we wait for the Webmaster?‖
Nobody could accuse this one of boot-licking,
Rallya thought in slight amusement. He must be an
aristo, she decided, or he would have denied it.
Very few of them became webbers; they had too
many ties to family and Empire, too much to lose
by swearing the Guild Oath. If they were not
content with being decorative members of their
Emperor‘s court, they joined his personal guard or
bought a commission in his army. They might end
up dead that way, but for an aristo, anything was
preferable to serving the wrong Emperor in the
wrong Empire. She remembered the second Oath
marker on Rafe‘s sleeve and wondered which highbred family in the New Empire had suffered the
dishonour of a son‘s defection.
Joshim slipped back into his seat. ―Sorry about
that,‖ he offered Rafe. Rallya heard the change of
attitude in his voice and looked a question at him
which was ignored.
―No doubt Amsur had some useful information
for you.‖ Rafe was smiling slightly. ―Shall I leave
now?‖
―It would be helpful,‖ Joshim said carefully. ―We
need to discuss this between ourselves.‖
―Discuss what?‖ Vidar asked, as baffled as Rallya.
―You‘ll find it far more comfortable if you talk
about it behind my back.‖ Rafe stood up. ―And so
will I.‖ He bowed formally to them all. ―Webmaster
Joshim, there‘s no need to inform me of your
decision. I can guess it.‖

―What did Amsur tell you about him?‖ Rallya
demanded as Rafe left the rec-room.
―He‘s an Oath-breaker,‖ Joshim said baldly.
―Emperors!‖ Vidar exclaimed. ―Is Amsur sure?
You‘d have to be insane to break your Oath,
knowing the penalty.‖
―You‘d have to be something special to get to
Second afterwards,‖ Joshim suggested. He drank
from the beer in front of him. ―Amsur says his
record is excellent.‖
―Apart from the obvious blemish,‖ Rallya
reminded him drily. ―And whoever promoted him
did him no favours. As a junior, he‘d have a chance
of getting a berth. Not a good berth, but he‘d be
webbing. As an officer, he‘s got no chance. There‘ll
always be somebody as good as him who isn‘t an
Oath-breaker.‖
―He‘s here under the hundred day rule,‖ Joshim
confirmed. ―Came in from Jeram today. If he
doesn‘t find a berth here he‘ll never web again.‖
―I wonder why he did it,‖ Vidar muttered.
―That‘s something he doesn‘t even know
himself,‖ Rallya pointed out. ―Not if identity-wipe is
everything it‘s said to be. He can make the same
guesses as us, though.‖
―You think he is an aristo?‖ Vidar asked.
―Was,‖ Rallya corrected. ―It‘s the only answer
that fits. Death before dishonour, and if death isn‘t
possible, identity-wipe.‖ She made a noise of
disgust. ―They shouldn‘t be allowed to take the Oath
at all.‖
―He abided by the letter of the Oath,‖ Joshim
remarked. ―It allows the choice: to switch allegiance
between the Emperors or to accept identity-wipe.
Strictly, he shouldn‘t be called an Oath-breaker.‖

―Logic chopping,‖ Rallya snapped. ―He broke the
spirit of the Oath. That‘s what matters.‖ She looked
at Joshim suspiciously. ―You can‘t want to continue
courting him?‖ she asked in disbelief.
―I‘d like to look at his record,‖ Joshim said
mildly. ―We‘re not so overrun with prospective
Firsts that we can afford to ignore him, and our
orders will be arriving soon.‖
―I am not courting an Oath-breaker,‖ Rallya said
flatly. She pushed her seat away from the table,
knowing better than to argue with Joshim when he
was suffering from a surfeit of soft-heartedness; it
was impossible to win, and there were easier ways
to get what she wanted. ―I promised Yessim I‘d
make a fifth at drag,‖ she lied. ―We‘ll talk about it
tomorrow.‖
***
The out-side observation gallery was deserted; Rafe
had his choice of viewing panels. He halted at
random in front of one, hardly seeing the star-field
it showed him. Out was currently sun-ward, a view
without interest, which was why he had chosen to
come here rather than the popular in-side gallery
with its view of the gas giant above which the
station hung.
A wise man would have been in his cabin,
sleeping, without any of the problems that made it
impossible for Rafe to sleep. A wise man would
know when to give up, would not be wasting his
time looking for a berth that did not exist. A wise
man would be planning a future out of the web. A
wise man… Rafe laughed at himself. A wise man
would not have made the decision that he had made
ten years ago.

Tonight had been a mistake as well. Bhattya was
a Name; there had never been any chance that they
would consider him once they knew. He should
have declined their invitation, rather than risk their
anger and the harm it could do him if they
broadcast his guilt. He shrugged mentally. If not
them, somebody else would do it. Amsur would
always be ready with his words of warning: an
excellent record, but you ought to know… Rafe had
been through it all at Jeram and at Somir.
He dropped into a seat and put his feet up on the
railing between it and the viewing panel. An old
cargoship was easing out of dock, pregnant with
fuel, pushing a string of pods in front of it. As its
steering vanes spread ready for the ponderous
wallow out to the jump point, Rafe‘s arms twitched
in sympathy. He stilled them with an effort. Five
days, Webmaster Joshim had said, and that was the
average wait for web-time. How much longer would
it be for an Oath-breaker?
Footsteps on the spiral staircase warned him that
somebody was coming up to the gallery. He hoped
that they were looking for solitude, as he was. He
slumped lower in his seat to make it clear he
wanted no company.
The footsteps reached the top and paused,
replaced by a soft laugh. ―I thought you‘d run for
the obvious bolt-hole.‖
Commander Rallya. At least his luck was
consistent, Rafe thought bitterly. ―I was about to
leave, ma‘am,‖ he said, getting to his feet.
―No, you weren‘t.‖ She came round the curve of
the gallery. ―Sit down.‖
Rafe sat; any instruction from a Commander was
an order, unless they were courting you. If she
wanted him seated, this was unlikely to be the

standard tongue-lashing, starting with his
presumption in accepting Bhattya‘s invitation and
finishing with his unworthiness for any berth on
any ship. Either she planned to indulge her
curiosity about him, or she expected him to bed
with her in the hope of being rewarded with a berth.
He grinned cynically; probably she intended to
combine the two.
―What‘s amusing you?‖ she asked.
―You.‖ Rafe abandoned caution. Whatever he
said or did now would anger her; let it be
deliberate. ―To save you time and effort, ma‘am: I
don‘t know why I broke my Oath and I choose not
to speculate; and I‘m a webber, not a whore.‖
To his surprise, she laughed. ―I couldn‘t be
courting you?‖ she challenged.
―No, ma‘am, you couldn‘t. You‘re playing with
me.‖
She shook her head. ―No, I‘m not. I will admit to
being curious.‖ She turned her back on him and
watched the cargoship pulling away from the
station. ―Not about why you broke your Oath.
That‘s obvious. About how you got to Second, and
why you‘re shipless.‖ She swung around to face him
again. ―You‘re causing me a slight problem. You can
help me solve it.‖
Rafe shrugged. ―I can‘t solve my own problems,
ma‘am,‖ he said frankly. ―I doubt I can help with
yours.‖
―You won‘t help yourself by being impudent,‖ she
said sharply.
―I won‘t help myself by lying down to be walked
over.‖
―Have you ever tried it?‖ she asked with raised
eyebrows. ―No, you haven‘t.‖

She leaned back on the rail, hands on either side
of her. Even relaxed, she seemed to have a rod of
steel up her spine. The Emperors only knew how
old she was: her hair had probably been grey before
Rafe was born; and how long she had been in the
web. Longer than anybody else alive, that was
certain, and with no plans to retire. Long enough to
be sure of getting her own way in everything. Rafe
took pleasure in the thought that he had nothing to
lose by thwarting her. She was waiting for him to
speak. Let her wait.
―If anything gets you a berth, it will be your
nerve,‖ she told him after a long silence. ―But not
with Bhattya.‖
―You don‘t have to convince me of that,‖ Rafe
told her calmly. He grinned suddenly. ―Who do you
have to convince?‖
―Cocky little scut,‖ she accused him. ―I don‘t
frighten you one bit, do I? I ought to.‖
―Any damage you can do me, you‘ve already
decided to do.‖
―What about any good I can do you?‖
Rafe laughed, gestured to the cargoship behind
her. ―If I‘m good, will you get me a berth aboard
that?‖
―Would you rather have no berth at all?‖ she
challenged.
Rafe closed his eyes briefly, brought up hard
against the facts. ―No, ma‘am. I‘d settle for a berth
aboard anything.‖
―I thought as much.‖ She looked him over, like a
trader examining a bad bargain. ―What was your
last ship?‖
―Exploration. Avannya. Somir Zone.‖

―Avannya.‖ She repeated it thoughtfully. ―Didn‘t
you hit an EMP-mine last year? Lost your Three
and half the web-room?‖
―Yes,‖ Rafe said unwillingly. ―We were lucky to
get home at all.‖
―Luck wasn‘t enough, from what I heard.‖ She
stared at him speculatively. ―Her Second got an
honour for bringing her home.‖
―Ludicrous, isn‘t it? All I did was save my own
neck, and incidentally a few others, but they call me
a hero and give me a badge to prove it.‖
―You don‘t wear it.‖
―Against all the regulations, no. Why embarrass
people or confuse their prejudices? I can hardly be
an Oath-breaker and a hero, can I?‖
―What do you want to be?‖
―A webber.‖ Rafe snorted. ―For as long as I‘m
allowed to be.‖ He leaned his head back and looked
up at the ceiling. ―Tell me what you want from me,
ma‘am, and go away. I‘m tired, I‘m irritable, and
the last thing I want is to end up on a charge of
insubordination. That would be the perfect end to a
perfect career, and I am reaching the end of my
patience.‖ He could feel a tic starting in his cheek.
―I can‘t imagine what I can do or say to make
myself more unacceptable than I already am, but if
you tell me, I‘ll do it. For the peace and quiet,‖ he
added. ―Not for any meaningless promise of a berth
on an antiquated cargoship.‖
―How long since you last had some web-time?‖
she asked abruptly.
Rafe cursed the tic, embarrassed that she had
noticed, angry that she had mentioned it. ―What
does it matter? Soon enough they‘ll be deactivating
my web.‖
―How long?‖ she insisted.

―Forty days,‖ he admitted bitterly. ―Nobody is
going to waste capacity on an Oath-breaker with no
future.‖
―They didn‘t allow you in the web on the way
from Jeram?‖ She sounded genuinely surprised.
―They didn‘t allow me in the web-room. Didn‘t
want me corrupting the apprentices.‖ Rafe closed
his eyes. ―Go away,‖ he repeated rudely.
―Come to Bhattya tomorrow. We‘ve capacity to
spare,‖ she offered unexpectedly.
―No, thank you, ma‘am,‖ he said stiffly.
―No conditions,‖ she promised. She went without
waiting for a reply, to Rafe‘s relief.

Member Identification
NE-P9000-42775
Date and Place
of Origin

Rafell
Not recorded;
date estimated 5013

Date of Oath

Not recorded;
date estimated 5032

History:
082/5033
Central zone

Identity wiped to enforce the
Member’s Oath

265/5033
Somir zone

Web qualification: Junior

280/5033
Somir zone

Assignment: Junior
OE-S83491725-2
Surveyship Avannya

292/5037
Somir zone

Web qualification: Senior
(distinction)

297/5037
Somir zone

Promotion: Third
OE-S83491725-2
Surveyship Avannya

325/5040
Somir zone

Promotion: Second

107/5042
Somir zone

Promotion: (Brevet) First
OE-S83491725-2
Surveyship Avannya

173/5043
ACHIL ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

Rallya cursed automatically as she shifted from her
right side to her left. The ache crept up on her every
night, but if she asked the station surgeon for
something to ease it, there would be the inevitable
conversation about retiring. She only ached where
she had been injured before they perfected regen;
anybody would, eight or eighty, but the surgeons
refused to believe it. Faffing fools had none of them
been born back before they perfected regen.
Probably thought nobody could survive a broken
bone without it.
She squinted at the time. Second hour. Fadir
would have started preparing breakfast in the webroom. She rolled off her bed and went to shower,
setting the water to warm. As she soaped herself,
she wondered whether the Oath-breaker would
turn up for the web-time she had offered him. He
would be a fool not to, after forty days without and
with the prospect of a five day wait for station time.
As big a fool as she had been to make the offer. The
sensible thing would have been to get him moved to
the head of Amsur’s waiting list.
She would tell Joshim about it over breakfast, in
front of witnesses so that he could not immediately
reopen the argument. Dressing, she ran through a
mental list of ships in dock that had vacancies for a
Second. Joshim would know better than she did but
she could not ask his advice, and she had to find a
berth for Rafe before Chennya came in or they
would lose Lina to Vasir through Joshim’s
stubbornness. Masma owed her a favour, but not a
large enough favour to take Rafe because of it.

Maybe somebody would take him in return for a
favour in the future?
Fadir had breakfast ready when she entered the
web-room. Half a year more and his apprenticeship
would be over. She would miss him, mostly for his
habit of rising before her. Bhattya would acquire a
new apprentice, a scared sixteen year old to take
Rasil’s place as the youngest and most ignorant,
and Fadir would take the Oath and be given his
web. He would make a useful junior but he would
never reach senior rank; only one in ten did and it
was obvious early on which ones they would be.
She was still scowling at that thought when
Joshim came in, yawning. Eight years and she had
never seen him truly awake until after breakfast,
except in a crisis. She passed him a mug of alcad
without a word and waited until he had drunk half
of it.
“I offered somebody some web-time last night,”
she said casually. “He hasn’t had any for forty days.
I didn’t think he should wait any longer.”
“Anybody I know?”
“We bought him a drink last night.”
“Rafe?”
“Don’t jump to conclusions,” Rallya warned.
“He’s entitled to web-time like anybody else, that’s
all.”
Joshim looked unconvinced but could not pursue
it in front of Fadir. “What time is he coming?”
“He didn’t say he was.”
“I’ll need to have a look at his record,” Joshim
said hopefully.
“I doubt there’s a queue for it.”
Joshim gave her a sharp look. Rallya made a
small gesture of apology. As a last resort, letting it
slip in Bhattya’s web-room that Rafe was an Oath-

breaker would force Joshim to give up; it would be
impossible for Rafe to control juniors who knew.
However, Rallya would rather succeed without
antagonizing Joshim. He could hardly object if she
found the child a berth, but he would be furious if
she spread the truth about him around the zone
and mentioning it in front of Fadir would do just
that.
She would have to be careful to whom she did
mention it, she realized. There were seniors of
command rank who would broadcast it as far as any
junior. Masma’s Captain, for example. She struck
them off her mental list. Emperors, she was getting
old! One accursed Second should not be causing her
so much trouble.
“Still want the web for a workout this afternoon?”
Joshim checked, putting his empty mug aside and
stretching lazily.
“Yes.” Rallya crossed to the notice board and
examined the web schedule displayed there, then
altered it to bring forward the time of her tactics
workout. Anybody who neglected to check the
schedule this morning deserved the standing
penalty for missing a workout: three days confined
to ship.
Stepping back, she almost fell over Fadir, craning
to see what she had done.
“Make sure they pay the going rate for the
warning,” she told him, enjoying the blush that he
could never quite control.
“Yes, ma’am. I mean, no, ma’am, I don’t charge. I
mean, no, ma’am, I won’t warn them.”
“Fadir, not only are you distinctly unenterprising,
you are also a lousy liar. After two years with
Bhattya, you should have been cured of at least one
of those problems.”

“Yes, ma’am. May I be excused, ma’am?”
“Yes, Fadir. I would like nothing better than to
see the back of you. And there’ll be three days
confined to ship for you for every person you do
warn.”
“Yes, ma’am.” He contrived to bow and slink out
at the same time.
“How does he expect you to find out if he
disobeys?” Vidar wondered, coming in as Fadir left.
“She’s telepathic,” Joshim said crisply. “Fadir and
Rasil reached that conclusion long ago.”
Rallya chuckled. “Useful if I were.” She poured
herself another alcad. “Vidar, are you waving that
flimsy around for effect, or did you intend to show
it to us?”
Vidar handed her the output from the messager.
“Orders,” he said happily. “With an "expedite"
flash.”
Rallya read through them quickly. “Back to
Aramas,” she said thoughtfully, handing the flimsy
on to Joshim. “The Outsider incursions must be
getting worse.”
Joshim nodded agreement. “How long before you
have the new mass sensors in, Vidar?” he asked.
“They’ll be in by this time tomorrow,” Vidar
promised. “If I have to steal them from the Stores,
they’ll be in.”
Almost more than anybody else, Vidar was eager
to return to an active zone. There, his task of
maintaining the ship in peak condition was made
easier by the cooperation of a Storekeeper with the
same priorities: get the patrolships back on duty
with the minimum delay; complete the formalities
later, if ever, when things were quieter. Here in
Achil, Vidar and Second Officer Jualla had been
forced to battle with the Storekeeper for every item

of equipment, in spite of the fact that Bhattya had
been assigned to the zone specifically for refitting.
Rallya frowned suddenly. Once Vidar had
installed the new mass sensors, the only obstacle to
Bhattya’s departure was their lack of a First, and
the "expedite" flash made it a matter of urgency to
find one. By the look on Joshim’s face, he was
having the same thought.
“I’ll be off-ship most of the morning,” she
announced hurriedly.
“When are we going to talk about our First?”
Joshim asked, refusing to be put off.
“Vidar will be busy most of the morning, and so
will you,” Rallya temporized. “You may as well take
the opportunity to supervise Rafe’s web-time. Save
checking him out later if we do decide to consider
him.” As she had intended, the suggestion disarmed
Joshim. “Then we can talk about it after my
workout.”
“You’re up to something,” Joshim said
suspiciously.
“Nothing you could possibly object to,” Rallya
promised. “Why don’t you call Rafe and make sure
he’s coming?”
***
Amsur was right, Joshim decided as he finished the
last flimsy of the printout: Rafe’s record was
excellent. Only one ship in the ten years since he
came across the Disputed Zone, and that was a
first-class surveyship, Avannya. Promoted to Third
after four years as a junior, to Second three years
ago and last year a brevet promotion to First, now
lapsed. Rapid progress by anybody’s standards, and
probably deserved: like patrolships, surveyships

could not afford to carry dead mass at any level in
the web-room. Nor could they afford to discard
obvious talent because of a single line in his record
— 082/5033: Identity-wiped to enforce the
Member’s Oath. Even Rallya would have to admit
that, Joshim thought hopefully.
Or had she admitted it already, by offering Rafe
web-time? No, if she had changed her mind about
him, she would have said so openly. Without an
explanation, of course. Rallya never saw any need
to explain herself, or to apologize for her actions. If
she wanted to invite somebody into Bhattya’s web,
she would, conveniently forgetting that only
Joshim, as Webmaster, had that right.
Joshim sighed. He had not made that point at
breakfast, as he had not made hundreds of similar
points in the eight years since he joined Bhattya,
because it was rarely worth the effort to argue with
Rallya. Especially not when her hip was troubling
her. The surgeons talked about the inevitable
effects of age, suggested drugs that would keep her
out of the web, and were surprised when she would
not listen to them. Rallya refused to acknowledge
the pain that drove her out of bed in the mornings,
would have raised blue hell if Joshim dared
mention that her performance in the web was not
what it had been eight years ago, and continued to
behave as if she owned Bhattya and would do so
forever.
Blue hell would be a tame description for what
would happen if she found out what Joshim was
looking for in their new First. Yes, Bhattya without
Rallya was unthinkable, but it was going to happen.
In five years time, by the rate at which her webreflexes were deteriorating, and the Emperors only
knew if she realized it was happening. Joshim

dreaded the day when he had to tell her that he
could not allow her in the web, but he intended to
have a First ready to step into the Commander’s
place when it happened. A First trained by Rallya;
there was nothing wrong with her devious,
unprincipled, knife-sharp brain. Her tactical skill
had brought Bhattya safely through forty years of
action; Joshim was going to ensure that she left a
fitting legacy, a successor who would make it easier
for her to leave, somebody she liked and was
prepared to trust with the ship that had been her
life.
Chennya’s Lina would be ready for command
rank too soon. She would move on again within two
years; she had a record of ship hopping. Somebody
like Rafe would be ideal, newly promoted to First
but with obvious potential. The trick would be to
get Rallya to take him as her protégé. Without being
seen to have anything to do with it. Joshim smiled
ruefully. At least not until Rallya had too much
invested in Rafe to be prepared to waste it.
All this was assuming that Rafe wanted to be a
patrolship Commander; that was one thing that
remained to be established. His record showed no
specialization in ship systems or the web, which
suggested that he had no inclination towards
Captaincy or Webmastery, but he had no patrolship
experience, which was a pity, and he was too young
to have gained any in the New Empire before he
came across. He could hardly have had his web for
a year when he was captured. Could anybody so
young have such entrenched loyalties that they
would refuse to switch their allegiance from the
New Emperor to the Old? Joshim dismissed the
question with an impatient shake of his head:
obviously they could.

His audio-messager beeped in his ear; Fadir’s
voice came through as soon as he acknowledged the
call.
“Second Officer Rafell is here, sir.”
“Bring him up to the web-room, please.”
Joshim smiled indulgently at the excitement in
Fadir’s voice. The Senior Apprentice had his own
ideas about the reason for Rafe’s presence: if he was
here for web-time, he must be the new First;
Bhattya’s web was so finely tuned that no stranger
would be allowed in. For Fadir’s sake, Joshim
hoped he kept his ideas to himself while Rallya was
about or she would chew him up and spit him out in
extremely small pieces.
“In here, sir.” Fadir opened the web-room door
and stepped aside deferentially for his companion.
“Thank you, Fadir.” Rafe’s face twitched into a
tired grin as Fadir bowed his way out. “I hadn’t the
heart to tell him he was wasting his time trying to
impress me,” he commented as he made his own
belated bow.
Or the energy, Joshim judged as Rafe
straightened up. Curse it, all the classic signs of
web-cramp had been there last night: the rigid
control of voice and movement, the unnatural
tension masquerading as alertness, the dark circles
of sleepless nights under the eyes, the untouched
drink. How had he not recognized them?
“Which ship brought you from Jeram?” he asked
angrily.
“Does it matter?” Rafe made a gesture of
dismissal. “They’re hardly unique in the way they
feel about me.”
“Which ship?” Joshim insisted.
“Deretya,” Rafe said wearily.

“Have you registered a complaint with the
Guildhall?”
“No, sir. It would attract too much attention.”
Joshim nodded understanding, not liking it.
Rafe’s position was too precarious to risk claiming
the rights that other webbers could take for
granted. However, that need not prevent Joshim
from having a few sharp words with Deretya’s
Webmaster.
“We’ll go straight up to the web,” he said briskly,
unlocking the door to the riser with his palm.
Relief showed in Rafe’s eyes, as if he had
expected Joshim to change his mind, even so late.
He covered it quickly with long grey lashes, made a
visible effort to steady his breathing and followed
Joshim into the riser.
“Did you particularly want to wet-web?” Joshim
asked as he stepped out at the top.
“Whatever is most convenient for you, sir.”
Rafe was looking around hungrily as he
answered. Bhattya’s web was big, even for a
patrolship: twenty wet-web places and another four
dry, all of them currently idle. Joshim never
managed to view it without a pleasing rush of pride.
To Rafe, it must look like heaven, after forty days of
enforced abstinence; he was twitching in
anticipation.
“We’ll use these.” Joshim indicated the nearest
pair of dry places. Wet-webbing was more
satisfying, allowing total immersion in the web
without the requirement for a core of body control,
but it took longer to prepare for and Rafe needed to
be in the web without delay.
“What size web did Avannya have?” Joshim
asked curiously, starting to prepare his place.

“Ten wet, two dry. We ran with eight in the web
normally, ten when jumping into a strange system
for the first time.” Rafe rubbed at his wrists
unconsciously and moved to prepare the other
place.
“Bhattya runs with twelve in the web. Eighteen
in an alert, including six on filtered standby,”
Joshim told him. “We’re thirty-six in the web-room,
plus the apprentices.”
“Avannya wasn’t rigged for filtered standby.
There’d never been the need. You don’t expect
EMP-mines in abandoned systems,” Rafe said
bitterly. “Especially not in the jump point.” He laid
the bunch of web-contacts down on the couch in
front of him and hesitated. “I have to warn you, sir,”
he said nervously. “I haven’t had any web-time in
forty days. I’m going to be clumsy. There’s a risk
that I’ll unbalance your web.” The words came out
as if it was the last thing he wanted to say. It
probably was, Joshim thought approvingly: all the
more credit for saying it.
“I appreciate the warning, but you can’t be any
clumsier than a junior in their first berth,” he said
easily. “This web has coped with hundreds of
those.”
“My extension is greater than any junior in their
first berth,” Rafe insisted. “It might be safer if I
waited for station time.”
“If I need to, I won’t have any problems limiting
you.” Joshim finished his preparations. “If I
thought there was any danger to my web, you
wouldn’t be here.” He walked round to Rafe’s side
and picked up the neglected bunch of web-contacts.
“Happy with these?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Then hook in.” He made it an order.

Rafe unfastened his wrist-bands and removed
them, putting them in easy reach on the ledge at the
head of his couch. Predictably, the contacts
underneath were dull from disuse. He took cleaner
from the ledge and swabbed them gently. His hands
were shaking.
“My neck-contact will need cleaning,” he
apologized.
Joshim took the bottle of cleaner from him. Rafe
unfastened the band at his throat and put that with
the others. He tipped his head forward and pulled
the curly strands of grey and brown hair out of the
way.
“Nice contact,” Joshim commented. “You didn’t
have many problems growing your web in.”
“I don’t remember, sir,” Rafe said, sharp with
embarrassment. It was one thing to ask a web-mate
to clean your neck-contact for you, another to ask a
strange Webmaster. He flinched as Joshim applied
the cleaner and pulled away after a few seconds.
“Yes, that should be clean enough.” Joshim
closed the bottle and replaced it on the ledge.
“What system of signals are you happiest with?
Bhattya uses extended tens, but that’s peculiar to
patrolships.”
Rafe frowned, then shook his head decisively.
“The condition I’m in, standard fives may be
beyond me, sir.” He grinned, but it was obviously
forced.
“Standard fives, then.” Joshim gestured for Rafe
to lie down on the couch. “Hook in, and I’ll run a
calibration sequence for you.”
“Thank you, sir.”
Rafe strapped the signal-contacts into place on
his wrists, face-to-face with his own contacts. He
adjusted them slightly to get the position right and

checked his judgement by the readout on the
monitor screen beside the couch. Lying down, he
twisted comfortably onto his side before strapping
the control-contact into place at the back of his
neck. The accurate positioning of that was more
critical and took longer, but eventually he was
satisfied.
“Ready, sir.”
Joshim triggered the standard calibration
sequence and watched the readouts with interest.
Reflex speed and extension at the top end of the
spectrum; range and control less good, but that
would be the result of the web-cramp. Nodding his
satisfaction, he made a few adjustments to the
settings of Rafe’s links.
“We have two hours before anybody else needs
the web,” he remarked. “I’ll signal when your time’s
up.”
As Joshim hooked himself into the web, the
configuration displayed on the monitor beside his
couch changed to show the new key-position and
his links activated automatically, the contacts
warming invitingly. He opened the paths from the
web to his brain and closed the non-essential paths
from brain to body, leaving himself a view of the
monitor and his speech and hearing.
“Ready for activation, Rafe?” he called, when he
had reached his compromise between the demands
of caution and the space that Rafe would need to
stretch away his cramp, and imposed the
corresponding limits on the web.
“Ready, sir.”
Rafe had obviously been alert for the moment
that his contacts became active. He surged into the
web eagerly, extending until he reached the edges
of the space available and holding himself there for

long seconds of clear relief before pulling back and
moderating his strength. The monitor showed that
there had been more overlap between body control
and web control during that surge than was wise,
but less than Joshim had anticipated. He relaxed
into passivity, content that any danger to Rafe and
to the web was over in those initial uncontrolled
moments, and settled himself more comfortably on
his couch to observe.
Rafe was already working each of his circuits
individually, methodically stretching the cramps
out of his nerves. After thirty minutes of precise
level and range control exercises, he moved onto
pairs and higher combinations, working up to the
complete sequence of Senior qualifiers. He ran
through those twice, once with his eyes open to
monitor his performance.
[Good] Joshim signalled as Rafe finished. [Time
up.]
There were ten minutes left of the time that he
had promised but Rafe had already pushed himself
further than he ought. Without any apparent illeffects, it was true, but web-cramp was
unpredictable. Joshim wished he had thought to
say that Bhattya had enough spare capacity for
Rafe to return every day if he wished. It was an
omission he would correct as soon as this session
was over.
[Acknowledged. Disengaging.] Rafe made the
switch from web to body almost as soon as he
signalled, a smooth switch this time, without
unnecessary overlap. “Disengaged, sir,” he
confirmed.
Joshim deactivated Rafe’s links and disengaged
from the web himself, stretching pleasurably as he
returned to full body control. Rafe had moved while

he was in the web, sprawling on his stomach with
his hands trailing over the edge of the couch. He
looked more amused than embarrassed by his
lapse, sitting up slowly and crossing his legs in front
of him while he verified on the monitor screen that
his links were inactive.
“Let me check your contacts before you put your
bands on,” Joshim requested, detaching his own
links and slipping the web-contacts into their
housing. Nobody could work so hard after so long
out of the web and not suffer web-burn.
“No need, sir,” Rafe protested confidently,
unstrapping the control-contact from his neck and
spoiling the effect by wincing. He removed the
signal-contacts from his wrists more carefully and
waited obediently for Joshim to inspect the
damage.
“Not too bad, considering you were determined
to cram six hours work into two,” Joshim reproved
him, rummaging on the ledge for some salve.
“Wrists.” Rafe held them out meekly and he
anointed the over-hot skin around the contacts.
“Tip your head forward.” He brushed the curls out
of the way and treated the larger burn on the neck.
“Tomorrow, you do exactly what I tell you. No more
and no less,” he said sternly as he applied the
ointment. Rafe started to turn his head. “Keep still.
You skipped breakfast, I assume?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Then we’ll go and find out what the apprentices
have concocted for lunch.” He patted the curls
gently back into place, put the salve away and
handed Rafe his bands one at a time. “After two
years, Fadir shows signs of mastering the cookunit.”

“Do I have to listen to the rest of his life-story?”
Rafe asked plaintively, uncrossing his legs and
slipping down from the couch.
“Not in company,” Joshim promised. “He’ll just
worship you from afar.”
Rafe snorted cynically. “Not for long,” he
predicted. “Not if Commander Rallya is there.”
“What did she say to you last night?” Joshim
asked sharply.
Rafe shook his head. “Nothing,” he claimed,
tugging at his tunic to straighten it. “Just the offer
of web-time, for which I’m grateful.” He tilted his
head and grinned impishly, stripping another five
years from his apparent age. “Shall we go and make
Fadir happy?”
***
Rallya glared at Rafe as he stepped out of the riser
behind Joshim. His web-time had been well-spent;
he was relaxed and smiling at something Joshim
had said on the way down from the web. Joshim too
looked pleased with his morning, which was more
than Rallya could say about hers. Yes, there were
ships in dock that needed a Second, but no one she
cared to approach with details of Rafe’s history. No,
she had not explicitly promised to find him a berth,
but she had implied that she could and he had
openly doubted it.
And while she had been wasting her time, Rafe
had been impressing Joshim. Not deliberately —
she would grant him that — but it was obvious from
the light in Joshim’s eyes that he had been
impressed. Obvious to every webber in the webroom, by the speculative looks that were flying

about. And as for Fadir, mooning around over a
pretty face and a well-turned backside…
“Fadir, if you don’t remember to breathe soon,
you’ll faint,” she told him sharply.
“There speaks the voice of experience,” Rafe
commented.
Even Fadir forgot to blush in the stunned silence
that followed. Rallya opened her mouth and closed
it again. “I never actually fainted,” she said
eventually. “But only because somebody else
reminded me to breathe.” She looked Rafe up and
down slowly. “Of course, the provocation wasn’t
quite as intense,” she added.
“Of course, ma’am,” Rafe agreed seriously, taking
the mug of alcad that Joshim handed him and
raising it in salute.
Rallya returned the salute with a single eyebrow.
“Did you enjoy your introduction to Bhattya’s
web?” she asked sweetly.
“Thank you, ma’am, yes. I’m grateful for the
opportunity.”
“Good. Good.” She turned to Vidar, who had
finally stopped choking silently. “Is Jualla going to
be free for my tactics workout, or do you need her
to finish installing the mass sensors?” she inquired.
“I need her,” Vidar said firmly.
“Then you shall have her,” Rallya said happily. “It
will give Rafe another opportunity to enjoy
Bhattya’s web. You can join my workout, can’t you,
Rafe?”
Joshim made a warning noise but Rafe smiled
cheerfully. “It will be a delight, ma’am,” he claimed.
“It will,” Rallya agreed readily, refilling her mug
and beaming at the web-room in general. “A
delight.”

Rallya stepped out of the riser and looked happily
around the web. Ten of the wet-web places were
filling with shub, ready for the workout. All that
was missing were the eight juniors and Rafe, and by
the sounds coming out of the changing-room, they
were well on the way to being ready too.
Somebody came out of the riser behind her; she
knew without looking that it was Joshim.
“I may not pass him fit,” he said flatly. “He burnt
himself this morning.”
“That’s what happens when you play with fire,”
Rallya remarked. “Don’t worry. I’ll be gentle with
him. Don’t you want to know what he’s like at
tactics?”
“You’ll be lacking your usual advantage,” Joshim
commented. “He isn’t afraid of you.”
“I’d noticed. Insolence as the last refuge of the
desperate,” Rallya jibed.
“Tell me that if he beats you,” Joshim challenged.
“If he beats me, I’ll take him as First,” Rallya said
confidently. “Staying to watch it happen?”
“It’s too crowded down below,” Joshim
confirmed. “If anybody else wants to watch the
monitor screen, they’ll have to sit in Jualla’s lap. On
top of Rasil.”
Rallya chuckled. “Time I was changing. Wouldn’t
do to be late for my own workout.”
The changing room was its usual tangle of bare
skin, dark and pale, brown, yellow and red. Rafe
was an even hazelnut brown, with a light dusting of
grey and brown body hair. Near-human blood in
there somewhere, Rallya decided. All sorts of
skeletons in his aristo family’s cupboard. And if
Fadir was allowed in here, he would definitely faint.
She swatted Lilimya out of her way and started to
strip.

“Two teams,” she announced as she pulled her
tunic over her head. “Lilimya, Rasmallya, Churi,
Ajir: you’re in Rafe’s team. The rest of you, with
me.” Joshim could not accuse her of being unfair;
she had given him the pick of the bunch. “Rafe, we
use extended tens. You do know them?” She flung
her breeches in the direction of the hook behind
him.
“If I don’t, I soon will.”
Rafe caught the breeches one handed and hung
them up. His hair was tied in a short bunch of curls
on top of his head. Rallya pinned up her own plaits
and shook her head to be sure they were secure.
“Want a few minutes in the web alone with your
team?” she offered.
“I wouldn’t get them in a real battle situation,”
Rafe said easily. “But ask me again afterwards,” he
said over his shoulder on his way out.
When Rallya emerged into the web-room,
Joshim was checking Rafe’s contacts and muttering
something that sounded suspiciously like advice.
Rallya ignored it; she could afford to be generous.
Vidar had suspended work on the mass sensors
to be present. “Anybody making a book on the
outcome?” Rallya called across to him.
“Why? You want to bet next year’s pay?” he
answered.
Joshim finished his inspection and nodded his
consent for Rafe to web. There had been no real
chance that he would refuse; he knew as well as
Rallya that the encounter would not last long
enough to do any real damage. Except to Rafe’s
pride.
She gestured to the members of her team that she
wanted a conference and quickly assigned them
their roles. From the corner of her eye, she saw

Rafe doing the same. That was probably what
Joshim’s advice had been about: a summary of the
strengths and weaknesses of webbers Rafe had only
just met. The young scut should have taken her
offer of time in the web with them. So, you wouldn’t
get it in a real battle situation, Rallya scoffed. In a
real battle situation, you take every advantage you
can.
She stepped up to the nearest wet-web position
and checked the level of the shub. High enough to
support her.
“Webmaster’s permission?” she called as a
courtesy to Joshim.
“Granted.” He stepped through the circle of wetweb places to take his position at the central
monitor.
Rallya tucked her web-bands into the niche
below the rim of her chosen position and dangled
her feet in the shub while she positioned her links.
It was colder than she liked, but she would not
complain to Joshim; her fault, for not checking it
earlier. A glance at the screen to check her links
before climbing down the ladder into the shub and
triggering her ready-light, then the wait for Joshim
to activate her links.
She was wondering if he would dare to activate
Rafe before her when her contacts warmed,
catching her off balance. She recovered quickly and
flared out through the web, easily identifying her
team and Rafe’s, and locating the single unfamiliar
presence. She kept a fraction of her attention on her
team, enough to be sure they were following
instructions and keeping the opposition too busy to
help Rafe. The rest she focused on him, not
attacking, just waiting pointedly for him to try

something before she jumped on him and cut him
out of the web.
Lilimya and the others were acting without
coordination, just managing to retain their places
and no threat to their opponents. Disappointing;
even without a leader, Rallya would have expected
better. Even as she thought that, Caruya was
separated from the web without warning, leaving
Rallya’s team without its strongest member and
Lilimya free to help Ajir. The pair of them ejected
Khisa before Rallya could help her and then turned
to help Rasmallya and Churi.
Furious, Rallya lashed out at Rafe and found
nothing except a resonance construct. Almost
simultaneously, Shayoni and Magred lost their
uneven struggles, leaving Rallya alone to face Rafe’s
team and an invisible Rafe. Curse you, she told him
silently, digging herself into the heart of the web.
Come to me if you want to finish this, or we’ll be
here until eternity.
Lilimya and the others were holding back. My
usual advantage still holds against them, Joshim,
she mocked herself, setting herself to locate Rafe in
the web. Forty years against a few hours? There was
no place he could hide from her, not now that she
was looking for him. The construct had been good,
and it had won him the first round, but not the
battle. Never the battle.
Churi was getting nervous. Good. Good. Soon he
would start signalling for reassurance, for
instructions, and then she would know where Rafe
was. She had only to dispose of him and the others
would crumble. Come on, Churi. Commander
Rallya is going to lose her temper and throw you
out of the web soon. Do you remember how it feels
to be thrown out of the web by Commander Rallya?

Why not ask pretty boy what he wants you to do
next? Churi, if you don’t do something soon, I’m
going to jump on you so hard you’ll end up in
tomorrow. Pretty boy won’t watch while it happens.
If he’ll stand up for Fadir, he’ll stand up for you.
She pounced. She came up hard against a solidity
that was not Churi. Lilimya and the others were
piling into her before she could retreat, including a
Churi who oozed out of the signal circuits with
uncharacteristic determination. Emperors, two
slick tricks in one workout was two too many! She
might be going to lose, but she was going to take
pretty boy out of the web with her. She grabbed for
his core circuits and pushed as much power as she
could through them, determined to break his grip
on the web before Lilimya and the others forced her
out. He resisted her for a moment, then crumpled
frighteningly fast. Only then did she remember his
web-cramp and try to cushion his way out of the
web, but it was too late. Lilimya and the others
drove her out as Rafe disappeared.
She dragged herself out of the shub and tore her
links away without bothering to check that they
were inactive. Joshim was already bending over
Rafe’s position, pulling him out with the aid of
Rallya’s dejected team. Just conscious and
breathing, Rallya saw with relief.
“Jualla’s on her way with your drug-pack,” Vidar
reported, leaving the central console to join Joshim.
“What’s wrong?” Lilimya climbed out of the shub
with a smile on her face that faded quickly as she
saw the cluster around Rafe.
“Go get dressed,” Rallya said without ceremony.
“All of you.” She swiped at the excess shub still
clinging to her and pulled her web-bands out of the
niche, strapping them on as she crossed the circle.

“You didn’t have to jump on him so hard,”
Joshim accused, looking up for a moment when she
halted beside Rafe.
“I’m sorry. I forgot your web-cramp.” Rallya
addressed Rafe directly. The youngster had an
unhealthy yellow tinge to his skin and was still
twitching involuntarily, but he was in no danger.
“So did I.” He grinned wearily. “A pity. Now we’ll
never know who would have won.”
Rallya crumpled up the last flimsy and flung it in
the general direction of the others littering one
corner of the Three’s small rest-room.
“He’s got no patrolship experience at all,” she
complained to Vidar.
“Didn’t seem to worry him this afternoon,” he
said maliciously. “Do you want this last mug of
alcad or will you leave it for Joshim?”
“I’ll have it. If Joshim wants some, he can fetch it
from the web-room.”
Rallya dragged herself out of her seat and
emptied the pot. The first time in forty years that
she had been thrown out of a web and every part of
her seemed to know it. At least Rafe was feeling as
bad, she comforted herself, and he deserved to.
Nobody but a fool went into a tactics workout with
web-cramp. Still, he had done well, considering that
he had wasted the last ten years in a surveyship.
Joshim came through from the web-room. “Sorry
I’ve been so long,” he said, lifting the empty pot and
putting it down again with a shrug.
“Web check out all right?” Vidar asked him.
“There was some unusually rough play in it this
afternoon.”
“Which will not be repeated in future,” Joshim
said firmly.

“No point in having a workout if it doesn’t hurt to
lose,” Rallya muttered. “Keeps people sharp.” She
sat carefully back in her seat.
“I noticed,” Joshim said drily. “Rafe looks like
death warmed up. And so do some of the other
participants.”
Rallya stared him down, defying him to name
anybody else. Or to mention the careless promise
she had made before the workout.
“Where is Rafe?” Vidar asked.
“He left nearly two hours ago.” Joshim looked
unhappy about it. “His nervous system checked out
within the normal limits for everything — just. I
couldn’t justify ordering him to stay.”
“Since when have we had to justify orders to
Seconds?” Rallya challenged.
“Since they started being able to think for
themselves.”
“And there’s no doubt that Rafe can do that,”
Vidar commented. “And he’s good in the web,
Joshim. As good as they come. You could turn him
into a Webmaster in a few years time.”
“That’s what I was thinking,” Joshim agreed.
“You can’t be serious,” Rallya protested. “He’s a
born Commander.”
“Two clever tricks don’t prove anything. He was
lucky, that’s all. He’d never beat you like that twice.”
“Luck like that you earn. And in a real combat
situation, once is enough,” Rallya insisted.
“Anyway, he didn’t beat me. The outcome was
inconclusive. If I hadn’t gone soft on him, I could
still have won.” And the next time we tangle, I will,
she promised herself.
“I still think I could make a Webmaster out of
him,” Joshim said stubbornly.

“We can sort that out later,” Rallya decreed.
“How soon can we get him promoted to First?”
“Amsur will brevet him immediately, if we ask,”
Joshim predicted.
“Will his record cause any problems getting it
made substantive?” Vidar asked.
“With Bhattya’s recommendation?” Rallya
scoffed. “No problems at all. Joshim, how soon can
you see Amsur?”
“Oughtn’t I ask Rafe first if he wants the berth?”
“Emperors, of course he wants the berth! What
do you think he’s been doing here all day, if not
working his bumps off trying to impress us?” Rallya
said in exasperation. “Still, if it will make you happy
to ask him first, ask him. And ask him which he
wants to be: a Commander or a Webmaster,” she
called after Joshim’s retreating back. “I’ll bet twenty
days pay I know the answer.”
***
Rafe poured himself a third glass of jack and drank
from it without tasting it. Sleepers would be a safer
way of achieving the oblivion he sought — alcohol
on top of web-cramp was a fool‘s trick — but
sleepers had to be obtained from the station
surgeon at the cost of a question and answer
session to which Rafe refused to submit. And with
his web in its current overstretched state, he was
more likely to be prescribed mild painkillers and a
homily, neither of which would be of any help for
his real problem.
He smiled sardonically. There was no help for his
real problem, which was why he was running away
from it inside a bottle of jack. After ten years, he
thought angrily, there should be no more surprises.

No drowning inrush of knowledge, no return of
skills that he had no memory of possessing. All that
should have been over in the first confusing year
after he woke without any awareness of who he
was, with only the knowledge of what he was — a
webber — and of what he had chosen to have done
to himself.
And yet there were still surprises, moments when
he turned a corner inside himself and found:
complete recall of the extended tens system of web
signals, and the certainty that he had once used it
regularly, but no memory of learning the system,
nor of the circumstances in which he had used it.
He emptied the glass in his hand and refilled it.
There were no memories of anything that had once
made him a person, only the things that made him
a webber. And if he failed to find a berth in the next
ninety-nine days, that too would be taken away
from him.
The door alert sounded. He cursed. There was
nobody in Achil zone to whom he wanted to speak.
There was nobody in any zone in either Empire to
whom he wanted to speak. Get gone, he wished the
unknown visitor. Get gone and leave me to get
drunk.
The alert sounded again. Rafe pushed himself to
his feet and went to answer it. If he did not, his
visitor would only come back later, when he would
be even less able to deal with them.
“What?” he demanded as the door slid open at
his touch. “What, sir?” he corrected himself
belatedly as he recognized his visitor.
Joshim looked at him in silence. “You ought to be
in bed,” he said at last.

Rafe shrugged. “Yes.” He leaned against the wall
by the door, more drunk than he had realized. “Is
that all, sir?”
Joshim was sniffing the air. “Jack? In your
state?” he questioned.
“Jack. In my state.” Rafe stepped back into the
room. “Want some? The bottle isn’t empty yet.”
“I should hope not.” Joshim followed Rafe in,
closing the door behind him. “How much have you
had?”
Rafe picked up the bottle and squinted at the
level. “This was full,” he said, abandoning the effort.
He sat down again and looked up at Joshim. A crick
in the neck was preferable to collapsing in an
untidy heap on the floor. “There’s another glass
somewhere,” he said, picking up his own. “Help
yourself.”
Joshim shook his head. “No, thanks. And you’ve
had enough,” he said firmly,
“Doesn’t that depend on how much enough is?”
Rafe queried.
“Enough is when you can’t stand up, or see
straight.”
“Enough is when you’re unconscious,” Rafe
contradicted him. “General anaesthetic,” he added,
gesturing at the bottle. “That’s the theory anyway.
As usual, the practice has a very loose
correspondence with the theory, but I expect them
to converge eventually.”
“When you’re unconscious.” Joshim plucked the
glass out of Rafe’s hand and set it down. “Do you do
this often?”
“No.” Rafe closed his eyes and watched the
patterns of light spinning inside his eyelids. Better
than watching Joshim watching him.
“So why tonight?”

“It hasn’t been a good day.” Rafe opened his eyes.
“Sorry, sir. After the trouble you took over me
today, I ought to be treating my web with more care
than this, I know. But tonight, there isn’t any
alternative. I don’t recommend that you stay and
watch.”
Joshim seated himself on the edge of the low
table, so that his eyes were on a level with Rafe’s.
Green eyes, Rafe noted, a cap of sleek black hair,
and uniformly pale brown skin, at least as much of
the skin as Rafe had seen. A ring bearing the silver
web of a Webmaster traced through a green stone
on one hand, and a silver pendant with the linked
circles of an Aruranist, visible earlier today but now
hidden inside a black jacket.
“Do you take the pendant off in the web?” Rafe
asked.
“Yes. And the ring.” Joshim was amused by the
question. “I have a tattoo of the circles — most
Aruranists do — but not of the web.” He continued
to watch Rafe speculatively. “Apart from getting
thrown so hard out of the web, I would have
thought today was a very good day. I don’t know of
anybody else who’s ever beaten Rallya in a
workout.”
“I didn’t beat her. If she hadn’t gone soft on me,
she could still have won.”
Joshim smiled. “That’s the second time I’ve been
told that this evening. It was still a creditable
performance.”
“Surprisingly so,” Rafe said bitterly. “Especially
to me.”
“Because of your web-cramp?”
“Not because of my faffing web-cramp!” Rafe
reached for his drink, evading Joshim’s attempt to
prevent him. “Until today, sir, I had no idea I knew

extended tens. Until today, I had no idea I could
create a resonance construct. Or mimic somebody
else in the web. Or hide somebody else in the signal
circuits.” He gulped at the drink, emptying the glass
before Joshim could take it off him again. “Now I
know I can do all those things, but I don’t know
what else I know, or how I learned, or who taught
me. And if I go to sleep now, I shall spend the night
chasing nonexistent memories around my dreams
and beating myself against the walls inside my
head.” He flung the glass against the wall beyond
Joshim. It bounced off and rolled across the floor.
“And there isn’t anybody to blame except myself,
and I’m never going to know why I was stupid
enough to break my Oath!”
He stopped and laughed self-consciously. “And I
ache,” he admitted. “I feel as if somebody knocked
me down and walked all over me.” He put his head
on one side and looked at the out-of-focus
Webmaster. “You didn’t come here to listen to me
whining, or to watch me drinking.”
“No. I came to offer you a berth as Bhattya’s
First.”
Rafe
swore
incredulously,
inadequately
expressing the sickness in the pit of his stomach.
“My luck could be used as a metric for consistency,”
he muttered, stumbling to his feet to retrieve the
glass. “You wouldn’t like to go away and pretend
you haven’t seen me like this?”
“No.”
“I didn’t think so.” Rafe froze as his web twinged
warning of an imminent spasm. “You could at least
look the other way while I throw up,” he said
carefully.
“If I do that, you’ll never reach the san.”

Rafe found himself supported to the san, and
after his stomach had rejected the alcohol with
which he had flooded it, to the bed. He rolled onto
his side, away from Joshim’s efforts to remove his
boots.
“Go away,” he urged. “Take the bottle with you if
it makes you happy, just go.”
Joshim finished removing his boots. “I’m going
to fetch something to sober you up,” he said. “Your
web is in no shape to cope with what you’re doing to
it.”
“Why bother? It isn’t your responsibility.” Rafe
turned miserably onto his stomach.
“We’ll talk about that when you’re sober.”
“Hell, you are going to sober me up,” Rafe said in
disbelief, seeing the drug-pack with which Joshim
returned.
“Yes.” Joshim set the pack down on the table and
came to look at Rafe where he was curled up in the
san. “Sick again?”
“It seemed a good idea to stay here. Saves me
having to clean up after myself later.”
“That may be the first sensible thought you’ve
had all evening. Think you can get to the bed? With
help, of course. I’m not going to treat you in there.”
Once Rafe was safely on the bed, Joshim opened
the pack and took out a drug-mask and canister.
“Deep breaths,” he said, sitting beside Rafe on the
bed and slipping the mask over his face.
Rafe obeyed, uncomfortably aware by now that
the strictures about alcohol and web-cramp were
fully justified. Joshim strapped a blood monitor to
his arm; he flinched as the probe bit.
“Finish the canister,” Joshim said, studying the
readout. “There’s still enough alcohol in your

system to knock out half a web-room. Emperors
only know how you stayed on your feet so long.”
“Near-human blood,” Rafe informed him through
the mask. “Inconvenient when I’m trying to drink
myself senseless.”
“Shut up and breathe,” Joshim told him.
Rafe closed his eyes and concentrated on pulling
the drug into his lungs. As the alcohol was
neutralized, it left behind an emotional numbness
that he welcomed. Anything rather than think
about the chance he had thrown away tonight.
“Enough,” Joshim decided at last, lifting the
mask off Rafe’s face.
“Thank you, sir.” Rafe sat up and hugged his
knees. “That was good of you.”
“It was also the one and only time I will do that
for you,” Joshim said grimly. “The next time you try
to kill yourself with a bottle of jack, I’ll leave you to
it.”
“I wasn’t trying to kill myself,” Rafe said flatly. “I
can’t. That’s part of the conditioning that goes with
identity-wipe. There isn’t any way I can voluntarily
deprive the Guild of my services. I have to wait to
be thrown out.” He shivered and started to remove
the blood monitor from his arm.
“Leave that,” Joshim ordered. “I’m going to give
you a pain-killer.”
“You wouldn’t have a sleeper to spare?” Rafe
asked hopefully.
“You can’t take one tonight. Your system can’t
handle it.”
“It can. Another effect of my near-human blood.”
Rafe grimaced. “Though I can’t prove it.”
“Your medical record…”
“Is incomplete, for obvious reasons. It notes that
I’m a hybrid, without giving details.” Rafe shrugged.

“Forget I asked. I’ll have to sleep without help
sooner or later. Why not tonight?”
“If you’re going to be Bhattya’s First, I shall want
a full metabolic work up for you,” Joshim
commented. “Until then, I’ll take your word about
the sleeper.”
“Is the offer still open?” Rafe asked
disbelievingly.
“Yes. On the condition that this does not happen
again.” Joshim handed him a small cup of liquid.
“Drink that.” He took the cup away when Rafe had
finished, rinsed it out and shut it in the drug-pack.
“Lie flat.”
Rafe obeyed, feeling the drug starting to work.
“How in hell did you persuade Commander Rallya
to accept me?” he asked sleepily.
Joshim laughed. “One day I may answer that. Go
to sleep.”

From the Old Empire Guild Bulletin, 200/5043
In Aramas zone, ship losses to the unidentified
Outsiders continue. Convoys are being instituted on
the routes of greatest risk, and extra patrolships
assigned to the zone. At the request of the Guild
Council, the Emperor Julur has dismissed Drevir Lord
Rhamar as head of the team of diplomats and
historians attempting to make contact with the
Outsiders, and appointed Madjaya Lady Gremor, noted
for her successful contact with the Lam-ti-ranog
system (now Dasnar zone).
Report by Palace Security Chief Braniya
to the Emperor Julur
In the matter of your particular interest, personnel
changes in the Aramas zone will take effect shortly; a
preliminary report on the new situation is attached.
Investigations into recent events are continuing.
205/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

―Glad to be back, Rallya?‖ As he spoke, Noromi,
Commander of Meremir, looked around the
conference room in disgust. “Emperors, we’ll never
get this lot sorted out. I doubt one of them has run
in a convoy before.”
“They’ll learn,” Rallya told him. She did not envy
Noromi his task as Convoy Commander, in spite of
the apparent authority it gave him over the other
patrolships. He was welcome to the tiresome
business of keeping the cargoships in some
semblance of order and mediating between
cargoship Threes who all thought they deserved
special treatment at each other’s expense. Far

better to have Bhattya’s role, only loosely attached
to the convoy and free to pursue Outsiders while
Noromi chivvied the convoy to safety.
“They won’t learn. Not until we’ve lost one of
them,” Noromi predicted sourly. He glowered at the
group of cargoship reps, congregated for mutual
protection on the side of the room nearest the door.
“Pity we can’t pick which one.”
“I don’t see Jomisa here,” Rallya commented,
changing the subject before Noromi could tell her
which of the cargoships had the distinction of being
the first to annoy him.
“She got promoted into a Second’s berth on
Sarasya. Just before they went for a refit. The
blond is her replacement.” Noromi pointed
carelessly towards the back of the room, where the
patrolship seniors, brought along to gain
experience of strategy conferences, had gathered.
“Talking to the half-sized First.”
“Rafe,” Rallya informed him.
“Yours?” Noromi turned for a longer look. “Much
experience?”
“Enough,” Rallya said vaguely. Enough to force
her to a draw in the web twice since their initial
encounter, but she was not going to admit that to
Noromi. Enough to cope with the heavy load of
tactical case studies that she had set him and to
come back with unexpectedly perceptive analyses of
them. He had served in a patrolship before he was
identity-wiped, that was certain, and a patrolship
with a Commander who had singled him out for
special training.
“You must introduce me,” Noromi decided.
“I’ll add you to the list.”

Noromi grunted and turned to watch the door
again. “Here’s Maisa at last,” he grumbled. “You’d
think she’d be on time for her own conference.”
Maisa looked understandably harried. She was
the wrong person to be Zone Commander in a zone
where Outsider incursions were a serious threat to
shipping; she should be sitting out the last few
years of her career in a backwater. Rallya scowled.
There were enough Commanders whose webs had
failed for whom the Guild could not find any job.
She wondered whose favours Maisa had called in.
And whether she was regretting it now.
It was a big convoy – four patrolships and eleven
cargo – and it took a while for Maisa to get the
silence she was waiting for. Rallya glanced back at
Rafe, lounging against the back wall with his hands
in his pockets and every appearance of having seen
it all before. He acknowledged her glance with a
tiny tilt of his head: still here, ma’am. It would be a
waste of time to question him later, she decided
sourly; he was not missing a thing that was going
on around him.
Maisa shuffled her notes for the last time and
plunged into her prepared speech. Rallya leaned
back in her seat. There was nothing new to her in
what Maisa was saying, only a rehash of the current
situation. Outsiders of unknown origin… historians
making every effort at identification… diplomats
attempting peaceful contact… convoy system for
your protection… Rallya yawned ostentatiously. If
there was one thing Maisa could do, it was take a
blatant hint. She skipped hurriedly to the end of her
notes, introduced Noromi and excused herself, duty
done.
Noromi took the cargoship reps through a rapid
review of the convoy rules and running order before

allowing them the pretense of debating the
decisions already taken. No cargoship carried a
trained Commander; whichever member of a Three
came closest to the necessary skills was deputized
to fill the role when needed. Rallya could see equal
numbers of Webmasters, Cargomasters and
Captains, and every one of them convinced that
they had something useful to say. At least it was an
opportunity to identify the troublemakers and the
steady few who would not panic in an Outsider
attack.
There was one Captain to whom it would be
worth talking; she had survived Outsider attacks on
her last two runs along the convoy’s route. When
the conference had straggled to an end, Rallya rose
with the intention of intercepting her but was
delayed by a Webmaster hoping for an apprentice’s
berth with Bhattya for a protégé of hers. By the
time Rallya had extricated herself, she expected to
find her quarry gone and was surprised to see the
woman lingering near Rafe, waiting for an
opportunity to talk to him when Noromi moved on.
“Captain Sajan, I’m Commander Rallya. Can we
talk? I’d like more details about the Outsider ships
that attacked you.”
“Gladly, if you’ll wait for me…” She gestured at
Rafe, who had disposed of Noromi and was waiting
for Rallya.
“Rafe is with me. Is it a private matter, or will you
join both of us for a drink?”
“A drink will be welcome, after this waste of
time.” Sajan waved a hand around the emptying
room.
“Not a complete waste, surely, ma’am,” Rafe
commented. “Commander Maisa’s summary of the
situation here was very informative.”

Rallya looked at him suspiciously. Sajan gave a
short laugh.
“With your looks, and a sense of humour like
that, you must be related to Yuellin,” she snorted.
“I’m afraid the name isn’t familiar, ma’am.” Rafe
did not change expression. Never play cards with
him for money, Rallya cautioned herself, watching
with interest to see how he dealt with this.
“You were born in the New Empire?” Sajan
pointed to the twin Oath markers on Rafe’s sleeve
and to a similar pair on her own tunic breast.
“Yes, ma’am.” Rafe smiled apologetically. “But
I’m a chance-child. I don’t know my parentage.”
“You could be his brother, the resemblance is so
close. Or his son. You’re young enough, and he
could have fathered you before he got his web.”
Sajan snorted again. “Although he isn’t a man for
women. I should know. I tried hard enough when
we were serving together, before he made
Commander on Janasayan. That was fifteen years
ago, of course. Surprised he isn’t on the Guild
Council by now. One of the youngest Commanders
ever. Didn’t look old enough to have a web, let alone
a Commander’s berth.”
“Sounds like you have a lot in common with him,
Rafe,” Rallya suggested slyly. “Is it impossible that
you’re his son?”
“Not impossible, ma’am, merely improbable.”
There was an hard edge of anger on his voice,
unmissable evidence of a temper; Rallya wondered
what it would take to make him lose it.
“If you ever cross the Zone again, ask him,” Sajan
suggested. “Yuellin Lord Buhklir. Tell him I sent
you.” She squeezed Rafe’s shoulder and Rallya
found herself holding her breath. “Who knows? You

might turn out to be the Buhklir heir. Wouldn’t that
be something for a chance-child?”
“Yes, ma’am, it would.” Rafe removed himself
from Sajan’s grip as if by accident and turned to
Rallya. “Will you excuse me? I promised the
Webmaster I’d take the afternoon training session
with the apprentices today.”
A lie, and he knew that Rallya knew it. Rallya
nodded permission and Rafe bowed his farewell.
Captain Sajan looked disappointed; she had
obviously hoped to reminisce with him at length
about her aristo acquaintance in the New Empire.
Rafe would have to be careful to avoid her in future,
Rallya thought. There would be few webbers as
intolerant of an Oath-breaker — aristo’s son or not
— as one who had themselves crossed the Disputed
Zone.
Still, she had answered the obvious questions
about Rafe’s past. Chance-child, hell; he was the
beloved son and heir of Yuellin Lord Buhklir, and
the recipient of all the care and attention that an
aristo could arrange. Buhklir had probably
supervised the lad’s apprenticeship himself, then
made sure that he was assigned to a ship with a
Commander who could be relied upon to continue
his special treatment. Rallya grinned nastily. Relied
upon to continue his special treatment, but not to
keep him safe in the right Empire.
Or was Rafe’s crossing of the Disputed Zone not
the result of a mistake by his Commander but
arranged as a deliberate curb on his father? It had
happened before: an aristo who put loyalty to
Empire before loyalty to Guild, rising to a high
position and needing to be reminded of the full
meaning of the Oath. The only thing that an aristo
put before Empire was family; what better

reminder than a son in the other Empire? No aristo
would argue so eagerly for lethal combat in the
Zone if their own son was facing them across it.
Rallya pressed her lips together, irritated by the
sour taste in her mouth. A pity if the son felt
compelled to be identity-wiped, but the welfare of
the Guild came before the welfare of any individual
member; Rafe had acknowledged as much when he
took his Oath. If he wanted to complain that he had
been badly treated — and he would have to work
out for himself what had happened; Rallya would
not help him — let him complain to his father.
Or to the Emperors, Rallya corrected herself
savagely. The Immortal Emperors, who would only
be content when they had drawn the Guild fully
into the endless and aimless war between them.
When they measured their losses in the Zone in
maimed and dead bodies, not transferred Oaths.
When the Guild’s autonomy was shattered and the
fleet permanently divided between the Empires.
When they were released from the Oaths that
bound them to the Guild as tightly as the Guild was
bound to them, the only constraint that had ever
been placed upon them and held. One webber
subjected to identity-wipe would not trouble their
consciences; the Guild could not afford to be less
ruthless in its fight to survive. If Rafe had a
complaint to make, let him make it to the
Emperors.
“Let’s find that drink,” Rallya told Sajan abruptly.
“I want to know everything you noticed about those
Outsider ships.”
***

―Commander back?‖ Joshim asked, finding Rafe
grabbing a very late lunch alone in the web-room.
“No, sir. I left her talking with one of the
cargoship Captains. Gathering information on
Outsider capabilities.”
“Conference go well?”
“Yes, sir. Or, I assume so,” Rafe said lightly.
“There was no violence done during the debate, and
everybody seemed to leave it with their
expectations met.” He stood up and slid his empty
plate into the cleanser. “Do you want me to take the
training session with the apprentices this
afternoon?”
“Vidar is taking it.” Joshim looked at Rafe
narrowly. It was odd that Rallya had not kept him
with her. “You can supervise Churi and Magred in
the web, if you would. Signalling practice. Wet-web
with them, if you like.” He glanced at the web
schedule. “They’re down for three hours, but cut it
to two. We’ve a new junior arriving this afternoon
and I want him in the web as soon as possible.”
“I thought we had our full complement,” Rafe
commented.
“So did I, but I’ve just received notification that
it’s been increased by one and he’s arriving this
afternoon.”
Joshim tried to keep the irritation out of his voice
and failed. It was not that he objected to the
increase, only to the timing of it, the day before they
were due to leave with the convoy. A newcomer
always disturbed the established patterns in a web;
it had taken several days to assimilate even
somebody as skilled as Rafe, and that had been on
the milk-run from Achil to Aramas.
“Stay in the web when you’ve finished with Churi
and Magred,” he decided. “You can help me

evaluate him. If he isn’t good enough, we aren’t
taking him.” He checked the time. “Go and have a
look at his record. It’s on the table in the rest-room.
Shall I bring you some alcad through? I’m making
some for myself anyway.”
“Thanks, yes.”
Rafe had finished reading when Joshim set his
alcad down in front of him.
“You haven’t read this yourself yet, sir?” he
queried.
“No. Why?”
“I know him. He was with Avannya.”
“And?” Joshim prompted.
Rafe leaned back in his seat and crossed his
ankles. “Elanis is competent, but lazy. He never
gives one hundred percent when he thinks fifty will
be enough.” He wrinkled his nose. “It wouldn’t
matter except that his judgement is poor. He always
thinks fifty will be enough.”
Joshim leafed through the record. “He was with
Avannya for six years,” he noted. “Could you afford
to carry him?”
“We couldn’t get rid of him.” Rafe shrugged.
“He’s got influence somewhere. The Three tried
twice to get him reassigned but he clung like a
limpet. It was a surprise when he moved on
voluntarily.” He scowled. “Two days before our last
trip, into a cushy berth on a passenger carrier. I’m
surprised he left it.”
“Maybe he found somebody with more influence
than he has,” Joshim suggested. “You recommend
we don’t take him?”
“Not if you can avoid it.” Rafe leaned forward and
picked up his alcad. “If you can’t avoid it, you can
always put him in the Commander’s team. That
would encourage him to move on again.”

“I heard that,” Rallya said from the doorway
behind Joshim.
“You were meant to, ma’am.” Rafe stood up with
his alcad. “If you’ll excuse me, I have some work to
do.”
“The apprentices’ training session?” Rallya asked.
“No, ma’am.”
“You surprise me.” Rallya stepped out of Rafe’s
way. “You should have come with us for that drink.
Captain Sajan was full of useful information.”
“Be careful, ma’am,” Rafe warned. “Much sharper
and you’ll cut yourself.”
“I’ll bear it in mind, son,” Rallya promised.
Rafe turned in the doorway to stare at her. “I may
not know whose son I am, ma’am, but I do know
whose son I’m not.”
The anger in his voice was plain and unexpected;
until that moment Joshim had thought this was just
another of the mock battles that gave the web-room
such pleasure. Rallya too was taken aback; she
paused for a fraction of a second before responding.
“I’ll bear that in mind too, Rafe.”
He turned on his heel and left. Rallya watched
him leave, then gave a little nod as if she had
learned something worth knowing. “Who am I
going to encourage to leave?” she asked.
“What in hell was that about?” Joshim
demanded. Emperors, if Rallya had not backed
down…
“Answer my question and I’ll answer yours.”
“A new junior. Elanis. Used to be on Avannya.”
He held out the record to her. “Arriving this
afternoon.”
“Another ghost from Rafe’s past,” Rallya mused.
“Must be his day for them.”
“Another?”

“There was a Captain at the conference who knew
his father. Apparently the likeness is startling.” She
chuckled. “Yes, I know. I shouldn’t have pushed
him so hard. But the results were interesting,
weren’t they?”
You old fraud. You were as surprised as I was,
Joshim accused her silently. “It would have been
even more interesting if he’d hit you,” he growled.
“Shall I call him back? You can hold his tunic.”
Rallya took the record that Joshim was still holding
and dropped it on the table. “What’s wrong with
him? Besides the fact that Rafe doesn’t like him?”
Joshim made himself swallow his first answer.
Rallya had never made him lose his temper and she
would not do so now. “He’s lazy. And he relies on
influence instead of ability,” he said levelly.
“Aristo?” Rallya demanded.
“Look for yourself.” Joshim stood up. “Rafe will
be working with me for the rest of the day.”
“To protect him from me?” Rallya asked in
amusement.
“To protect you from him,” Joshim flung back,
and walked out leaving Rallya still looking for a
response.
***
Rafe sat on the rim of his web-position, listening to
Churi and Magred talking in the changing-room
about him. They had already agreed that he was a
darling in the web-room but a stickler in the web;
now they were discussing whose lover he would
become and when. Magred’s opinion was that it had
already happened, with Joshim, and Churi favoured
the Commander, at some indeterminate point in
the future. Very indeterminate and far future, Rafe

felt like telling him; he contented himself with a
yelled reminder that the Webmaster would be
arriving soon. There was a sudden silence, followed
shortly afterwards by the fully clothed emergence of
two very junior juniors wondering how much, if
anything, he had overheard. He smiled at them,
sphinx-like, and let them go still wondering.
The shub beneath his feet was warm and inviting.
He wished he could slip back in, to wait for Joshim
and Elanis, but it would be a bad example to set:
apparently webbing alone. He swung around
through ninety degrees and stretched out along the
edge of the web, closing his eyes and relying on his
ears to warn him of somebody coming up the riser.
Yuellin Lord Buhklir. The name woke no echo,
nor did he expect it to; if it had, he would have
distrusted it as wishful thinking. His father, or
brother, or merely somebody who shared his
particular genetic mix: it did not matter. As Rafell,
he had no connection with the man and he never
would. If some belly-kick of fate took him back into
the New Empire, he would not have any memory of
the encounter with Sajan; he would be identitywiped again. Insurance against an Oath-breaker
deliberately recrossing the Disputed Zone. Effective
insurance.
He sighed, wondering what the Commander had
learned from Sajan, and when he would find out.
Not about the Outsiders: the safety of Bhattya
might depend on his, or somebody else’s, correct
interpretation of that information; Rallya was too
good a Commander not to know that. But anything
she had learned about Buhklir, she would keep to
herself until she found a use for it, and that use
would be against Rafe. Emperors knew how she had
amused herself before he had joined Bhattya. Was

there a forty-year-long succession of webbers with
whom she had played like a cat with small prey, or
was he unique, because she thought he was
uniquely vulnerable?
He had given her reason to question that earlier,
and it was too late to doubt the wisdom or
otherwise of that moment of anger. He smiled,
briefly amused that she might think he had been
upset by what Sajan had revealed, angered by her
method rather than her intent. She would learn
eventually. I will not lie down to be walked over, he
promised her silently. Because others saw fit to play
god with my life, that does not give you the right. I
am not your toy, nor a pawn to prove your power.
Push me too hard and it will become very clear. Did
you think I was angry today? You have never seen
me angry, Commander.
He took a deep breath. In ten years he had never
lost his temper any further than he had with Rallya,
and that only rarely. How then did he know that he
could, and that it was something for others to fear?
Nothing but skills and impersonal knowledge
survived identity-wipe; it could not be personal
memory that told him. More wishful thinking? Or a
near-human race-memory? He shrugged. Another
thing he would never know, and he could not fret
over every one of those, or even over any of them. If
he did, he would spend his life in a bottle of jack.
A whisper of air blowing across his damp skin
told him the riser was in use. He sat up as Joshim
stepped out, smiling a greeting which Rafe
returned.
“Sorry to keep you waiting.” Joshim moved aside
for Elanis. “You two know each other.”

“Yes, it’s a reunion.” Elanis looked around avidly.
“I’m impressed. It makes Avannya look tiny,
doesn’t it, Rafe?” he commented.
“The changing room is through here.” Joshim
steered him in the right direction and out of sight.
Rafe got to his feet and moved to prepare one of the
dry-web positions; Joshim would want a calibration
sequence first. He had just finished when Elanis
reappeared.
“The Webmaster said you’re to do a calibration
sequence,” the junior announced.
“The Webmaster asked if you’d do a calibration
sequence, please,” Joshim called out.
Elanis glared as he removed his web-bands. “Are
you a real First this time, or is it still brevet?” he
asked more quietly.
“Does it make a difference?” Rafe asked mildly.
“And whichever it is, you still ought to check those
contacts before you use them.”
“I assumed you had.” He made a perfunctory
check. “You haven’t changed much, have you?”
“That’s reassuring to know.” You cannot like
everyone you web with, Rafe told himself strictly,
starting the calibration sequence. You only need to
trust them. It was unfortunate that Elanis did not
inspire trust either.
Elanis’ performance in the web had not improved
in the near-year since Rafe had last worked with
him. It took Joshim less than an hour to reach an
assessment of his abilities, and only five minutes to
tell it to him afterwards. Rafe lingered out of
hearing until Joshim had finished, and Elanis had
dressed hastily and departed. He had enough
experience of Elanis’ character to know that he
would blame Rafe for Joshim’ opinion, just as he
had blamed Rafe for every unfavourable opinion of

him since Rafe had been promoted into the Third’s
berth that Elanis had expected to get; Rafe had no
intention of being the target for his immediate
spite.
The Webmaster was taking a leisurely shower
when Rafe finally went through to the showerroom.
“Was he the Webmaster’s lover on Avannya?” he
asked, moving aside for Rafe.
“No.” Rafe grinned maliciously. “Although he
wanted to be, for the privileges he thought it would
get him. He wasn’t anybody’s lover, not for very
long. Things he learned across the pillow were all
around the web-room the following day.”
“You speak from experience?”
“No. Observation. That’s another of the things he
has against me.”
Joshim laughed. “I suspect he’s planning his way
into my bed. Any advice on how to avoid it?”
Rafe took the tie out of his hair and shook the
curls down. “I suspect he’d be lucky to make it
through the cabin door.”
“True. Although it isn’t so difficult for the right
person.”
Rafe stepped into the spray to give himself time
to think. There had been enough warning of this in
the speculative looks that Joshim had been giving
him since he joined the ship. He ought to have a
response prepared; what he had was a hollowness
between heart and groin, both of which were
responding without words. He was not a virgin;
there had been nights of curiosity and comfort with
other webbers, but always single nights, sharing
nothing except the hours of pleasure. There had
never been any commitment, no exchange of pasts
and promise of futures, because Rafe had no past

that he dared to offer. But with Joshim, who
already knew? The prospect unexpectedly
frightened him.
“Is this such a surprise, Rafe?” Joshim set his
hands lightly on Rafe’s shoulders and bent forward
to kiss him. Rafe had a moment of déjà vu that
shook him as much as his physical reaction — green
eyes beneath black hair, parted lips bending to kiss
him. He trembled. Joshim released him at once and
stepped back.
“Sorry, Rafe. I thought…”
Rafe took his hands and pulled him back under
the spray, standing on tiptoe with his hands on
Joshim’s hips to reach his mouth. They kissed,
broke apart for breath and kissed again as fiercely.
Joshim called a halt at last, holding Rafe firmly at
arm‘s length with one hand and switching off the
spray with the other.
“Dry, dressed, and down to my cabin? As
Webmaster, I have to set a good example, and what
will happen in this shower if we don’t leave it soon
is not something I want the juniors to emulate
***
Rafe was a playful lover, his lips laughing as often
as kissing and in as many ways, but now he was
lying beside Joshim in the prolonged, easy silence
that had followed their first loving, his face against
Joshim’s shoulder, one leg bent over Joshim’s
thigh. Joshim traced a mischievous finger along his
back. Rafe sighed in unabashed pleasure and
turned his head just enough to nip the lobe of
Joshim’s ear. Joshim moved without haste until he
could see Rafe’s face and stroke the fine sheen of
silky grey hair on his belly that merged into the

diamond of brown curls at his groin. Rafe gasped
and rolled onto his back, reaching urgently for
Joshim. Joshim held his wrists gently and ran his
tongue up the sensitive under-surface of each arm
before releasing them and setting his tongue to
trace descending circles through the grey down of
Rafe’s belly. Rafe moaned in eager anticipation and
Joshim paused to look up at his face.
“Did you say something?” he teased.
Rafe said something that showed scant respect
for Joshim’s rank. Joshim tutted and settled
himself lower between Rafe’s thighs. Playful and
delightfully noisy, he amended as Rafe answered to
his lips and tongue. The final yell would have
woken the whole ship were it not for the
soundproofing of the cabins.
He lay with his head on Rafe’s thighs afterwards,
listening to his breathing move into the even
cadence of sleep. Rafe had a rare gift for knowing
when words were needed, and when silence was
right; he was a comfortable person to be silent with,
and if he fell asleep without words, it was because
he trusted Joshim to know what might have been
said.
He had a gift too for enjoying himself, for
drawing every drop of pleasure out of a moment
before moving to the next. Joshim smiled at the
memory. There had been no haste when they closed
the cabin door behind them. A slow undressing,
each savouring the initial revelation of the other’s
body outside the discipline of the web, exploring
with the eyes before they touched. A gentle
embrace, kissing with none of their earlier urgency,
moving to the bed, searching for the words and the
caresses that brought response, building a language

to be shared between them: ―This?” “Yes.” “And
this?” “Oh, please, yes!”
Joshim slipped off the bed, careful not to disturb
the sleeper, and said his evening prayers in front of
the Arura in the niche behind his desk. Late, but
then they often were, and he could not believe in a
deity who required stopwatch accuracy, any more
than he really believed in a deity who would hear
his prayers. Prayer was a reaffirmation of belief; the
Arura was a visible symbol of that belief; a deity, or
thousands of them, were only other symbols,
necessary because his mind was too limited to
comprehend the reality behind them. How many
reincarnations would it take before he progressed
beyond the need for those particular symbols? He
stroked the curves of the Arura, thinking that he
would keep one even when he no longer needed it,
amused by his sudden, unusual introspection.
There is a reason for every question, but not
necessarily an answer, he reminded himself as he
lay down beside Rafe to sleep.
***
A face. A succession of faces, or were they all the
same face? They flashed in and out of focus,
mouthing snatches of speech that were sounds, not
words. Rafe tried desperately to cling to one of
them, any one of them, to hear what was said, to see
the face clearly. The effort drove the dream away
and he was lying in the dark with nothing left.
A dim light came on, making him blink, and
there was a face looking down on him. He struggled
to put a name to it, knowing that he knew one, not
knowing what it was. He squeezed his eyes shut and
swore in frustration.

“Rafe?”
The voice triggered memory. Joshim. Rafe
opened his eyes again and tried his own voice.
“Sorry. Nightmare.” He sat up and rested his chin
on his knees. “Did I wake you?”
“Yes.” It was not a complaint. Joshim put his arm
across Rafe’s shoulders and squeezed briefly. “Tell
me?”
Rafe shrugged. “I wish I could. There isn’t
anything to tell. Nothing I can remember,” he
added sardonically.
“Your father?” Joshim guessed.
“The Commander told you?”
“She mentioned it.”
“There’s no proof that he is my father. Or
anything else to me. And if you’d asked me before I
went to sleep, I would have said it didn’t bother me
at all.” Rafe smiled with difficulty. “Obviously, I
would have been wrong. Something must have
triggered that nightmare.”
“How often do you have them?”
“Not often, now.” Rafe sighed. “Immediately after
I was wiped, they came every night. Now, it’s once
or twice a year, with the occasional bad patch.” He
rubbed his cheek against the hand on his shoulder.
“You’re honoured. You’re only the second person
who’s ever been woken by one.”
“Oh? What sort of company am I in?”
“One of Avannya’s juniors. She was in the web
when we hit the EMP-mine.”
“I’m sorry. Was she special to you?”
“We only spent the one night together. She was a
nice kid, though.” Rafe shook his head in
remembered grief. “About Churi’s age, and as
plump. Working her way through every cabin in the
ship, the way they do when they’ve just got their

webs. Making up for lost time as an apprentice and
eager to find out about the fringe benefits of their
new nervous system. Hell, the way I probably
behaved when I first got my web.”
“Churi been in your bed yet?” Joshim teased
deliberately.
“No.” Rafe accepted the diversion gratefully,
determined to enlarge on it. “He thinks the
Commander is in possession, or will be soon.
Magred has better powers of observation. She was
backing you.” He turned to face Joshim completely,
slipping one arm around his waist and tracing the
linked circles of the tattoo on his left breast with the
fingers of the other hand. “Ready to go back to
sleep?”
“You have another idea?”
Rafe grinned mischievously and straddled
Joshim. “I do,” he promised deep in his throat. “Lie
there and I’ll show you.”

Conversation at the office of
Councillor Danriya Lady Carher
“The agent is in place, with explicit instructions to
cover every contingency. If all goes well, the problem
will be solved by the end of the year.”
“You said that last year too.”
“This time the matter will be handled by the agent in
person. He is in no doubt about the consequences of
another failure.”
227/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

Rallya dropped into the seat that Elanis had just
vacated in front of the web-monitor, perfectly
aware that he had only risen to collect a cup of
alcad. The monitor showed no unusual activity, just
two web-teams in the last hour of another
uneventful shift. Vidar was nominally in the keyposition, with Rafe as second, but they had
switched roles for this shift. Good practice for both
teams, and halfway to the convoy‘s destination
without incident, everybody needed a little variety
to keep them sharp.
The small screen to one side of the web-monitor
showed a mass-scan of the convoy, the cargoships
as fat, lumbering blips and the patrolships as
smaller blips tied to the speed of the cargoships by
invisible chains. The cargoships were complacent;
Noromi spent his whole time exhorting them to
make better speed, without results. Having passed
safely through the system‘s major jump point, the
obvious place for an Outsider attack, the cargoship
Threes had given a collective sigh of relief and
dropped their speed, to settle happily around the

optimum of their mass-speed cost curves for the
run down to the settlements on the inner planets.
Only Sajan, aboard Tariya, was showing any
sense, and in her position at the back end of the
convoy, she was handicapped in her attempts to
gain speed by the ships in front, who wailed to
Noromi whenever Tariya ran up to their tails. In
Noromi‘s place, Rallya would have used Sajan to
force the others to increase speed, instead of giving
her a warning about convoy formation whenever
the wails became too loud. In fact, she had offered
Bhattya‘s services to perform the same function; a
patrolship creeping inexorably up your rear end
was a powerful incentive to accelerate. The hell with
Noromi‘s veto; if things did not improve soon, she
would do it anyway.
The view on the small screen altered as Rafe
focused on the large cluster of asteroids in the
trojan point of one of the system‘s gas giants,
altered again to scan to the limits of Bhattya‘s
sensors. He learned well, Rallya thought
approvingly. Aware of the obvious, but not
concentrating on it to the exclusion of other
possibilities. The asteroids would make a good
hiding place for one or two raiders. Noromi was
aware of that and had positioned both of the other
patrolships to cover it. Bhattya, above the plane
that held asteroids and convoy, was equally well
placed to meet an attack from the asteroids or from
the three other sectors within her reach.
Rallya narrowed her eyes as she calculated how
well placed they were. They had gradually moved
out from the position she had left them in at the
end of her shift, three hours ago. Accident, or Rafe
thinking ahead? The latter, she conceded

grudgingly. As she watched, he continued to flick
between the long range scan and the asteroids.
―Rafe showing off again?‖ Elanis said quietly
from behind her seat. He had learned not to make
such comments for everyone to hear — Joshim had
reduced him to incoherence with a few well-chosen
words the first time that he did so — but he
continued to make them to Rallya in private, taking
her sparring with Rafe as encouragement.
―Trying to emulate his father,‖ Rallya suggested.
Rafe had not mentioned Sajan‘s information since
that day, made no attempt to discover what Rallya
knew. It would be interesting to see how he reacted
to this pestilent aristo apparently knowing more
than he did, and she could rely on Elanis to use
what she told him.
―His father?‖ Elanis rose to the bait beautifully.
―Some aristo in the New Empire. Commander
Buhklir. Sajan, aboard Tariya, knew him before she
came across the Zone.‖ Rallya smiled happily. ―Did
you know he was an aristo too?‖
―He‘s never mentioned his past,‖ Elanis said
stiffly. ―No doubt he‘s an unacknowledged son.‖
―Ask him,‖ Rallya suggested. ―If he is, that‘s
another advantage he has over you. Looks, skill,
intelligence and he isn‘t an aristo. What more could
anybody ask for?‖
Elanis fell silent, lacking the wit to respond in
any way that would not be insubordinate. Rallya
had not yet forgiven Joshim for moving Churi from
her team into Rafe‘s and replacing him with a lazy
lump of bone and blubber; the first opening that
Elanis gave her, he would be off Bhattya. Joshim
had filed a request to transfer him the day after he
arrived, but Rallya would not rely upon the
goodwill of some assignment clerk. She would push

him into insubordination sooner or later; he did not
have Rafe‘s fine judgement of where the line lay.
She grinned, admitting to herself that the line for
Rafe was not in the same place as it was for
everybody else. She had not had so much fun with
her clothes on in years, and she would not hamper
Rafe with rules.
Rafe‘s main view had changed again, picking out
a lone asteroid above and to one side of the convoy.
Rallya stiffened as he tightened the focus and
switched to a large scale mass-contour chart. Yes,
that discrepancy could be a raider, well hidden and
waiting to pick off the tail-end ship of the convoy
with a tight tractor-beam before a preset jump; that
was how she would do it in their place.
As she pushed herself out of her seat, the primary
alert sounded and she swore. No time to get into
the web; Vidar would have to handle it alone. No,
not Vidar, Rafe. The teams could not switch roles
now, not without wasting seconds that would let the
raider escape. As she sat down again, still cursing,
Rafe started the tight turn that would take Bhattya
after the raider.
Joshim displaced Lilimya from the seat beside
Rallya, blatantly disregarding the alert; he had not
been in the web-room when it sounded, should
have stayed where he was. The raider was moving
away from the asteroid, trying to get out of its mass
shadow in order to jump. A beautiful ship, built for
speed and stealth. Rallya cursed the historians, for
their failure to identify the source of such a ship,
and the diplomats, for their repeated failure to
make peaceful contact. If they could do their jobs
properly, there would be no need for this.
Rafe had calculated the turn beautifully, secondguessing the direction that the raider would choose

to escape. The only questions were the timing and
the range of the raider‘s weapons. Rafe did not have
the shields up, could not put them up before the
turn was complete without risking the loss of the
steering vanes. If they completed their turn before
they were within the raider‘s range, and if the
raider was unable to jump before they were within
Bhattya‘s range… Rallya ran the calculations in her
head and came up with a question mark.
―If Rafe snaps one of the vanes, Vidar will be
furious,‖ she remarked for the benefit of her
audience. Rasil tittered until Fadir hushed him.
They were coming out of the turn now, the vanes
that had been flattened against the hull
straightening, restoring the spherical symmetry of
the drive field. Vidar‘s team were easing into
control of more and more functions, careful not to
disturb the working of Rafe‘s team but relieving
them of background tasks and allowing them to
concentrate on weapons, shields and timing. Rallya
sustained the effort necessary not to hold her
breath until Rafe raised the shields.
He did it later than she would have done,
perhaps making his own balance between the slight
loss of speed and the increased safety, and perhaps
catching the first signs of the raider preparing to
fire: the temperature increases along their hull, the
minor adjustments in orientation. When the raider
did fire, he resisted the temptation to fire back
immediately, letting the shields take the battering
they were designed to take, using the time to
decrease the range. Yes, Rallya urged. They must
stop firing and lower their shields before they jump.
Wait for that moment, when there is nothing to
confuse your aim, neither their fire nor the

backwash of your own, and nothing to protect them
except the favour of their gods.
He waited, as if he could hear her, and at the
moment that the raider prepared to jump, he fired.
One shot, as if he would do it neatly or not at all. A
square hit, and where there had been a shining hull,
there was a spreading mess of metal. Fadir gave a
whoop of triumph.
―Fadir, go calculate how many crew that ship
could carry.‖ Rallya snarled the order without
taking her attention from the screens. Rafe had
switched again to long range scan. Emperors, as if
he had done this hundreds of times before, Rallya
thought disbelievingly. He should have been
reacting like Fadir, exulting in his victory, not
immediately wary of another attack. How in hell
was he managing to do everything so right?
―I‘ll take my team up,‖ Joshim decided, standing
up. ―We can be ready to relieve them as soon as
Rafe gives the signal.‖
Rallya grunted agreement. ―I‘ll bleep Jualla and
her team, send them up too.‖ The messager alarm
was flashing insistently. ―Congratulations from our
Convoy Commander and his grateful charges,‖ she
predicted. ―Wonderful how fast they‘ve all started
to move now.‖
―Rafe down?‖ Rallya asked Vidar as he entered the
rest-room.
―Yes. In the web-room, drinking alcad.‖ Vidar
chuckled. ―I‘m surprised you weren‘t out there to
jump on him as soon as he came down.‖
―Why should I want to do that?‖
―I can‘t imagine. He didn‘t do a thing wrong, but
that doesn‘t usually stop you.‖ Vidar was in a high
good humour.

Rallya ignored the jibe, knowing when Vidar was
teasing. ―And now he‘s basking in applause from
everyone who knows no better,‖ she predicted.
Vidar shook his head. ―He stopped that just as
soon as it started. Asked Churi how many people
he‘d helped to kill today. Everybody else took the
hint. Except Elanis. He accused Rafe of being an
Outie sympathizer. Got most upset when Rafe
reminded him that his family had been Outies three
generations ago. Called Rafe an upstart chancechild whose only talent was for bending his back in
the Webmaster‘s bed.‖ Vidar had obviously relished
the confrontation, was repeating it word for word.
―So you put him on a charge?‖ Rallya said
hopefully.
Vidar shook his head. ―Wasn‘t necessary,‖ he said
gleefully. ―Rafe apologized for beating him into
Joshim‘s bed and wished him better luck with you.
Elanis was laughed out of the web-room.‖
Rallya grinned broadly. ―With his tail tucked
firmly between his legs and likely to stay there.‖
She stretched gently, reflecting that the seats in
the rest-room got lower every time that she sat in
one, and more difficult to get up from. So Rafe was
sharing Joshim‘s bed, was he? That took a lot of
doing. Joshim was too good a Webmaster to have a
string of casual liaisons in the web-room, the way
that Vidar did; nor did he do what a lot of
Webmasters did, regularly taking every member of
the web-room to bed as part of the process of
monitoring their physical and emotional states. In
fact, to Rallya‘s certain knowledge, Joshim had only
shared a bed aboard Bhattya with herself or with
Vidar, and that infrequently. Although she had
often teased him about it, she had to admit that it
saved a lot of trouble in the web-room; his

judgement had never been questioned on the
grounds of pique or favouritism, and in eight years
nobody had brought a problem to herself or to
Vidar that should have been taken to Joshim first.
―Just as well you didn‘t put Elanis on a charge,‖
she told Vidar. ―He‘d have yelled favouritism so
loud they‘d hear it in Imperial.‖ She frowned
suddenly. ―Did you know about Joshim and Rafe?‖
―No.‖
―Which makes it the only pairing aboard this ship
that you haven‘t known about since the day it
happened,‖ Rallya concluded.
―True, but neither of them is the sort to post the
news on the notice board.‖
―That doesn‘t usually inconvenience you too
much.‖ Rallya pressed her lips together. ―If you
didn‘t know, how did Elanis?‖
―Lucky guess? Maybe Rafe makes a habit of it.‖
―Don‘t be stupid,‖ Rallya said irritably. ―If you
don‘t know Rafe well enough to know that isn‘t
true, you should know Joshim well enough to know
he‘d recognize somebody like that.‖
―I‘ve never known him when he was in love,‖
Vidar pointed out. ―He could be as stupid as the
rest of us in that state.‖
―Speak for yourself. And if he is in love, you‘d
better start worrying. Rafe will be ready for a
Commander‘s berth within a few years. Any guesses
what Joshim will do then?‖
Vidar whistled. ―We could lose him.‖
―We probably will,‖ Rallya said gloomily. There
were not many established Threes who would
consider an Oath-breaker as Commander, but the
Guild might give a new ship to an established
Webmaster with a reputation like Joshim‘s and a
new Commander with Rallya‘s recommendation…

She would give Rafe that recommendation, she
admitted; he was too good for her to withhold it.
And if she did withhold it, they would still lose
Joshim. Hell‘s teeth though: if Rafe thought that his
relationship with Joshim would win him any
concessions from Rallya while he was aboard this
ship, he was going to get a nasty shock
***
It was not hard to guess who was knocking at his
cabin door, Rafe thought wearily; he was only
surprised it had taken her so long to arrive.
―Come in, ma‘am,‖ he called, turning to face the
door but not standing to greet her.
She halted just inside the door and stood with
her hands on her hips, surveying the room.
―Pleased with yourself?‖ she challenged.
―Should I be?‖
She picked up the reck nearest to her on the desk,
looked at the label, tossed it back. ―You didn‘t make
many mistakes today.‖
What would you say, ma‘am, if I told you that I
made no mistakes at all? That everything I did was
the right thing, at the right time, for the right
reasons? And that it was all there in my memory:
juggling speed against safety, judging the moment
to raise the shields, the moment to fire. Even my
web remembered the sensation of being in control
of a ship‘s web during combat!
Rafe controlled another wave of nausea. He was
not really remembering those things; it was the
identity-wipe playing tricks with him again. He had
witnessed another person in a similar situation;
was not allowed to remember that person; could
only recall what he had seen as though it was

something he had done himself. They had
explained it to him when he was still asking for
explanations, in the early days. Maybe if he had
asked them, they would have explained why he
could remember how it felt. And why it made him
sick to think about it.
He realized that Rallya was watching him closely,
as if she could see his thoughts written on his face.
―Did you come to tell me about the mistakes I did
make?‖ he asked with an effort.
―No.‖ She tried the edge of the bed and sat down.
―There were things that I might have done
differently, but the result is what matters.‖ She
looked at him measuringly. ―Will you be able to do
it again? Or do you not like the thought that you
killed twenty people today?‖
―The time to worry is when I stop not liking it.‖
―Did Buhklir teach you that?‖
Rafe‘s stomach lurched another warning. ―I
worked it out for myself.‖ He jammed his hands in
his tunic pockets. ―Was that all you came to ask,
ma‘am?‖
―No.‖ Rallya stood up and crossed the room to
look down at him. ―You‘re shaking,‖ she remarked,
lifting his chin with a single finger. ―Reaction to
combat? Or to thinking about your father?‖
Rafe pulled away. ―None of your business.‖
―None of your business, ma‘am.‖ She replaced
her hand under his chin, turning his face up to the
light. ―And if it‘s reaction to combat, it is my
business.‖
―If you don‘t let go of me, I shall be sick over you.
Ma‘am.‖
―Nonsense.‖ She released him anyway. ―You‘ve
got too much pride, and the self-control to support
it.‖

And I have been sick so many times since
escaping from the web-room that my stomach is
empty, Rafe thought ruefully; the only thing I have
left in it is the urge to be sick. ―There was
something else you wanted to ask,‖ he prompted.
―I came for your thoughts about that raider,‖ she
said, taking the empty chair. ―Did you notice
anything that isn‘t on record?‖
―Their cannon range.‖ Rafe seized the change of
subject. ―The estimates I‘ve seen were twenty
percent too low.‖
Rallya nodded agreement. ―Must have been a
third of their mass just powering those cannon,‖
she commented. ―And if they were intending to
carry another ship through jump with them, they‘d
need another third for the tractors. Not a lot left for
drive, is there? Either they had no margin for error,
or they came from somewhere just one or two
jumps away.‖
―They may not have intended to hold the ship
with tractors during jump,‖ Rafe speculated. ―If
they cast a wide enough jump-field, they could
carry it through in their wake. That would have
allowed them to get away with half the power for
their tractors.‖
―They‘d have to be hellishly confident about their
jump capabilities. Get that stunt wrong and you
lose yourself for good.‖
―The F‘sair used it regularly,‖ Rafe pointed out.
―Took a lot of ships before the cargoships learned to
flick their own jump-field on to turn the jump wild.
That stopped the raids within half a year. For the
F‘sair, dying in battle is a lucky death: their gods
carry them straight to heaven; but if they get lost
during jump, their gods can‘t ever find them and
they‘re condemned to hell.‖ He balled his fists in his

pockets, forcing fingernails into palms, a futile
effort to drive away the vivid images of the interior
of a F‘sair warship, of a meal shared with a F‘sair
war-leader. Impossible. Imagination, not memory,
he told himself desperately.
―Useless set of gods they‘ve got,‖ Rallya
commented. ―I doubt our Outsiders share the same
ones, but the thought about the wild jumps is worth
passing on. Buhklir had you taught well.‖ She
raised both eyebrows. ―Did you know that you turn
a fetching shade of grey whenever I mention his
name?‖
―I‘m glad you find it amusing, ma‘am,‖ Rafe
managed.
―Interesting, not amusing,‖ she corrected him. ―Is
it part of the conditioning that goes with identitywipe?‖
Rafe shrugged. ―I presume so, ma‘am, although I
haven‘t experienced it before.‖
―You haven‘t had any knowledge about your past
before,‖ she pointed out. ―And it has to be
something that operates very infrequently, or you‘d
be useless as a webber.‖ She rose to her feet. ―You‘d
better get some sleep. You look like death, and
you‘re due back in the web in five hours.‖ She
grinned. ―I‘ll send Joshim down, shall I? In his
capacity as ship‘s surgeon, of course. The shape
you‘re in, you‘ll have no other use for him.‖
***
―Into bed with you,‖ Joshim said firmly, as soon as
a ash-coloured Rafe closed the door behind him.
Rafe gave him a tight smile. ―What for? We both
know I won‘t sleep. Or only long enough to wake up
yelling.‖

―Bed,‖ Joshim repeated. ―This is your Webmaster
speaking.‖ He gave Rafe a gentle push in the right
direction. ―Is it just nausea?‖
―What did the Commander say?‖
―That I should come and hold your hand while
you threw up.‖ Joshim frowned. ―Are you fit to web
your next shift?‖
―If I‘m not, the Commander has got a lot to do
with it,‖ Rafe said sourly.
―I was assuming that.‖ Joshim put both hands on
Rafe‘s shoulders and pushed him down to sit on the
bed. ―What else is wrong beside the nausea?‖
―It‘s quite enough on its own,‖ Rafe admitted,
resting his head against Joshim‘s forearm. ―You‘d
think they could come up with some more dignified
way of reinforcing the identity-wipe,‖ he
complained. ―At least they had the sense to put a
delay mechanism in. If this had hit me during
combat…‖ He shivered.
―Was that the trigger?‖ Joshim asked, alarmed.
―Yes,‖ Rafe said miserably.
Joshim took a deep breath. Rallya had attributed
it to her reference to Buhklir. If it had been the
encounter with the raider, the experience of being
in the web during combat… He had a clear vision of
Bhattya as a sphere of debris spreading in the wake
of the convoy because of a lapse in Rafe‘s
concentration or in his web control. As Webmaster,
Joshim thought unhappily, he might have to bar
Rafe from the web for this. As Rafe‘s lover… that
had to be a secondary consideration, he chided
himself.
―All right,‖ he told Rafe steadily. ―Lie down. I‘ll
go and fetch my drug-pack. We‘ll get rid of your
sickness and then we‘ll talk.‖

He stopped on his way, to ask Jualla to switch
shifts with Rafe: four more hours to solve this. She
agreed readily, and offered to ask her team and
Rafe‘s if they were willing to make the change
permanent. Elanis‘s news was travelling fast,
Joshim thought wryly. Jualla had been in the web
during the argument in the web-room, but she had
already heard about it. A permanent change would
put Joshim and Rafe on the same shift pattern, give
them more time out of the web together. He
thanked Jualla and gave her permission to ask.
Am ampoule broken under his nostrils gave Rafe
relief from his symptoms. As he regained his
normal colour, Joshim wished there was as easy a
cure for their cause.
―Jualla has swapped shifts with you,‖ he said,
sitting down across the room from the bed. If he sat
beside Rafe, it would be harder to maintain the
separation between Webmaster and lover, too great
a temptation to take Rafe in his arms and comfort
him. He already knew that comfort was not enough;
he had comforted Rafe every time that he woke
from a nightmare, and the nightmares still
continued. He had to offer something more specific
than comfort: a solution, or an attempt at a
solution. It was his responsibility, both as a
Webmaster and as somebody who cared very much
about Rafe.
―When did this start?‖ he asked. ―Exactly.‖
Rafe grimaced. ―I was fine until I disengaged.
Then I was almost sick in the shub.‖
―You‘re sure it isn‘t just the stress of combat?‖
Joshim asked hopefully.
―I‘m sure.‖ Rafe sat up and characteristically
hugged his knees. ―You‘re worried about allowing
me in the web again.‖

―Yes,‖ Joshim admitted. ―While there‘s a chance
that this will happen again, I‘m worried about
allowing you in the web.‖
―There‘s always that chance,‖ Rafe said heavily.
―Not if we find a way to prevent it,‖ Joshim
pointed out.
―What? You can‘t give me any drugs to suppress
the sickness while I‘m in the web. If you did, the
conditioning would only express itself another
way.‖
―Then we work on the cause and not the
symptoms,‖ Joshim said calmly.
Rafe laughed harshly. ―What are you going to do?
Undo the conditioning? Restore my memory? Hell,
Joshim, if it were possible, do you think I‘d have
waited this long?‖ His voice was rising.
―Have you ever tried?‖
―No.‖ Rafe let out a long sigh. ―I wouldn‘t know
how to start. Or what damage it might do.‖ He
looked away, looked back again. ―Sorry I shouted.
I‘m just scared.‖
―What are you scared of?‖
―Having my mind messed around anymore.
Losing my web. Losing you. Finding out who I used
to be. It‘s a comprehensive list, isn‘t it?‖
―Why shouldn‘t it be? And I don‘t have a definite
answer, Rafe, only an idea that might work, if you
want to try it.‖
―What is it?‖
―An Aruranist technique. You know that we
believe in reincarnation?‖ Rafe nodded. ―It‘s
important to us, remembering as many of our
previous lives as we can, so that we don‘t waste the
current one covering old ground. I could teach you
the methods we use to remember.‖

―Working on the theory that, if they work across
multiple reincarnations, they might work across
identity-wipe?‖ Rafe asked doubtfully.
―I‘m not promising,‖ Joshim warned.
―I know you‘re not. And I‘m not saying I believe
in reincarnation, but…‖ Rafe shrugged jerkily.
―How many do you remember?‖
―Three. That isn‘t many. There‘s a woman in
Jasan who remembers twenty-eight.‖
―And you remember them all clearly?‖
―No. The first one is hazy, just snatches of detail.
One day I‘ll improve it.‖ Joshim laughed softly.
―Although I‘ve been saying that for years. I suspect
I remember enough not to want to remember any
more. I don‘t like her very much.‖
―Her?‖
―Yes. I was a woman last time too. A priestess in
a temple outside the Empires. Salu‘i‘kamai. The
Hand of the Goddess is on the Earth,‖ he
translated.
―With my luck, I‘ll end up with a complete
memory of a previous life as a night-soil porter on
Rasasara, and nothing else,‖ Rafe muttered. ―You
know we‘ll be violating our Oaths if we do this?‖
―Yes.‖ Joshim wondered exactly when he had
realized. At the time he had first wondered whether
the recall techniques would work for Rafe, he
decided, and that had been nights ago, watching
Rafe fall into the uneasy sleep that followed yet
another nightmare. It was suddenly absurd that he
was planning to break his Oath while sitting as far
as he could from the man for whom he would do so.
He went to Rafe‘s side and took his hands.
―If it works, you can‘t go back to being who you
were,‖ he warned.

―Not without getting us both wiped,‖ Rafe agreed
grimly. ―And I don‘t want to go back. All I want is to
be able to live comfortably inside my own head.‖ He
squeezed Joshim‘s hands hard. ―You‘re crazy to
even think about this,‖ he said fiercely. ―I won‘t let
you involve yourself.‖
―It‘s too late to stop me.‖ Joshim traced Rafe‘s
cheekbone with a kiss. ―And I don‘t let anybody
make my choices for me.‖
―I won‘t let you break your Oath for me,‖ Rafe
insisted. ―Emperors, Joshim, I may be called an
Oath-breaker but I haven‘t broken my Oath yet and
I never will!‖
―Would it be Oath-breaking?‖ Joshim queried.
―You‘re not the person you were ten years ago. Even
if you remember who you were, you won‘t be that
person. You‘ve no intention of bolting back across
the Disputed Zone. What harm will it do if you
remember who you were?‖
Rafe shook his head firmly. ―I don‘t know,
Joshim, but… If we did this, how could we ever
know again what was Oath-breaking and what
wasn‘t? If I‘d sworn false allegiance to the Old
Emperor ten years ago, then contrived to cross the
Disputed Zone again, would that have been Oathbreaking? Or would it have been all right, because
nobody knew I‘d sworn falsely, because no harm
had been done?
―And if we can justify this to ourselves, what will
we be able to justify next? And how could we object
if the Guild changed its interpretation of the Oath it
swore to us? If the Emperors changed their
interpretation of the Oaths they‘ve sworn to the
Guild? Those Oaths are too important, Joshim. If
we break our Oaths, we can‘t hold them to theirs.
And if we can‘t hold them to theirs, they‘ll plunge

the Twin Empires into full-scale war. We have to
keep our Oaths, Joshim. We haven‘t any choice.‖
Joshim took Rafe‘s hands in his again, raised
each one in turn to kiss it. The vehemence of Rafe‘s
reaction had shaken him, left him ashamed of the
ease with which he had proposed that they break
their Oaths.
―When you put it like that, we don‘t have any
choice, do we?‖ he agreed reluctantly. ―It shouldn‘t
have been necessary for you to convince me of it.‖
―Convince you? I was convincing myself,‖ Rafe
said bitterly. ―Hell, Joshim, do you think I‘m not
tempted? Do you think I don‘t dream about waking
up one morning and knowing who I am? But if I
break my Oath now, I might as well have broken it
ten years ago and spared myself all this!‖ He made
an angry gesture. ―You‘d better bar me from the
web. I‘m a danger to everybody else in it, and that‘s
Oath-breaking as well.‖
―Stop taking the Webmaster‘s decisions for him,‖
Joshim said, deliberately lightly. ―You can stay in
the web on two conditions. One: you don‘t take the
key-position. Two: you disengage if you suspect
your conditioning is beginning to operate. Agreed?‖
―Agreed.‖ There was only dull resignation in
Rafe‘s voice. ―I‘d better get some sleep. Can I have a
sleeper?‖
―I‘ll get you one.‖
There was nothing else he could offer Rafe at the
moment, Joshim realized, watching him take the
drug. A few hours of unbroken sleep, and Rafe‘s
place in the web, and Joshim was not certain that
he had made that decision solely as a Webmaster.
This was why you never involved yourself in the
web-room, he reminded himself: you always
doubted your own ability to make decisions about

the people you love, rightly doubted it. He ruffled
the sleeping head fondly. It was too late to pull back
now, even if he had wanted to.

From the Gazetteer of the Old Empire,
revised 5030
Jalset’s World (Aramas Zone) : a lightly settled
agricultural world, sole source of the recreational drug
blissdream; a typical frontier backwater, with no
features of physical, biological, or cultural interest.
Passage can be obtained on cargoships departing from
Aramas station.
251/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

Rallya breathed in the spice-ridden air of Jalset‘s
World and gagged.
―How the hell does anybody live in this?‖ she
demanded.
Lilimya grinned. ―The dirtsiders will probably tell
you they couldn‘t live anywhere else, ma‘am.‖
Rallya shaded her eyes to watch Bhattya‘s shuttle
lift off with the returning liberty party, then turned
to address the party that had come down with her.
―You‘ve got ten hours,‖ she reminded them. ―If
you can find anything to do with them down here —
you could spit from one side of this town to the
other. Keep out of trouble, and if you can‘t keep out
of trouble, don‘t bring it back to the ship. The
Webmaster has better things to do with his time
than treat the local variety of sexbug — ask Rafe if
you don‘t believe me.‖ She glanced around the
inattentive faces: they had heard it all before, even
Fadir, and were impatient to be on their way. ―Go
on, vanish,‖ she urged them. ―Anybody who isn‘t
back here in good time for the shuttle will forfeit
their next ten liberties.‖

The town was overflowing with liberty parties,
the dirtsiders making the most of the influx of fresh
money by doubling their normal prices. Rallya took
a desultory look through one of the small shops:
nothing she had not seen before on maybe a
hundred other worlds. Sixty years, two or three
different worlds every year. Yes, call it a hundred,
and none of them in any way memorable. Friends
on half a dozen of them, retired webbers who had
found a world they liked, or claimed to like. Exfriends. Once they were forced to retire, there was
always the loss of everything they had had in
common, the unspoken jealousy in the look they
gave her web-bands: why has she still got her web?
And always her relief at the end of a visit, the
escape from a reminder of her inevitable future.
She shook herself irritably, stood with hands on
hips in the middle of the main street and glared
along it. The best cure for morbid thoughts was a
drink, and at least this dirtball did not have
restrictive drinking laws. For the hundredth time,
she wondered why she had bothered to accompany
a liberty party, and answered herself: it was simply
good sense to have one of the Three on hand if
anybody got into real trouble. Not that anybody
from Bhattya would dare get into real trouble, but
there was always a first time.
She chose one of the quieter bars, found that she
could eat there too and ordered a meal. The food
tasted heavily of the local spices but was better than
she had expected. From her seat on the veranda,
she could see all the activity along the main street.
She ordered another beer — also better than she
expected — and lifted her feet onto the rail around
the veranda. With another nine hours to kill, there
was no need to hurry anywhere.

One of the dirtsiders drifted over to join her,
wanting to know if the tales about webbers were
true without actually saying as much. A nice
looking lad, about a third of Rallya‘s age. She
considered accepting his offer, to fill an hour or so,
then decided against it. He would find somebody to
tumble with: there were enough webbers in town.
Maybe Lilimya: she was renowned for being
generous to the curious. Rallya told him she was old
enough to be his grandmother and pointed him in
the direction of the most brightly lit bar, amusing
herself by being gentle with him. There were plenty
of dirtsiders she had dismissed hot-faced with the
question: does your mother know you‘re out?
―Excuse me, ma‘am. Have you seen Captain
Sajan?‖
Hajolir, Rallya remembered with an effort,
Sajan‘s Third. She had met him briefly back on
Aramas station. A tall man, tall enough to give her a
pain in the neck and the sun in her eyes if she
looked up at him.
―Didn‘t know she was dirtside,‖ she answered.
―She came down with the rest of us eleven hours
ago, but we were due to return an hour ago and she
hasn‘t turned up for the shuttle.‖
―Is that unusual?‖
―Yes, ma‘am. Very.‖
―Might she be sleeping off a drunk? Or too busy
in the local joy-house to notice the time?‖ Rallya
suggested the two most common reasons for
overstaying a liberty, although Sajan had not
seemed that irresponsible a woman.
―We‘ve checked the joy-house. She hasn‘t been
there. And we‘re checking all the bars now,‖ Hajolir
said. ―The last time anybody saw her was eight

hours ago. That was in one of the shops on the
north edge of town, looking at cloth.‖
Rallya frowned. ―Shopkeeper see her leave?‖
―She says so. And that‘s the respectable side of
town, the dirtsiders tell me.‖
Hajolir had obviously run out of ideas, was
hoping for guidance. Rallya swore and dropped her
feet to the ground.
―If she turns up drunk, or tumbling, Hajolir, I‘ll
have your ears to make my next wrist-bands. And
hers to make the neck-band,‖ she threatened. ―This
is not how I planned to spend my liberty. Go find
every webber able to stand, including the ones who
are currently horizontal. I want them here within
thirty minutes. Refer any arguments to me.‖ She
glanced at the position of the sun. ―We‘ve two hours
left of good light — we‘ll sweep the town. Every
street, every alleyway, every public building.‖ She
watched him dash off, relieved that the
responsibility for finding Sajan was no longer his.
―Hell, if my liberty is going to be ruined, so is
everybody else‘s,‖ she muttered angrily.
Thirty minutes later there was a crowd of
webbers blocking the main street and an irate
leader of the local peace-force complaining that
Rallya was not going through the right channels.
Rallya spared him enough time to inform him that
Sajan was a webber; that the right channels were
the webbers waiting for instructions; and that he
could either shut up and keep out of the way, or
make some constructive suggestions about what
might have happened to Sajan in his town. He
made a few more noises of protest, then suggested
that they start their sweep on the west side of town,
which was not quite as respectable as the rest.

It was forty minutes before Lilimya‘s group found
Sajan‘s body. She had been dragged to the end of an
alley and covered with the refuse from the eatinghouse that backed onto it from the main street. She
had been stabbed once in the back, the knife
nowhere close by, and robbed of everything she had
been carrying. Naturally, nobody in the eatinghouse had seen anything or heard anything.
Naturally, the leader of the peace-force was aghast
that a webber had been murdered, would make
every effort to bring the killer to justice. Rallya cut
through his platitudes, told him curtly that the
other members of Sajan‘s Three would be in touch
to make arrangements for disposal of the body and
left him to mouth his apologies to Hajolir, who had
no choice but to stay.
Back in the bar, she bought herself a drink of
Jalset‘s firewater, then one for Lilimya, who
wandered up with Fadir in tow and no inclination
to drift on. The main street was full of webbers in
angry groups. Rallya watched them carefully, alert
for any sign that they might vent their anger on
local people or property. It would not be the first
time it happened.
―Lilimya, go back to the shuttleground and call
Commander Noromi,‖ she ordered. ―Tell him that I
said to cancel all liberty throughout the convoy and
recall existing liberty parties at once. Fadir, you
stay here, in case I need a runner. Or are you too
drunk to run?‖
―No, ma‘am,‖ he said indignantly.
―Good. What are you waiting for, Lilimya?‖
―On my way, ma‘am!‖
Rallya watched her go. ―Fifteen minutes, then
we‘ll spread the good news,‖ she told Fadir
absently. ―Do you want a beer?‖

―No, thank you, ma‘am.‖
―Have one anyway. It might stop you fidgeting.‖
She bought the beer from a anxious-looking owner.
―Don‘t worry,‖ she told him drily. ―Yours is the
safest bar on the street, with me in it.‖ It did not
seem to reassure him.
―Do you think there will be trouble, ma‘am?‖
Fadir asked nervously.
―There already has been,‖ Rallya reminded him.
―Emperors, if you‘ve got enough sense to stay out of
dark alleys with strangers — and I‘m assuming you
have — then Sajan should have known better too!‖
It was not only the waste of it that angered
Rallya, it was the stupidity. Sajan was a veteran,
with as much experience as the party of webbers
who had found her body all taken together. It was
sheer negligence to let a dirtsider kill her so easily.
―It didn‘t look as if she‘d put up a fight, did it,
ma‘am?‖ Fadir ventured.
Rallya looked at him sharply; she had not
realized he had seen the body. It explained why he
was so pale. ―Difficult to put up a fight when you‘ve
been stabbed in the back,‖ she commented.
Fadir flushed. ―Yes, ma‘am, but…‖
―Go on. I‘ve nothing better to do with my ears
than listen to you.‖
―Wouldn‘t she have known better than to let
somebody come up behind her like that?‖
Rallya shrugged. ―Yes. If she had been sober. If
she hadn‘t been distracted by somebody else. If she
hadn‘t been with somebody she thought she could
trust.‖ She finished her drink, gestured at Fadir‘s
untouched beer. ―If you want that, drink up before
we round everybody up and get them out of here.‖
She watched him drink, realizing that for Fadir,
Jalset‘s World would be memorable, the place he

had seen his first dead body. It was faintly annoying
that she could not remember where she had had the
same experience, and that she suspected she would
forget about Jalset‘s World as easily.
―You‘ve done all right today, Fadir,‖ she told him
roughly. ―Don‘t spoil it by growing roots in that
seat.‖

Conversation at Peace-force Headquarters,
Jalset’s World
“You know it has to be another webber, and I know it
has to be another webber, but we’ll never get the
Convoy Commander to agree. According to him, there
isn’t a single member of the Guild who’d give another
webber a bloody nose, let alone stab one in the back.
Their precious Oath doesn’t allow it.”
“Why are we wasting our time worrying about it? If
the murderer is aboard one of the ships, that’s the
Guild’s problem, not ours.”
“We have to arrest somebody, to keep the Guild
happy. Especially now, with this damned Outsider
trouble. If they decide to stop the convoys…”
“They can’t. Half the Imperial Court uses
blissdream.”
“They’d find something to replace it quickly enough,
and if they didn’t, the Guild wouldn’t care. Listen, we
didn’t arrest Chalir until the day after the webber was
killed, did we?”
“No.”
“Talk to him. Persuade him to confess to killing the
webber as well as his partner, and concoct a believable
story to pass on to the Convoy Commander.”
“What do I offer Chalir?”
“Whatever it takes.”
254/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

Joshim hid a smile as Churi ran out of words and
resorted to enthusiastic but imprecise gestures to
complete his answer.
―You‘ve worked hard at that since your last
assessment,‖ he said instead.
―Yes, sir. Although I didn‘t really understand it
until Rafe explained about compound feedback.
Once I understood that, the rest was simple. Well,

easier,‖ Churi corrected himself. ―It wasn‘t that
Rafe‘s explanation was better than yours,‖ he
added, belatedly remembering the two hours that
Joshim had spent explaining the same subject to
him. ―It just made more sense to me.‖
Joshim did smile at that. ―Have you explored the
mathematics of it yet?‖ he asked.
―No, sir. Rafe said I should concentrate on
getting the ideas right first.‖
―When you‘re ready to try the maths, tell me and
I‘ll start you off. Or ask Rafe, if you want.‖
―I‘ll do that, sir.‖
Churi had moved forward to the edge of his seat
in nervous anticipation of Joshim‘s verdict. A
Webmaster‘s assessment was always an ordeal for a
junior in training, and particularly so when they
had done badly in their last assessment, as Churi
had. A consistently poor performance could cost a
junior their berth aboard Bhattya, or in an extreme
case their web. A webber had to have an instinctive
understanding of the way the web worked, of its
possibilities and limitations, of the consequences of
their actions within it. Without that instinct, they
might think when there was no time to think, or act
when action was the worst choice they could make.
Few webbers were born with the instinct, but all of
them had to acquire it or lose their place in the web,
and Joshim was the final judge aboard Bhattya of
who had it and who did not.
―You‘ve made good progress this quarter year,‖
Joshim said encouragingly. ―Especially since you‘ve
learned that there are no shortcuts.‖
Churi relaxed visibly. ―Yes, sir. I think it‘s
because Rafe has helped me a lot, particularly when
we‘re in the web.‖

Rafe had plenty of time to spare in the web,
Joshim thought unhappily as Churi left, time he
would not have if he were allowed to take the keyposition again. That decision would have to be
reviewed soon, before Rafe‘s brevet promotion was
made substantive; no ship could have a First — or
any senior — barred from the key-position. And
without any new evidence, Joshim did not know
how he could reverse his decision.
It did not help that Rafe would not discuss the
matter. He had referred to it once — obliquely —
since Joshim had imposed the restriction, when he
asked for permission to fit some training sessions
into their shared web-shift, the training sessions
which had helped Churi so much. The irony was
that it took a high degree of web-skill to combine
the number two position in the web with a teaching
role without disturbing the work of the active team.
By giving permission, Joshim was showing a rare
level of confidence in Rafe, and deflecting questions
from the rest of the web-room about the restriction
placed upon him. Which was probably one reason
why Rafe had suggested it.
Salu‘i‘kamai would never have had this problem,
Joshim thought ruefully. She would have followed
her gut feeling, certain that it was the voice of her
Goddess prompting her; no conflicts for her
between duty and desire. A direct link to a deity was
an advantage best appreciated when it had been
lost; prayers, to which the answers were unclear or
unrecognized, were a poor substitute which so far
had produced no solution to Joshim‘s dilemma. Or
if they had, it was not the solution that Joshim
hoped for and so he had not seen it. That was
another problem with prayers: it was permissible to
pray for what you wanted, but what you got was

what the gods wanted, and there was no guarantee
that the two would coincide. And if the gods had no
interest in your problem, you got nothing, not even
an indication that it was yours alone to deal with.
The door alert sounded, reminding Joshim of
another problem, one which had been wished on
him by the assignment clerks and — as far as he
knew — not by any higher authority. Elanis was
punctual to the second, not out of simple good
manners but from his policy of investing the exact
minimum of effort necessary to escape criticism
from his seniors. He had been given ample time to
realize that it was not an approach that would be
tolerated aboard Bhattya; he had failed to change
it, so now he was due for a warning. Unless he
produced an acceptable explanation, Joshim
reminded himself scrupulously.
―You wanted to see me, sir.‖ Elanis bowed as he
stepped through the door.
―Yes. Sit down, please.‖ Formality was the right
note for this interview; Elanis would respect
nothing else.
―Thank you.‖ Elanis sat back in the chair, either
not nervous or hiding it well.
―I talk to every new member of the web-room
after they‘ve had some time to settle in, about their
work and their adjustment to a new ship. Most
Webmasters do, so you‘ll have been through similar
interviews before.‖
―Yes, sir.‖
―Are you satisfied with your work in the web?‖
Elanis‘s chance to make his excuses, if he had any.
―Yes, sir, quite satisfied.‖
―You‘re not aware that there have been
complaints about it?‖

―No, sir. May I ask who has complained, and on
what grounds?‖
―Several members of the web-room have
expressed doubts about your commitment, both in
the web and out of it. I believe that they discussed
the problem with you before coming to me because
they were unhappy with your response.‖
Elanis shrugged. ―I‘m not accustomed to being
criticized by juniors with less experience than me.‖
―They may have less experience, but they‘re
entitled to an opinion about your performance, and
to more respect from you than they received,‖
Joshim said sharply. ―Their opinion is shared by
the two seniors who web with you regularly, and
confirmed by my own observations. Your work is
not satisfactory.‖
―In what respect?‖
―You‘re lazy, you‘re inconsiderate, and you
overestimate yourself,‖ Joshim told him bluntly.
―You expose the rest of your web-shift to needless
risk.‖
―My previous Webmasters had no complaints,‖
Elanis said stiffly.
―I can see that from your record.‖ See it, but not
understand it, Joshim added silently. ―Bhattya‘s
requirements are more stringent than the
requirements of a surveyship or a passenger carrier.
If you feel unable to meet them, you should
consider a transfer to a less demanding berth.‖
―Is this a formal warning?‖
―Yes.‖ Joshim had not intended to make it
formal, but it was plain that an informal warning
would have no effect. ―You have the right to enter a
defence into your record, if you wish.‖
―If a formal warning goes into my record, I shall
certainly enter a defence,‖ Elanis said calmly.

―Although it would be better for both of us if
neither entry were made. And for Rafe.‖
―In the face of statements from every member of
Bhattya‘s web-room who has complained about
you, an accusation of undue influence is not going
to be much of a defence for you, or a problem for
Rafe and me,‖ Joshim said softly. ―You have the
right to know that I will be entering an account of
this conversation in your record, in support of my
existing request for your transfer out of my webroom. I am also giving you formal warning that, if
there is no lasting improvement in your work
starting with your next web-shift, you will be barred
from my web for wilful negligence.‖
―You would certainly regret that,‖ Elanis said
smoothly. ―I have friends who would make sure
that you did.‖
―You could be pillow-friend to the entire Guild
Council without gaining enough influence to get a
Webmaster removed from their ship,‖ Joshim said
scornfully.
―Enter that warning in my record, or bar me from
the web, and you‘ll never be anything but the
Webmaster of a passed-over patrolship,‖ Elanis
sneered. ―No Guildhall berth when your web starts
to fail you. No future at all.‖
―The warning stands,‖ Joshim told him icily.
―You may enter your defence when you wish. I
suggest you also submit a request for a voluntary
move, if you do not want your record sullied with a
compulsory transfer. And if your work does not
improve immediately, the charge of wilful
negligence will also be entered and you will be
barred from the web.‖
―You will regret this,‖ Elanis promised.
―You may go now.‖

So that was the explanation for Elanis‘s
blameless record, Joshim thought angrily as the
door closed. Influence, or the threat of it. Rafe had
suggested as much when he commented on
Avannya‘s failure to get rid of the lazy aristo. How
close to retirement from the web had Avannya‘s
Webmaster been, and how intent on getting a
Guildhall berth? Close enough to worry about
Elanis‘s threats, probably, and close enough to
dread a future outside the Guild.
Joshim called Elanis‘s record onto his screen and
started to word the new entry. The record of their
conversation had to be made at once, while his
memory of it was still fresh, and to defer the
warning, even for a few hours, would be seen by
Elanis as a sign of weakness. He was determined
that the arrogant junior would not have the
pleasure of even a few seconds mistaken triumph.
One thing influence could not achieve was the
alteration of a webber‘s record; once made,
Joshim‘s entry would haunt Elanis until he retired.
It would not stop him getting a berth as a junior;
only a judgement that he was totally unfit to web
could do that. However, it would make it difficult
for him to get a prime berth and impossible to gain
promotion to senior. Unless, of course, he set his
friends to work on the problem, but if he had
enough influence to get himself a senior‘s berth, he
would already have done so. It was doubtful that
there was enough influence anywhere in the Twin
Empires to get Elanis promoted to senior, Joshim
decided cynically.
The door alert sounded again, quickly followed
by Vidar‘s head around the door, his red hair still
damp from his shift in the web.
―Busy?‖

Joshim shook his head. ―Just let me finish this.‖
He added his identity-code and stored the record,
remembering to grant temporary access to Elanis
so that he could enter his defence.
―A good morning, from the way Churi is grinning
from ear to ear,‖ Vidar commented, dropping into
the empty chair and putting his feet up on Joshim‘s
desk.
―He did well, and so did Magred.‖
―But not Elanis?‖
―Have a look at his record.‖
―I‘ve been watching you update it.‖
Joshim was not surprised. An observer from
outside Bhattya‘s web-room might be fooled by
Vidar‘s pretense to be interested only in sex and
ship systems, but there was nothing that went on in
the web-room that he did not make his business.
And nothing that he and Rallya would not bet on.
―Who won?‖ he asked.
Vidar laughed. ―I did. Rallya said you‘d think you
had to be gentle with him because Rafe doesn‘t like
him. I‘m looking forward to collecting when she
comes back from the escort Commanders‘
conference.‖
Joshim grunted irritably. ―She deserves to lose if
she doesn‘t know me better than that.‖
―True.‖ Vidar dropped his feet off the desk. ―It‘s a
pity you didn‘t make a reck of the interview.‖
―You think I‘ll need one?‖ Joshim asked in
surprise.
―I‘d be happier if you had one.‖
―Elanis probably thinks bedding one member of
the Guild Council once counts as influence,‖ Joshim
said drily.
―You aren‘t worried?‖

―However much influence he‘s got, I‘m safe until
I retire from the web. Or until the other members of
Bhattya‘s Three throw me out,‖ Joshim teased.
―Which I won‘t do, and Rallya won‘t do, and
Rallya‘s successor won‘t do,‖ Vidar prophesied
slyly.
―Rallya will be with us for years yet.‖
―How many years? I may be Captain and not
Webmaster, but I can tell when somebody‘s reflexes
are slowing. She isn‘t the webber she was ten years
ago, Joshim.‖
―None of us are.‖
―But you‘re thinking ahead to Rallya‘s
replacement,‖ Vidar guessed. ―Why else were you so
choosy about our new First? You‘d never been so
difficult to please before.‖
―Pure lust?‖ Joshim suggested.
Vidar made a rude noise. ―That came later.‖
Joshim knew that Vidar would press until he got
the answer he was certain was there. ―The thought
of Rallya‘s retirement did cross my mind. I haven‘t
discussed it with her though,‖ he warned.
―So how long?‖
―Five years,‖ Joshim said reluctantly. Vidar had
the information and the experience to work it out
for himself. ―That‘s my best guess. I can‘t be more
accurate without doing a full recalibration.‖
―And you can‘t do that without telling her why,
and the resultant explosion would breach the hull,‖
Vidar said sympathetically. ―Have you heard the
rumours that she won‘t get a station post?‖
―Yes, before I joined Bhattya. Rumours that she
won‘t get a station post, that Bhattya is down on
somebody‘s hate-list, that nobody from Bhattya‘s
Three has ever risen higher.‖ Joshim shrugged. ―If
it‘s true, she must have made some powerful

enemies. Forty years is a long time to keep a
vendetta going.‖
―Would Rallya make any other kind of enemy?‖
Vidar said in amusement.
―Well, if I‘m damned already, it‘s one more
reason not to be scared of Elanis.‖ Joshim frowned,
remembering something the junior had said. ―He‘s
certainly heard the rumours. Called Bhattya a
passed-over patrolship.‖
Vidar stroked his moustache with one finger
thoughtfully. ―We could be,‖ he remarked. ―Only
one assignment to the Disputed Zone in forty
years? Never assigned to the Imperial Zone? With
our reputation, we could expect a few of the
prestige assignments to come our way.‖
Joshim raised his eyebrows. ―Do you want to
fight in the Disputed Zone?‖ he challenged. ―Or to
do ceremonial escort duty for the Old Emperor‘s
favourite aristos?‖
―No more than you do. Which is why I approve of
your choice of Rallya‘s replacement.‖ Vidar smiled
widely. ―Nobody is going to give an Oath-breaker
any prestige assignments. Just the hard and
necessary jobs, the ones we get now.‖
―You‘re making a lot of assumptions,‖ Joshim
warned.
―Justified assumptions,‖ Vidar said smugly. ―You
can‘t convince me that you don‘t want Rafe as our
next Commander. I‘ve no objections, and he‘ll never
get a better offer. The only question is whether
Elanis can stop the Council from ratifying his
promotion to Commander.‖
Joshim scowled. ―He didn‘t threaten Rafe, not
after the initial accusation of undue influence.‖
―Doesn‘t know how vulnerable Rafe is,‖ Vidar
suggested. ―If he finds out…‖

―The Council has never refused to ratify a
promotion into a Three,‖ Joshim pointed out. ―Blue
hell would break out if they did. The autonomy of
each Three is one of the foundations of the Guild.
Nobody is going to jeopardize that for the sake of
Elanis‘s spite. And if Elanis has any influence worth
having, what‘s he doing aboard a passed-over
patrolship anyway?‖
―I wonder if Rallya made the same sort of
misjudgement when she made her enemies,‖ Vidar
commented.
―Knowing Rallya, she knew exactly what she was
doing and went ahead out of sheer stubbornness.‖
Vidar put his head back and laughed. ―Maybe.
Going to ask her advice about protecting your back,
and Rafe‘s?‖
―Without mentioning that I‘m worried about
Rafe‘s promotion to Commander?‖
―Difficult,‖ Vidar conceded. ―Does Rafe know
you‘ve got his career planned for him?‖
―We haven‘t discussed it.‖
―He‘s no fool. He‘ll have guessed,‖ Vidar
predicted.
―His brevet rank has to be made substantive
before anything else can happen,‖ Joshim said
heavily.
―Elanis won‘t have time to prevent that,‖ Vidar
objected. ―The approval will be ready by the time
we get back to Aramas. All it will need is our
signatures.‖
―True.‖
Vidar looked quizzically at Joshim. ―What‘s the
problem?‖
Joshim sighed. ―The problem is, I don‘t know if
there is a problem.‖

―But you think there may be. Any connection
with swapping Rafe‘s web-shift and keeping him
out of the key-position?‖ Vidar asked shrewdly.
―Yes.‖ Joshim hesitated, knowing he had to ask
but not wanting to hear the wrong answer, which
was why he had not asked before. ―Tell me, when
you were in the web with him while we were in
combat with that raider, did you notice anything
odd?‖
―About Rafe‘s performance? Apart from the fact
that he handled himself like a veteran, no.‖
―No sign that his concentration was disturbed?‖
Vidar shook his head. ―Not a thing, and I was
watching him damned closely. It‘s not too
comforting, going into combat with somebody in
the key-position who‘s never been in combat
before.‖ He frowned. ―Had he been in combat
before?‖
―It‘s possible,‖ Joshim said cautiously. ―After he
came out of the shub, he was as sick as a first-timer
through jump. It might have been caused by the
conditioning that goes with identity-wipe.‖
―Whatever it was didn‘t hit him until he came out
of the web,‖ Vidar said positively. ―I was monitoring
him so closely I was almost inside him. Emperors, I
was monitoring him so closely I probably was
inside him,‖ he said sheepishly.
Joshim tutted automatic disapproval. Shadowing
somebody in the web so closely that you
experienced everything they felt and did was
dangerous. At best, it could damage their control.
At worst, with the potential that it introduced for
circular feedback, it could cause permanent burnout of both webbers involved.
―I don‘t think he registered that I was doing it,‖
Vidar volunteered. ―And I‘m not good enough to

shadow perfectly. If I didn‘t disturb him, nothing
else would.‖
―I hope not.‖ Joshim chewed his lip. Vidar‘s
comments were encouraging, but they were not
conclusive.
―If he were any other First who‘d never been in a
patrolship before, you‘d be watching him carefully
but you‘d let him take the key-position,‖ Vidar said
reasonably. ―Especially when he‘s sharing a webshift with you. There‘s nobody better qualified to
take control if anything does go wrong. And he‘s
one of the best webbers in Bhattya‘s web-room.
Almost as good as you or Rallya. He‘s wasted as a
permanent number two.‖
―I know,‖ Joshim acknowledged. Rafe‘s skill in
the web was a delight. He did not have Rallya‘s
innate talent, which made her such a poor teacher
and a demanding key because she subconsciously
expected others to find webbing as easy as she did.
Rafe‘s skill was learned, and polished carefully and
continually; he knew how to pass it on, and how to
use it to get the best from others. It was rare to find
that in somebody with only ten years experience,
and a crime to waste it, but…
―You won‘t get an definite answer by keeping him
out of the key-position,‖ Vidar pointed out. ―You‘ll
always be wondering.‖
―So I should let him take the key-position and
wait for him to fold in the middle of combat?‖
Joshim argued. ―Just to get a definite answer?‖
Vidar tugged at his earring. ―You‘re not
restricting Rallya, and you know that now
deterioration has started, there‘s always a chance
that her web will fail without warning during
combat. If you‘re worried about Rafe, shouldn‘t you
be equally worried about Rallya?‖ he countered.

―The chance of sudden web failure in Rallya‘s
current condition is negligible.‖
―You can‘t be sure of that until you do a full
recalibration.‖
―If there had been any major change, Rallya
would have mentioned it. She may be wilful, but
she isn‘t irresponsible.‖
Vidar conceded the truth of that with a gesture
that made his collection of gold bracelets clink
together. ―I still think you‘re wrong about Rafe,‖ he
insisted. ―Even if there is a risk, wouldn‘t it have
been greatest the first time he was in combat? He
survived that, and he‘s aware of the danger now. It
can only get safer.‖
―Not if the conditioning is set to get stronger if
it‘s ignored.‖
―If they wanted him to keep out of combat, they
would have conditioned him against taking a berth
on a patrolship, not faffed around making him a
liability in the web if he did.‖ Vidar shook his head
in mock despair. ―You can‘t even be sure it was the
conditioning that made him sick. When I was a
junior, we had a Commander of ten years‘ standing
who still threw up every time he came out of the
web after combat. Nobody dreamed of barring him
from the key-position.‖
When he was exasperated, Vidar had a lot in
common with Rallya, Joshim realized fondly. But
not so much that he thought he could make the
Webmaster‘s decisions for him, thank the gods.
―I‘ll decide one way or the other before we start
on the in-bound run,‖ he promised.
―No, you won‘t. You might change your mind and
let him back into the key-position, but you won‘t
make a decision.‖

―Would you explain to me the difference between
making a decision and changing my mind?‖
―If you change your mind, it will be for the wrong
reasons and you won‘t be able to stop worrying
about it. If you make a decision…‖
‗…it will be for the right reasons and I‘ll be happy
with it?‖ Joshim concluded. ―Well, if that‘s the
difference, I‘m not in a position to make a decision.
Only to change my mind.‖
Vidar shook his head firmly. ―You shouldn‘t try
so hard to be the perfect Webmaster,‖ he said, not
unsympathetically.
―Maybe not.‖ Joshim twisted his ring around his
finger. ―It would be simpler if I were just his
Webmaster. Loving him as well… I can‘t keep the
two things separate.‖
―Don‘t try,‖ Vidar said crisply. ―It doesn‘t work.
You can‘t be a Webmaster without being influenced
by your personal feelings. Your instincts about
people are as accurate as any measurement of their
performance that you can make.‖
―Even if I care about somebody so much that I
dare not trust my judgement about him?‖
―Your judgement about Rafe is fine. What‘s
wrong is your judgement about yourself. You think
that you‘re being objective about Rafe, but you
aren‘t. You‘re letting your fear of being biased in his
favour push you too far in the opposite direction,
into a choice you know is wrong.‖ Vidar leaned
forward. ―Admit it, Joshim. If you really believed
that he was an unacceptable risk in combat, he
wouldn‘t be in the web at all, would he?‖
Joshim hesitated. ―Probably not,‖ he conceded at
last.
―So why didn‘t you ban him from the web?‖ Vidar
insisted.

Joshim glared across his desk. ―Because it wasn‘t
necessary,‖ he admitted. ―And because I didn‘t want
to,‖ he added defiantly.
―If it was necessary, would you have done it?‖
―Yes. I would.‖
That answer, unexpectedly easy, freed a tangle of
doubts. Making it and knowing it to be true, Joshim
could look clearly at the decision he had made
about Rafe and recognize that it had been a
mistake. Not just for all the reasons that Vidar had
argued, but also for the simpler and more
important reason that he had not made it as
Webmaster, as he had deceived himself that he had.
He had made it as Rafe‘s lover, swayed by Rafe‘s
distress and by his own guilt about the OathBreaking that he had proposed into doing
something — anything — to ease the tension
between them. Something that made him feel that
he had not abandoned his duty as Webmaster, so
long as he did not examine it too closely.
No wonder the gods had not responded to his
prayers: he had been asking for a solution to the
wrong problem, to a problem that only existed in
his head. Or had they responded, by whispering in
Vidar‘s ear? Joshim smiled at the thought of the
reaction he would get if he asked Vidar whether he
had received any divine guidance recently.
―At least I‘m not the only fool involved,‖ he
realized ruefully. ―Rafe would have argued the ears
off any other Webmaster over this, but he hasn‘t
said a word about it to me.‖
Vidar sat back contentedly. ―Too honourable to
take advantage of his position in your bed?‖ he
teased.
―And in my affections,‖ Joshim corrected goodnaturedly.

Too honourable to risk talking me into another
form of Oath-breaking, letting him in the keyposition against my better judgement, he added
privately. That was not a subject he could discuss
with Vidar, in spite of the friendship they shared,
but it was something he had to discuss with Rafe,
now that Vidar had bullied him into seeing sense.
―Thanks, Vidar,‖ he said quietly.
―Buy me a drink when we‘re dirtside.‖ Vidar
grinned. ―Bring Rafe along. He can buy me one
too.‖
***
―Ah, Rafe.‖ Noromi welcomed him to Meremir‘s
web-room with a curt nod. ―Rallya not with you?‖
―She‘s outside, talking with Commander Erelna,
sir.‖
―Expects us all to wait for her, I suppose,‖
Noromi complained. ―Find her difficult to work
with, do you?‖
―Not particularly, sir.‖
―Not likely to say if you did, in your position.‖
Noromi
chuckled
knowingly.
―Ought
to
congratulate you on your success against that
raider. Mostly the result of luck, of course, but still
a creditable effort.‖ He patted Rafe‘s shoulder.
Rafe contrived a brief smile and moved out of
easy range of another pat. ―I don‘t underestimate
the value of luck, sir.‖
―Don‘t overestimate it either,‖ Noromi warned.
―It‘s no substitute for hard work and thorough
planning.‖
―No, sir, but it‘s often the thing that makes the
hard work worthwhile.‖

―Rallya told you that, I suppose?‖ Noromi shook
his head disapprovingly. ―Take my advice, Rafe.
Don‘t believe everything she tells you. Just because
she relies on luck doesn‘t mean you can do the
same. Hard work and proper training, that‘s what it
takes to get anywhere.‖
―I couldn‘t hope for better training than I‘m
receiving from Commander Rallya,‖ Rafe said
bluntly. The clumsiness of the approach was an
insult and the envy behind it irritated him. ―At least
she knows the difference between luck and skill,‖ he
added unkindly.
―One fluke success doesn‘t make you a
Commander,‖ Noromi said, offended. ―You‘d do
well to remember that instead of aping Rallya‘s
arrogance.‖
There were worse things to ape, Rafe decided as
Noromi stalked off. Like a pedestrian Commander
who could not make an direct approach to a First
that he wanted to poach from another ship. Noromi
should never have been given overall responsibility
for the convoy; Rafe had learned that from the
conference at Aramas. It was a formula for missed
opportunities, for slavish adherence to the tactics
that Noromi had personally proven successful. He
was not incompetent, Rafe conceded honestly, but
he lacked initiative.
Rallya was the obvious candidate for Convoy
Commander, which was one reason why Noromi
was jealous of her, but she would have refused the
job if it had been offered, and her reputation was so
formidable that Commander Maisa would not dare
order her to take it. Rallya would refuse
Commander Maisa‘s job if it were offered, Rafe
decided as she entered the web-room and paused to
greet Noromi. Too much routine work involved and

too many people to deal with who were not
webbers, people who had to be coaxed instead of
bullied.
―Noromi informs me that you‘re impertinent,‖
Rallya announced as she joined Rafe.
―I expect so, ma‘am. I‘m surprised that he‘s so
eager for me to join Meremir.‖
―Blinded by your more obvious attractions,‖ she
said scornfully. ―Or hasn‘t heard about your
dubious past yet. How does it feel to be in demand
for once?‖
―It‘s your reflected glory that makes the
difference,‖ Rafe retaliated.
Rallya laughed. ―Sit down and bask in it,‖ she
advised, relaxing into the nearest seat and closing
her eyes. ―Wake me up when the farce is over.‖
Noromi‘s uninspired plans for the in-bound run,
a reprise of the out-bound run but in the opposite
direction, aroused Rafe‘s old intolerance of a task
performed barely adequately. It had been wise to
keep all the patrolships with the convoy when the
cargoships were heavily loaded and unable to move
fast, but now that they were capable of some speed,
it was wasteful to repeat the tactic. Even Bhattya‘s
limited roving commission was only confirmed by
Noromi as a bow to the inevitable.
Rallya sat throughout with closed eyes, as if
intolerably bored with the proceedings. Clearly, she
had no more intention of arguing with Noromi than
had either of the other Commanders present, but at
least they had the excuse of lack of seniority. Wake
me up, she had decreed; in a flood of devilment,
Rafe resolved to do exactly that.
―Any questions?‖ Noromi asked ritually at the
end of his presentation.

―Yes, sir,‖ Rafe said, violating the convention that
the Commanders‘ shadows never spoke.
Noromi was disconcerted, but signalled for Rafe
to continue.
―I‘m not quite sure what the point of it all is, sir,‖
Rafe said. Peripherally, he saw Rallya sit further
down in her seat. No support from her then, but no
interference either.
―The point?‖ Noromi repeated. ―The point is
obvious.‖ He moved to cancel the displays he had
created.
―Not to me, sir,‖ Rafe said imperturbably.
―The point,‖ Noromi said acidly, ―is to deliver the
cargoships safely to Aramas station. I would have
thought that was obvious to a half-wit.‖
―I see, sir. Is that all, sir?‖
―All? Isn‘t that enough?‖
―Aren‘t our orders to ensure safe delivery of the
convoy and to gather intelligence about the
Outsiders?‖
Noromi choked. ―You‘re impertinent,‖ he accused
repetitively.
―Probably, sir,‖ Rafe agreed cheerfully. ―You
haven‘t answered my question.‖
Noromi looked around for support, received
none from Rallya or from the other Commanders,
and was forced to fall back on his own resources to
regain control of the meeting.
―Before you reach command rank, which is
extremely unlikely on the basis of today‘s dismal
showing, you will realize that orders are rarely
meant to be interpreted literally,‖ he told Rafe
sententiously. ―Until then, your best course of
action is to remain silent and learn from your
betters.‖
―Then you‘ll explain your interpretation, sir?‖

Noromi sought inspiration from the bulkhead
above him, and received it.
―Perhaps you‘d like to explain yours,‖ he
suggested maliciously. ―And the way it should be
put it into practice.‖ He made a grandiloquent
gesture of invitation. ―The meeting is yours.‖
―Thank you, sir,‖ Rafe said happily.
―Some people never learn,‖ Rallya commented,
opening her eyes for the first time.
Rafe wiped Noromi‘s displays, leaving only the
plot of the direct route back to Aramas. Turning to
face his audience, he wondered for a moment
whether he was about to make a fool of himself. It
was a familiar uncertainty and he grinned, the grin
which always persuaded his audience of his
confidence. An internal alarm flickered and he
muted it hastily, helped by the blatant expectation
of his coming failure on Noromi‘s face.
His ideas took shape as he transferred them to
the displays, his uncertainty and the nagging of his
conditioning fading as he did so. He laid down the
simple elements first, the measures to ensure the
safety of the convoy. The aim of the Outsiders was
to steal ships, not destroy them, so group the
cargoships in a fast, tight formation. Their
combined mass shadow would be protection
against a ship being snatched without warning in
the wake of a raider‘s jump; a tractor beam would
have to be used to drag them free first.
The patrolships were at their slowest and most
vulnerable in a turn, so keep them at the rear of the
convoy, poised to run down on a raider
approaching from any direction. The raider‘s need
to use a tractor beam would grant the time the
patrolships required.

The cargoships were lightly armed but not
shielded, so order them not to open fire unless fired
upon, nor to attempt to block a raider‘s escape
route. Under no circumstances were they to break
formation or reduce speed without permission.
The patrolships were not to fire upon a raider
unless a cargoship would otherwise be lost. A
damaged patrolship was a greater danger to the
convoy‘s safety than a fleeing raider. If a raider was
about to jump alone, let it go. If possible, ride on its
wake, take a full spectrum sensor recording of its
arrival point and jump back at once through the
same hole before it faded. The manoeuvre was not
compulsory, Rafe stressed drily; it was an option
open to a ship with the right team in the web. It
would be useful to know where the raiders jumped
to, but not at the risk of losing a patrolship.
The point of greatest danger would be the jump
from the Jalset system into the Aramas system; two
patrolships would go ahead to secure the arrival
point. But they would not travel with the convoy.
Once the cargoships were taking their share of the
responsibility for their own safety, two patrolships
would form an adequate escort from Jalset‘s world
to the departure point. The other two would be free
to carry out the second part of their orders: to
gather intelligence about the Outsiders.
The Jalset system‘s nearest neighbour was an
uninhabited binary system. Uninhabited, and with
the multiplicity of major jump points that any
binary system had; an ideal system for the raiders
to route through. Two patrolships would leave
within a planetary day to seed that system with
recording drones, set to monitor jump flares, before
jumping on to Aramas. The drones would be
collected during the next convoy‘s turnaround. If

the raiders were passing that way, the recordings
would reveal it, the first pointer for the diplomats
and the historians to the origin of the Outsiders. If
the records were blank, then the drones could be
reused in another system.
It would have been too insulting to Noromi to ask
for questions at the end of the presentation, too
likely to undo any good that had been done.
Instead, Rafe gave the audience a hesitant,
expecting-to-be-corrected look and waited for their
reaction. Equally tactfully — or, on Rallya‘s part,
maliciously — the other Commanders waited for
Noromi to speak first.
―There‘s a lot you haven‘t considered,‖ he said
grudgingly. ―How would you persuade the
cargoships to agree to their share, for example?‖
―It would have to be explained to them by the
right person,‖ Rafe told him. ―Somebody they
already trust with their safety.‖
―He means, not by an upstart First,‖ Rallya said
helpfully. Her face was expressionless but Rafe
suspected she was enjoying herself.
―I should think not,‖ Noromi grunted. He stood
up and studied the displays closely. ―Your manners
leave a lot to be desired, young man,‖ he
pronounced, ―but you‘ve done quite well for a first
attempt. The idea about jumping after the raiders is
too risky, of course. The kind of crazy idea we all
have when we‘re young. But there are elements of
this we may be able to use.‖
***
Rallya glared at the list on her screen: texts from
her library that Rafe had accessed since joining
Bhattya, and not one of them dealt with convoy

tactics. Wherever he had learnt the basis of today‘s
performance, it had not been there.
It was not, she reflected irritably, that he had
come up with anything of startling originality. The
organisation of a convoy with a limited escort was
standard enough, and the seeding of the binary
system with recording drones was an obvious use of
a spare patrolship or two. The interest lay in the
way he had put it together, jumping from the fact
that the raiders had never destroyed a cargoship to
the conclusion that the convoy would be as safe
with two escorts as it was with four, and using that
to create the spare patrolships that Maisa
perpetually lacked.
And it had taken real skill, she credited him
jealously, to trap Noromi into allowing him to
speak. It was not a ploy that would work twice, but
as she had remarked to Joshim in another context,
once was usually enough. It was certainly more
success than Rallya had had in years with Noromi,
who spent more energy in avoiding her opinions
than he did in forming his own.
Inevitably, Rafe‘s plan had survived Noromi‘s
review unscathed, and Noromi was disgustingly
pleased with it. By the time the convoy returned to
Aramas station, it would have become Noromi‘s
plan and Rafe‘s name would not be mentioned in
his report to Maisa. Rallya grinned wickedly, sorry
that she would not be there when the rumour about
Rafe‘s Oath-breaking reached Noromi.
It would be instructive to learn where that
rumour had started. Rallya had had it from Erelna,
Commander of Corir, just before the conference.
Erelna had had it from a junior in her web-room,
who had had it from an unknown junior from a
cargoship during shared liberty time. There would

be no tracing it back to its source, even if there was
time to try before Bhattya left orbit.
It would also be instructive to learn if Rafe knew
about it yet. He had chosen an opportune time to
display his talent. Had that been luck, or the
knowledge that he needed to shine? When the
rumour reached Bhattya‘s web-room, if it had not
done so already, he would need every scrap of good
will that he could muster. Emperors knew, seeding
an uninhabited system with drones was only
marginally less boring than convoy escort duty, but
to arrive at that viewpoint took forty years of
experience. Most of Bhattya‘s web-room would be
delighted with the news, and impressed to learn
that Rafe was responsible.
Well timed or not, there was something that
bothered her about Rafe‘s performance at the
conference, Rallya realized. Not the cynical asides
to his audience, about the Court‘s urgent need for
blissdream or the overwhelming gratitude that they
might earn from the diplomats if things went well;
every patrolship Commander shared that cynicism
about the results of their work. Nor the smoothness
with which he had presented a plan which there
had been no time, no reason, to think through
beforehand; Rallya had had plenty of examples of
him thinking on his feet.
No, it was the sheer confidence with which he
had led them through his ideas. Rallya could
recognize fake confidence and she could recognize
the real thing. This had been real, somebody sure of
what they were saying, accustomed to being
listened to and heeded. It was the understated
confidence that only came with experience; as she
had thought when he destroyed the raider, she was
seeing more than raw talent in Rafe. It was an

intriguing conundrum: how much could a junior
with maybe a year‘s experience have learned, even
from the most expert of teachers? And, since the
answer was less than Rafe knew, how much
experience had he had when they identity-wiped
him?
Damn Sajan for getting herself killed before
Rallya could ask her again about Buhklir. About
how young he had looked when she knew him, and
how young he might have looked ten years ago.
Young enough to be taken for a junior just
qualified? And was he so committed to the New
Empire that he would make the choice that Rafe
had made? If a Commander was identity-wiped,
they would have to start again as a junior; in that
situation, Rafe‘s youthful appearance could make a
mistake about his age inevitable.
How old would Buhklir be now? Fifteen years
ago, he had become the youngest Commander ever,
so Sajan had claimed, or the youngest Commander
in the New Empire. He might have been forty then,
the same age as Rallya when she reached command
level, but certainly no younger. That made him
fifty-five now. Rallya scowled in disappointment. At
fifty-five a web‘s growth was invariably complete,
but at thirty it would still be maturing. Joshim
would not have missed a discrepancy like that
between Rafe‘s age and the state of his web. But
everything fitted except the arithmetic, so damn
Sajan again for getting herself killed; her timing
could not have been worse.
Or better, Rallya thought suspiciously. If Rafe
were Buhklir, how would his conditioning react to a
prolonged encounter with somebody he knew in his
previous life? The brief meeting at Aramas had
shaken him badly, and Sajan would have sought

him out again, on Jalset‘s World or at Aramas, to
reminisce about the New Empire and to add him to
her collection of aristos, or near-aristos. Even if
Rafe were only Buhklir‘s son, would identity-wipe
survive such a direct counter-stimulus? And what
would be the result if he did regain his memory?
Who would have an interest in ensuring that he did
not?
Nobody, if the identity-wipe had been applied for
Oath-breaking; if memory returned, it would be
wiped again, with nobody a loser except Rafe. What
if the identity-wipe had not been the result of Oathbreaking, but to hide something in Rafe‘s past? In
those circumstances there would certainly be
people interested in preventing a return of memory,
Rallya thought grimly, people at the highest level in
the Guild. Identity-wipe was so serious a step that it
had to be sanctioned at Council level; to impose it
on a webber for any reason except Oath-breaking
was a betrayal of every Oath the Council members
had taken. Discovery would destroy those
implicated.
But, if it was vital to conceal something that Rafe
knew, why run the risk of discovery by keeping him
alive, even identity-wiped? Simpler and safer to kill
him: no need to involve a psych-surgeon to perform
the identity-wipe, no need to keep him under
constant observation. The observer‘s identity was
clear: Elanis, first on Avannya and now on
Bhattya. Clear too that his instructions included
murder if necessary; Rallya herself had told him
that Sajan recognized Rafe, and Sajan had died at
the first opportunity. Which brought Rallya full
circle: if they were prepared to kill to keep the
secret, why was Rafe still alive?

And, when Elanis had all the influence necessary
to keep his berth on Avannya indefinitely, why had
he left it so suddenly, just before an accident which
should have led to the death of every webber
aboard? Accident? Rallya snorted derisively.
Nothing that happened around Rafe was an
accident. Somebody had tried to kill him,
somebody with more influence that Elanis‘s
controllers. Somebody willing to sacrifice an entire
web-room to be sure that he died. Rallya swore
bitterly. Avannya, then Sajan. Bhattya next? There
was a good reason to keep Elanis aboard, in spite of
Joshim‘s protests. Whoever wanted Rafe dead did
not consider Elanis expendable; his presence was
protection of a kind, his departure a warning of
imminent danger. Unless there was a reassessment
of priorities and Elanis became expendable, but a
patrolship — an alerted patrolship with Rallya
aboard — was not the easy target that Avannya had
been.
New Empire Guild politics, ten years ago? Rallya
could not remember what had been going on,
doubted that she had ever known. No reason to
suppose it was any more attractive than Old Empire
Guild politics, and she had a surfeit of that thirtyfive years ago. Buhklir would have been a likely
candidate for the Guild Council, Sajan had
suggested. Was he in favour of partition, or against
it? Whatever view he held, neither faction would
have been forced to go to such extreme lengths to
prevent his election. And if the reason lay only in
the New Empire, how had help like Elanis been
enlisted on this side of the Disputed Zone?
There were too many linkages missing to make
sense of it yet, but too many elements of the picture
present to doubt that there was a secret to be

discovered. Rallya smiled contentedly. No mistakes
this time, she promised herself. Handle it slowly
and carefully, like the explosive it was, and detonate
it where it would have the most impact: under the
Guild Council. There would not be many with
anything to hide who would survive the shock
waves that would travel through the Guild.
Especially not those who had accepted the offers
that Rallya had turned down thirty-five years ago.
The ones who had achieved power since then
because Rallya had spoken out too soon, before she
had the whole picture. The ones who would soon
learn that thirty-five years was not too long to wait
to win a war.

From introductory material for apprentices
to the Guild of Webbers
…After induction, you will be assigned to the webroom of a ship for two years, where you will receive
your initial training under the supervision of your ship’s
Three…
…Upon
satisfactory
completion
of
your
apprenticeship, you will be granted a half-year’s leave,
which should normally be spent in your home
environment. The purpose of this period is to enable
you to consider the gravity of the Oath that you intend
to take… Twenty percent of apprentices leave the Guild
at this time…
…Once introduced, your web will take between one
hundred and four hundred days to establish itself. The
degree of discomfort experienced during establishment
varies between individuals… You will already be aware
that
permanent
sterility
is
a
side-effect
of
establishment…
Training
starts
again
when
establishment is complete…
…Once qualified as a probationary junior, you will
normally be assigned to the web-room of a ship or
station, and achieve full junior qualification within two
years. Junior assignment is the responsibility of the
Personnel Directorate, although your preferences and
those of the Webmasters concerned are always taken
into account…
…If you wish, you may go on to qualify as a senior,
entitling you to accept the offer of a senior berth.
Selection of a web-room’s seniors is the responsibility
of the Three involved, but subject to approval by the
Personnel Directorate…
…You may also wish to train in one of the
specializations open to you. These include: Captaincy

(specializing in ship, station, and communications
systems); Webmastery (specializing in personal, ship,
and station webs); Cargomastery (specializing in the
commercial
aspects
of
the
Guild’s
work);
Surveymastery (specializing in interstellar navigation
and exploration); and Command (specializing in peace
work)…
…Any senior may accept the offer of a place in a
Three, thus achieving command rank. Selection of a
new member of a Three is the responsibility of the
existing members, subject to ratification by the Guild
Council (see later). Each Three consists of: one
Captain, one Webmaster, and one other specialist
appropriate to the ship or station to be commanded…
…You may apply at any time for a berth in one of
the Guild’s specialist Directorates (Personnel, Central
Support, Systems, Webs, Survey, Commerce, Peace,
and External Liaison). These berths are located at
Guild Zone Stations, including Central, and at planet
based establishments, including both Imperial Worlds.
Appointments to a Directorate are the responsibility of
that Directorate, subject to approval by the Personnel
Directorate; command rank is a prerequisite for the
higher positions… The head of each Directorate is
appointed by the Guild Council (see later)…
…Anybody who has reached command rank is
eligible for election to the Guild Council. Members of
the Council are responsible for formulating Guild
policy, and for making and enforcing Guild legislation;
they are the Guild’s supreme authority. The Central
Support Directorate is the Council’s executive arm… All
Guild members who have reached command rank are
eligible to vote for Council members…
…You will continue as a Guild member until your
web performance drops below the acceptable level for
ship and station control. This is the inevitable
consequence of aging, and normally occurs at about

sixty years old. At this time, your web will be
deactivated, to avoid the slight risks associated with an
active but unused web. You may then chose to apply
for a specialist berth, or to retire with a Guild pension…
…You may be worried about the relationship
between the Guild and the Twin Empires, particularly
in view of the current conflict between the Emperors.
Time spent in a web-room is the best way to dispel
this concern, but a few words on the situation are
appropriate here. As you know, the Guild is pledged
equally to the people of both Empires and the majority
of the Guild’s work is unaffected by the division
between Old and New… The Guild has an agreement
with the Emperors over resource allocation in the
Disputed Zone. Each Emperor may purchase as much
Guild support as they wish for their combat forces, at
prices determined by the Guild Council. Services that
are provided by the Guild are limited to: interstellar
transport of Empire forces (excluding intra-system
transport in combat areas); strategic and tactical
advice during operations involving Guild ships; and
nonlethal combat between Guild ships assigned to
opposing Empires… All Guild ships and personnel
captured while supporting an Emperor’s combat forces
are reassigned in the opposing Empire. The cost of
replacing such ships and personnel in the Empire from
which they have been lost is recovered from the
Emperor responsible; an equivalent sum is credited to
the combat account of the opposing Emperor… This
agreement can only be changed by unanimous consent
of the Guild Council and both Emperors. The Guild may
terminate the agreement unilaterally if Guild casualties
are incurred in the Disputed Zone, or if Empire combat
forces take any action that might result in Guild
casualties; sanctions would also be applied against the
Emperor responsible for any Guild casualties…

255/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

Rafe paused by the Arura in the niche by Joshim‘s
desk and touched it experimentally. It was
smoother and a little warmer than he expected it to
be, the curves fitting comfortably into his palm, but
it gave him none of the comfort that Joshim drew
from it. He smiled slightly, acknowledging that he
had not expected that either, and sat cross-legged
on the seat that Joshim‘s visitors used. It was better
to sit quietly in the dark than to lie sleepless.
Had there been more than three hours before he
was due on duty again, he would have taken a
sleeper from the supply that Joshim kept by the bed
for him. He did not want to be awake with nothing
to do except listen to Joshim‘s even breathing and
wonder how many more nights he would have in
this cabin. It was frightening how easily he had
come to need somebody else, frightening how much
the idea of losing Joshim hurt. If he had known
how tangled in each other they would get, would he
have responded to Joshim‘s kiss, the first time?
Probably yes. There was the pull of Joshim‘s eyes
and smile, the sensation of déjà vu that had touched
him then and every time since when he woke to see
Joshim‘s face, the feeling of homecoming. A curious
analogy for love for somebody to choose who had
no home, he thought fleetingly, or no home that he
could remember except the web-room of Avannya,
long since broken up for scrap.
―Are you all right?‖
Rafe had not heard Joshim leave the bed and
come to stand behind him. He reached a hand back
over his shoulder to squeeze Joshim‘s hand.
―Fine. It‘s too late to take a sleeper, that‘s all.‖

―Do you want company, or do you want to be
alone?‖
―I didn‘t want to wake you.‖
―That‘s not what I asked.‖
Rafe leaned his head against the back of the seat.
―I don‘t want to be alone with the night-devils,‖ he
admitted.
Joshim rested his hands on Rafe‘s shoulders.
―What sort of night-devils?‖ His fingers found the
knot of muscles at the base of Rafe‘s neck and
moved to ease them. Rafe sighed with the pleasure
of it. ―Sit forward a little and I can do this properly,‖
Joshim suggested.
Rafe obeyed wordlessly, centring the weight of
his head down the line of his back and curling his
hands in his lap, losing himself in Joshim‘s
massage. A shaman once told me that, if I sat like
this long enough, I would rise up and float. It was a
pity that he never told me how long was long
enough and I could never spare the time to learn…
As the voice in his head laughed, Rafe shuddered
violently.
―A memory?‖ Joshim guessed.
―Yes.‖
―Want me to stop?‖
Rafe shook his head. Joshim sensed the
movement and resumed his gentle probing for the
tension.
―They‘re coming more often while I‘m awake,‖
Rafe said softly. ―Just a snatch of a voice, or a flash
of a scene. No names. No links. Just broken pieces
that will never fit together to make a whole.‖
―It frightens you.‖
―No, not frightens. That‘s too strong. Disturbs.
Unsettles. I can‘t have what I want from my future,
and I can‘t have what I had in my past, and I‘m left

juggling fragments of them both.‖ Rafe sighed
again. ―Don‘t listen to me, Joshim. It‘s the nightdevils talking.‖
Joshim‘s fingers moved along the line of Rafe‘s
jaw and back again. ―What do you want from your
future?‖
Rafe shrugged. ―I‘ll have to settle for what I can
get.‖
―Why not what you want?‖
Rafe shook his head, refusing to answer aloud.
What I want is what I have now, only without the
nightmares and the memories and the sickness and
the doubts. Joshim‘s fingers traced circles on his
temples, drew lines out from the centre of his
forehead. Rafe wanted to freeze the moment in
time, live secure in it forever, but he could not have
that either.
―I was thinking about Avannya earlier,‖ he told
Joshim. ―I spent my whole life in her web-room, or
the ten years of which I‘m allowed to make sense,
but she never felt so much like home as Bhattya
does.‖
Joshim traced a symmetrical pattern on Rafe‘s
cheekbones. Rafe turned his head to kiss one set of
fingertips. I want to stay with you. It would be too
painful to say it.
―You‘re worrying about yesterday, after the
conference, aren‘t you?‖ Joshim suggested.
―After that bout of sickness, don‘t you think I
should be?‖ Rafe asked tightly.
―No.‖ Joshim set his hands on the back of the
seat and turned it so that they faced each other in
the darkness. ―Are you worried about the cause of
the nausea or its consequences?‖
―Both.‖ Rafe could not see Joshim‘s face, but it
made talking about the problem no easier. ―Not to

mention the sheer misery of throwing up endlessly
for an hour.‖
―If I‘d thought to leave a supply of anti-nauseant
with the sleepers, you wouldn‘t have had to wait for
me to come out of the web,‖ Joshim said guiltily.
―I hadn‘t planned to need any,‖ Rafe joked. ―If I‘d
kept quiet at the conference, I wouldn‘t have
needed any. Next time I‘ll know better.‖
―Next time, I‘ll make sure it‘s available for you.‖
―If you want.‖
―No, Rafe,‖ Joshim said sternly. ―You‘re not
going to avoid talking about it by caving in to
everything I say.‖
―Then we‘ll talk about it,‖ Rafe said angrily.
―We‘ll talk about when you‘re going to ban me from
Bhattya‘s web altogether, and whether your
recommendation — if you give me one — is going to
be enough to get me a berth on another ship. One
that isn‘t a patrolship, so I don‘t get ripped apart by
the impossible things I can do and the impossible
things I remember. One where I don‘t have to
watch you being torn between what you want to do
and what you have to do, because of me.‖
―Is that what you want?‖
―No, damn you! It isn‘t what I want! It‘s all I can
have!‖
Joshim said nothing. Rafe shut his eyes and
concentrated on regaining enough control to speak
calmly again. ―Sorry, Joshim. I shouldn‘t have
shouted at you. It isn‘t your fault, and it‘s making
you as miserable as it‘s making me.‖
―Not quite. Not since I realized what a fool I was
being.‖ Joshim laid the back of his hand briefly
along Rafe‘s cheek. ―I panicked, you know. I didn‘t
need to bar you from the key-position. If I‘d just
taken time to think, I‘d have seen then what I saw

yesterday. You‘re fine as long as you have
something important to focus on, like webbing, or
showing Noromi how things should be done. The
backlash only hits you when you relax, when you
stop holding it off. You can control it. You‘re
controlling it already.‖
Rafe chewed his lip, troubled. ―It can‘t be that
simple,‖ he objected. ―Why would they set it up at
all if it‘s so easily beaten?‖
―I don‘t think anybody set it up,‖ Joshim said
after a pause. ―It is too easily beaten and too
unspecific. As Vidar said, if they‘d wanted to keep
you out of combat, they‘d have conditioned you
against taking a berth on a patrolship.‖
―You‘ve been talking about me to Vidar?‖ Rafe
demanded.
―Vidar is a friend, and he could see I was worried
about you. I would have talked to you if you‘d let
me.‖
Rafe had no answer to that. ―If nobody set it up,
why is it happening?‖ he asked instead.
―I think it‘s your normal physiological reaction to
stress,‖ Joshim said carefully. ―Do you feel sick
when you‘re nervous?‖
―Sometimes, slightly, but this is different,‖ Rafe
argued.
―More extreme,‖ Joshim conceded, ―because the
stress you‘re under in the web during combat, or
facing a web-room full of sceptical Commanders, is
compounded by your identity-wipe.‖
Rafe shook his head doubtfully. ―It would be nice
to believe it,‖ he said slowly. ―I‘d rather be sick with
nerves than as a direct result of somebody
tampering with my mind, but… it‘s only wishful
thinking, Joshim. We both know that.‖

―Gods, Rafe! What do I have to do to convince
you?‖ Joshim grabbed the Arura over Rafe‘s head,
knelt at his feet and pressed it into his hands,
retaining his own hold on it. ―On my honour, on my
life and on any lives I have to come, by all that is
sacred to me, I swear that I believe it is safe for you
to work in Bhattya‘s web. In the key-position. In
any damned position you choose. May I be cursed
for all time if I have sworn falsely.‖ He released the
Arura and took Rafe‘s hands. ―Is that enough?‖
Rafe nodded mutely, then remembered that
Joshim could not see him. ―You‘re that certain?‖ he
asked, shocked by the gravity of the oath that
Joshim had given him, with its echo of the
Webber‘s Oath and the binding of the Arura held
between them.
―I‘m that certain.‖ Joshim brought Rafe‘s hands
up to his lips and kissed the palms in turn. ―Is it
enough?‖
Rafe leaned forward, put his arms around Joshim
and rested his cheek on his shoulder, his face to his
throat. Joshim could not have sworn that oath if
there had been any conflict within him, or any
doubt. Was it so wrong to accept as truth the thing
that you wanted to be true? Sometimes, the two had
to coincide. If Rafe could prove it, by controlling the
sickness, as Joshim suggested he could…
―How are you at teaching stress control?‖ he
asked shakily.
Joshim laughed and hugged him hard. ―A backrub is the best way to start,‖ he claimed. ―Come to
bed and I‘ll show you.‖

From the Constitution of the Guild Of Webbers
…If the members of a web-room unanimously
petition for the expulsion of one of their number, that
request is binding upon their Three and upon the
Personnel Directorate of the Guild…
268/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

―You could have more weight on that,‖ Vidar
suggested, examining the setting of Rafe‘s exercise
bench.
―Only if I want to do myself permanent damage,‖
Rafe objected. ―Some of us are built for speed, not
strength.‖
―All it takes is application.‖ Vidar adjusted the
empty bench to his liking and stretched out on it.
―Did you find the fault in Khisa‘s monitor circuit?‖
―No.‖ Rafe secured his bench-weights and lay
back for a brief rest. ―I ran the full set of first level
diagnostics on it, and on the adjacent circuits.
Joshim‘s got them all in the workshop for further
investigation.‖
Vidar grunted approval and started a warm-up
sequence that made Rafe ache just watching.
Bhattya‘s Captain was as conscientious about
keeping himself in top condition as he was about
keeping the ship there. ―Don‘t let me stop you,‖ he
urged Rafe.
Rafe anchored his feet under the bar at the end of
his bench and did a slow sit-up with his hands
behind his head, turning so that his left elbow
touched his right knee and then stretching down
towards his ankles before straightening out
unhurriedly.

―Isn‘t this your sleep period?‖ Vidar asked
curiously, finishing his warm-up and embarking on
a series of leg-raises.
―As soon as I‘ve finished here,‖ Rafe agreed.
There was no need for Vidar to know that he had
already tried to sleep and failed, beaten by a vicious
nightmare of endless underground tunnels. He had
come to the gym to purge the lingering traces of the
dream with physical activity, and to bring his body
to a point where it would overrule his mind. He
would rather do that than take a sleeper.
As he performed another sit-up, he speculated
about the echo that Khisa had reported in her
monitor circuit. It had only shown itself once,
faintly, but no fault in the web was taken lightly;
lives depended on the correct functioning of the
electro-components that linked Bhattya‘s webbers
together and to the ship‘s systems. Only fools — and
dirtsiders, who knew no better — were complacent
about the safety of the web, about the nature of the
knife-edge balance between performance and risk.
Hell‘s irresistible bargain, Rafe had heard a
retired webber call his once-active web; a passport
to soaring power which no sane person dared reach
for. It was an apt analogy. In the web, your brain
was linked to the body of the ship, your nerves
carried sensations that nonwebbers would never
know. You only had to loosen the chains of
discipline a little to tap the web‘s full potential, to
create new sensations, to explore new pathways
through your extended body, a body that
encompassed your companions in the web as their
bodies now encompassed you.
And there was the danger: stray from the
predefined pathways and you could not know what
your web-mates would experience — pleasure, pain,

or insanity because they could no longer interpret
the behaviour of the body that they shared? Even if
you were alone in the web, experiments jeopardized
your own sanity, your own grip on mundane reality.
So, you worked to strict rules in a fully activated
web, or played — as in Rallya‘s workouts — in a
limited imitation, always aware of the tantalizing
possibilities that were within reach but
unattainable. Until eventually, even the possibilities
were gone and you were confined forever within a
body with a deactivated web.
The ten minute jump alert sounded, jolting Rafe
out of his reverie. He reached up to check that his
bench-weights were secure, lay back to await the
jump and then changed his mind, sitting up and
reaching for his soft-shoes.
―Expecting trouble?‖ Vidar asked, securing his
own bench-weights.
Rafe shook his head. ―It‘s unlikely.‖ He slipped
the shoes on and stood up. ―After Avannya, I prefer
to see where I‘m going as soon as I arrive,‖ he
confessed.
―The EMP-mine was sitting right in your jump
point when you broke out, wasn‘t it?‖ Vidar asked
sympathetically.
―Yes.‖ They had hit it with every sensor wide
open and the web full; Avannya could not have
been more vulnerable if it had been planned, Rafe
thought bitterly. It would have made no difference
if he had been in the web-room to witness it,
instead of working on a malfunctioning mapping
drone, but it would be a long time before he felt
comfortable going through jump out of range of the
sensor displays.
The five minute alert sounded as Rafe arrived in
the web-room. Rallya‘s team and Lilimya‘s were in

the web, Rallya in the key-position. The web-shifts
had been rescheduled so that she would be there
when they broke out into the strange system; it was
a routine precaution. Most of the waking crew were
gathering in the web-room, with nothing to do
during jump except watch.
Joshim was not there and, looking at the monitor
screen, Rafe identified the nimbus that was an
occupied dry-web place. The Webmaster was taking
no chances; if the fault Khisa had reported was
symptomatic of a wider problem, the stress of the
jump could trigger an imbalance that could only be
corrected in time by the reflexes of somebody
monitoring the web from within.
―Can‘t wait to see what‘s on the other side?‖
Jualla asked, joining Rafe at the back of the room.
―Be a pity if there‘s nothing to see after the effort
you expended to get us there.‖
―Wouldn‘t it?‖ Rafe agreed easily, ignoring the
bite in Jualla‘s voice. Although she would not be
ready for promotion for another year at least,
Bhattya‘s Second was still jealous of him for taking
the berth that she had subconsciously thought of as
hers. And for the relationship that he had with
Rallya, he thought with gentle amusement. A
relationship that Jualla would never achieve until
she exchanged blind veneration for respect tinged
with a healthy degree of impiety. The analysis made
him feel unaccountably old.
The one minute alert sounded as Vidar came in,
fully dressed in contrast to Rafe‘s shorts and softshoes and with no sign of his exertions in the gym.
Rafe continued to watch the displays around the
main screen, noting the increased power coming
from the drive, the vanes settling into quiescent

sleekness against the hull, their increasing speed
through inertial space.
―She really flies, doesn‘t she?‖ he said to nobody
in particular.
―Yes, when there‘s nothing to hold her back,‖
Jualla agreed proudly. ―And she can punch a jump
through anywhere.‖
The ten second alert sounded. Rafe braced
himself against the seat in front of him. Reality
blurred, streaming into chaos, then refocused. As
he blinked at the displays, waiting for his eyes to
realize that reality had returned, he heard the
repeated shriek of the primary alert.
―A ship!‖ Jualla exclaimed, her eyes adjusting an
instant before Rafe‘s and identifying the distant
shape.
Rallya had the shields up already, must have
raised them the instant they emerged from jump
without waiting for a reason, just as she had primed
the weapons. It was the caution of an veteran who
intended to grow older, Rafe reflected grimly,
pushing his way through to the front of the
observers in Vidar‘s wake. The displays were
showing multiple views of the strange ship — massscans, light-scans, heat-scans — as Rallya gathered
all the information she could.
―Only one,‖ Rafe decided after a moment‘s
scrutiny. They had emerged into a relatively empty
region of space, with no close masses large enough
to hide any other threats. The nearest star of the
binary was a garish red circle beyond the stranger,
its partner a smaller disk beyond that.
―Who‘s got comm control?‖ Vidar asked,
sounding as frustrated as Rafe by his inability to
influence events, by his forced reliance on others.

No webber liked to be out of the web at a time like
this; it was almost like being deaf and blind.
―Dathir.‖ Jualla triggered the link that routed
incoming messages to the web-room, was rewarded
only by star noise as Dathir searched the
frequencies for EM messages. She reduced the
volume, continuing to study the screens avidly.
―We‘re slowing,‖ she said after a moment.
―And changing course directly toward them,‖
Rafe agreed. Rallya could not be intending an
attack; she would not reduce speed if she was. The
stranger was growing slowly in the screens as they
approached, but showed no obvious reaction to
their presence. Rafe frowned at the displays, trying
to prize from them detail that the screen‘s
resolution was too coarse to show him. What was
Rallya‘s enhanced view showing her that he could
not detect?
―It‘s a derelict,‖ he announced, at last recognizing
the significance of the nearly featureless heat
pattern of their target.
―Are you sure?‖ Jualla said dubiously.
―He‘s right,‖ Vidar said with confidence. ―Rallya‘s
taking us in for a rendezvous.‖
―Is it a Guild ship?‖ Rasmallya voiced the obvious
question.
―Could be,‖ Vidar said cautiously. ―From this
distance, I can‘t tell. Can anybody else?‖
Nobody responded as they continued to watch
the screen, looking for a clue to the derelict‘s origin
or fate.
―Boarding party, sir?‖ Rafe asked the next
obvious question.
―Yes.‖ Vidar looked around, noting who was
present. ―You, me, Peretya and Nikur,‖ he decided.

―Jualla, pick three more and be ready to come find
us if we find trouble.‖
They rode across the gulf between Bhattya and the
derelict on a drone; Rallya was too cautious to take
them close enough to spin over on a line. As they
approached, details of the wreck which had been
reported by those in the web became visible to the
naked eye: the Guild insignia above the name
Hadra, familiar from the list of cargoships lost in
the zone; the short gash in her side, seemingly cut
to gain access to her interior; the curious tarnish on
the surface of her hull. Heat damage, Vidar had
suggested as the cause of the discolouration, and
Rafe had not disagreed, because he had nothing
concrete with which to support an instinct that said
otherwise.
―Only the one opening in the hull,‖ Vidar
reported over the comm for the benefit of the
listeners aboard Bhattya as the drone completed a
careful circle of the ship, examining the side that
had been hidden until then. ―No sign that the Eboats were launched.‖
Rafe grimaced inside his airsuit at the
implications of that. Corpses inside, unless the crew
had been taken prisoner. He was not sure which
was a kinder fate to wish for them, not knowing
what use the Outsiders would find for prisoners.
―We‘ll go in the obvious way,‖ Vidar decreed.
They anchored the drone to the hull a few lengths
from the opening. Rafe attached one end of the
guideline from his belt to a ring-bolt on the drone.
―I‘ll fix the other end inside,‖ he promised,
setting out carefully across the smooth surface.
The heat-curdled edges of the opening showed
how it had been made. Rafe examined them closely,

noting where the sharp edges had been made safe.
Those responsible had been no happier about
breathing vacuum than he would be.
Shining a beam around inside revealed an
engineering space through which a pathway had
been cleared. Rafe pushed a cutter from his belt
through the entrance, aiming it into the centre of
the space. It moved under his impetus alone,
confirming what he had suspected. There was no
gravity field operating inside the cargoship.
―Going in now,‖ he reported. ―There‘s machinery
just inside which will make a good anchor.‖
He snagged his cutter from where it drifted as he
passed, then unfastened the guideline from his belt
and tied it around one stanchion of a storage rack,
tugging hard to be sure it was secure.
―Come on in,‖ he invited the others.
―Nikur, you come with me to the engineering and
cargo levels,‖ Vidar decided when they were all
inside. ―Rafe, you and Peri cover the cabin and
command areas.‖ He flicked his beam at the open
hatchway that led to the rest of the ship. ―We‘ll
meet back here in two hours. Progress reports every
thirty minutes.‖
Outside the hatchway, a short length of corridor
led to a riser shaft. Vidar sprayed a colour splash on
the riser wall opposite, a marker for their exit. Rafe
oriented himself from the now-dead lights on the
corridor ceiling, shone his beam towards the
unseen top of the riser.
―We‘ll start at the top and work down,‖ he told
Peri, switching to the private channel between
them. ―Web, web-room, rest-room, comms-room.
Carry away anything we can, visi-reck the rest.‖
They used the rungs of the emergency ladder to
boost themselves along. Rafe counted levels as they

passed them, knowing that Peri was doing the
same, a precaution against getting lost in the
darkness in a strange ship. The restricted view that
his beam gave him made the riser walls ahead press
in upon him and he knew that, if he looked back,
the unlit shaft behind would look like a chasm.
Even knowing that he could not fall if he released
the ladder, he still preferred not to look back to
where Peri followed a few rungs behind.
―Four,‖ he called, halting at the last opening as
his beam showed the top of the shaft above them.
―Four,‖ Peri agreed. ―I‘ll mark it.‖
Rafe shone his beam through the opening while
she did so. It showed him a wall of blank screens
opposite. ―Web-room,‖ he announced, widening the
beam and increasing its power until only the
corners of the room remained dark. ―And three
dead,‖ he added harshly.
They were drifting free, one with a spherical halo
of long fair hair that Rafe had a misplaced urge to
stroke away from the face it obscured. He pulled
himself through the doorway, heard Peri curse
under her breath as she followed.
―Let‘s establish the cause of death,‖ Rafe said
flatly, using the backs of the web-room seats to
control his crossing of the room. The woman with
the long hair was nearest, her tunic identifying her
as Hadra‘s Cargomaster. Rafe caught her arm,
which was stiff with the brittle cold of space, and
tugged her into one of the seats, making a mental
apology to her for the indignity of it.
Behind the hair, her face was middle-aged,
drained of personality by death but frozen in
surprise. As Rafe gave in to himself and smoothed
her hair gently, his gloved fingers found what the
floating hair had hidden: a wound on her scalp on

the top of her head. He looked closely and recoiled
in revulsion. A hole had been driven down from the
top of her head, deep into the brain.
―Not decompression, nor asphyxia,‖ Peri was
saying as she examined another of the bodies. ―No
visible wounds…‖
―Check the top of the head,‖ Rafe suggested
grimly.
―Gods and Emperors!‖ Peri exclaimed after a
moment‘s silence. ―His head…‖
―This one too,‖ Rafe told her.
―Why kill them that way?‖ Peri demanded.
―They were dead when it happened,‖ Rafe
decided, checking the third body and finding the
same grotesque wound, the same lack of any other
discernible cause of death. ―There‘s no evidence of
bleeding. Either this is some kind of ritual
mutilation or…‖
He broke off as an obscene idea suggested itself.
The Outsiders were taking samples of brain tissue.
Webber‘s brain tissue, carrying in it web-seed, the
virus that created webbers. Gods, Rafe thought
angrily, they might not even be Outsiders, who were
unlikely to know the reason for a webber‘s
enhanced nervous system. But there were certainly
people within the Twin Empires who knew, and
who resented the Guild‘s monopoly of the
advantages it brought. Could the raiders be coming
from inside the Empires?
―Report, Rafe?‖ Vidar came through on the
common channel.
Rafe switched to the same channel. ―We‘re in the
web-room,‖ he responded cautiously. His unproven
suspicions were no subject for discussion on an
open channel with the whole of Bhattya‘s web-

room listening in. ―There are three dead here, all
with head wounds.‖
―We have two dead, also with head wounds,‖
Vidar said, the tone of his voice making it clear that
he had reached the same horrifying conclusion
about the wounds as Rafe had. ―There‘s nothing
missing from the cargo-holds. The seals hadn‘t even
been disturbed until we broke them,‖ he added,
putting the matter beyond doubt. ―We‘re going on
to the engineering section now.‖
―We‘re on our way up to the web,‖ Rafe replied.
He switched back to the private link to Peri. ―I‘ll get
the log first.‖
In the rest-room, he went immediately to the
door to the secure space beyond. It was still locked,
to his intense relief, and there was no other way in.
The R-K-D kept inside had not been taken. The
raiders knew about web-seed, but they did not
know about the drug that was needed to help the
seed establish itself in the body of a new host. As he
sealed the log inside a storage pocket on the outside
of his airsuit, he wondered how long it would take
them to learn that they only had part of the secret.
There were four dead in the web, tethered in
their wet-web places by their web-contacts,
surrounded by drifting globules of freeze-dried
shub. Rafe checked them each in turn, finding what
he expected to find.
―I‘ve got the web-reck,‖ Peri announced. ―That
should tell us something about the scum that did
this when we replay it.‖
Rafe assented automatically as he disengaged the
web-contacts from what had once been a young
man. The skin around the contacts was blistered;
the contacts themselves were blackened. Looking at
the damage, Rafe was almost reminded of

something, something he had seen before if only he
could remember where and when, something
locked away from him ten years ago. Blackened
web-contacts, and the tarnish on the hull…
―Input overload?‖ Peri said in puzzlement, seeing
what he had found. ―The safety circuits should have
operated long before that sort of damage
happened.‖
―I don‘t know.‖ Rafe gave up trawling his
memory, knowing it was useless. ―The autopsy will
tell, when we get them back to Aramas.‖ He looked
around sadly, knowing they could not take all the
dead back with them. ―We‘ll take this one and the
woman from the web-room,‖ he decreed. ―The
others will have to wait for the salvage tug.‖
***
―Web-seed,‖ Rallya said consideringly. ―It‘s not the
first time it‘s been tried.‖
―It‘s the first time it‘s been tried by this method,‖
Vidar said angrily. ―And if the raiders are from
within the Empires, where are they getting their
ships from?‖
Rallya glanced at Rafe, curious to see if he had
the answer to that too, but he was still frowning at
something unseen, as he had been since dropping
into his seat and making his report.
―Take your pick,‖ she told Vidar. ―There are
decommissioned fleets in every outermost zone, left
to rot in orbit when their owners were absorbed by
the Empires and found they couldn‘t compete with
the Guild.‖ She weighed Hadra‘s web-reck and log
in her hand thoughtfully. ―Time somebody
compared what we‘ve seen of the raiders with what
we know about those fleets. And what we know

about the Outsiders with whom the owners of those
fleets have contact. Only fools would use ships that
could be traced back to them and whoever is behind
this, they‘re no fools, to have got away with it for so
long. Even though they won‘t have any success
without…‖
She censored the end of the sentence and turned
to their silent companion. ―I forgot to ask, Rafe.
Had they been inside the secure space?‖ Even if he
did not know the significance of everything inside,
he would have checked.
―No. They left the R-K-D,‖ Rafe answered
abstractedly.
Vidar looked at him in surprise. ―How do you
know about that?‖ he asked. ―It‘s restricted
information. Threes and above only.‖
―Is it?‖ Rafe looked equally surprised. ―I don‘t
know how I know. I must have learnt it before I was
wiped…‖
―Over a Webmaster‘s pillow,‖ Rallya suggested,
heading off Vidar‘s curiosity. ―Make yourself useful
and play this.‖ She tossed Hadra‘s log to Rafe.
―Among the many things we don‘t know is how the
crew died. There may be clues in there.‖
As Rafe fitted the log into the rest-room‘s reader,
Rallya thought with satisfaction that his awareness
of R-K-D was confirmation that he had been a
Commander before he was identity-wiped, in spite
of the discrepancy with his apparent age. The drug
was one of the Guild‘s most closely guarded secrets,
its formula known only to a handful of the most
senior members of the Webmaster‘s Directorate.
Had it not been the only effective way to heal a
damaged web, even its existence would not be
known outside that group.

Rafe triggered the play-back of the log and the
reader‘s screen flickered with nonsense and error
messages. Looking puzzled, Rafe stopped the
process and took the log out of the slot to examine
it physically.
―No visible damage,‖ he observed.
―Let me see it.‖ Vidar made his own examination.
―Looks fine.‖ He elbowed Rafe out of the way and
fed the log into the reader again, as if his
intervention would make it work. It did not.
―Verify the web-reck,‖ Rallya suggested, passing
that to Vidar. They could not interpret the data on
it, except using Bhattya‘s web‘s central monitor,
and they required Joshim‘s authorization to do
that, but they could check that the data was
readable and consistent.
―Unreadable,‖ he reported tersely almost at once.
―Both of them.‖ He reread the labels on both recks,
as if he suspected that Rafe had brought back the
wrong ones. ―They‘ve wiped them.‖
―Easier to take them away,‖ Rafe said
thoughtfully. ―And they‘re not wiped, just
scrambled.‖
―As good as wiped,‖ Vidar said stubbornly.
―Be interesting to find out if any of the other
recks aboard are in the same state,‖ Rallya
commented.
―You think they were affected by whatever killed
the crew?‖ Vidar asked.
―Could be.‖ Two mysteries aboard the same ship
had to share a single solution. Rallya studied Rafe,
who had withdrawn back into his silent
preoccupation. ―Care to share what you haven‘t told
us yet?‖ she challenged him.
―I would, if I knew what it was,‖ he said bitterly.
―My memory isn‘t what it used to be.‖

―You remembered about R-K-D,‖ Rallya
reminded him, ―and this is more important.‖
Rafe smiled sardonically. ―Importance doesn‘t
seem to have dictated what they left me. Knowing
about R-K-D obviously wasn‘t personally significant
to me. Knowing the connection between that
tarnished hull, and the damage to those webcontacts, and the way those recks have been
scrambled…‖ He shrugged expressively. ―If I
remember, I‘ll tell you. But I doubt that I‘m going to
remember.‖
―Some sleep might help,‖ Vidar suggested.
―You‘ve worked right through your sleep period.
Turn in. Joshim won‘t expect you to join him in the
web for what‘s left of your shift, and Rallya and I
can cover your next duty periods without you.‖
―It might help.‖ Rafe sounded unconvinced. ―If
you‘ve finished with me here, I‘ll get something to
eat first.‖
When they had both gone, Rafe to eat and sleep,
Vidar to set up some tests on the sample of hull
metal that he had brought back from Hadra, Rallya
put the log back in the reader and played it through
slowly, looking for anything decipherable amid the
nonsense. Not that she expected to find anything
helpful: the placing of the bodies Rafe and Vidar
had found — in cabins and workshops as well as in
the web and the web-room — indicated that, when
the raiders had attacked the ship, there had been no
warning, no time to record the attack in the log.
The web-reck might be more useful, if Joshim
could dredge anything from it, but that would have
to wait until he came out of the web. And Rallya
was not hopeful that either Joshim or Vidar would
find a solution to the mystery, or even an
intelligible clue. Perhaps the autopsies would help,

but they would not take place until Bhattya reached
Aramas, and Rallya would not be the first to learn
the results.
Rafe‘s belief that he knew — had once known —
something relevant to Hadra‘s fate was interesting.
Rallya had not given much thought to the way that
identity-wipe worked; she had not realized that
Rafe was aware in the gaps in his memory. Of
course, they could not erase memories completely,
not without destroying the skills and knowledge
that they sought to preserve. All they could do was
make the memories inaccessible, like unseen rooms
behind locked doors. Finding a door revealed the
existence of a room, and the paths to the door were
clues to what lay beyond. It raised the possibility
that Rafe could be brought to remember what he
had forgotten, both about the connection between
Hadra‘s multiple mysteries and about the truth of
his past.
Rallya locked the log away in a storage drawer
and rubbed absently at her hip. Rafe would
continue to worry away at the missing memory
without prompting, but a few new pointers might
help, if she could come up with any. And she could
not discount the possibility that he would never
remember, or that what he remembered would be
of no use. Although he would not be so distracted
by it if he was not sure of its importance, and she
was beginning to value Rafe‘s judgement. Her
instincts and what she had seen of him said that he
must have been a damned good Commander in his
time, almost as good as she was…
Predictably, the gathering in the web-room was
talking its way around the same questions. It had
not been possible to keep secret the raiders‘
purpose, not when Peretya and Nikur had seen the

head wounds, and to suppress the idea that the
guilt lay within the Empires would have wasted the
slight chance that somebody in the web-room
would put the pieces of the puzzle together. The
initial mood of fury had simmered down into
determination, Rallya was pleased to find; they
would think more clearly that way.
―You were told to go to bed,‖ she reminded Rafe
mildly, breaking into his conversation with Jualla.
―Yes, ma‘am.‖
It was said to pacify her, not as a statement of
intent, but Rallya let it go; Joshim would chivvy
Rafe into compliance when he came out of the web.
She moved on to the cook-unit and filled a plate
with fish stew. Rasil‘s effort, by the delicate smell of
it; raised on a water world, he knew more things to
do with fish — and even mock-fish — than anybody
else aboard, including Joshim, who shared the
same sort of upbringing but disclaimed all
knowledge of food preparation.
―Do you think we‘ll find more of the missing
ships in this system, ma‘am?‖ Jualla asked.
―It‘s probable that they‘re here,‖ Rallya answered.
―I don‘t believe in the kind of coincidence that
would bring us out of jump exactly on top of the
only one. Whether we‘ll find them is another
matter. We‘re on a tight schedule; we‘ve only just
enough time to drop the drones and jump on to
Aramas to meet the convoy. We won‘t be making a
search and, if we do come across another by chance,
we won‘t have time to board.‖
She noted that Rafe was frowning intently at
something she had said. It could not be their lack of
time that had caught his attention; he already knew
about that. The coincidence that had brought them
out of jump almost exactly on top of Hadra… The

raiders were unlikely to move the ships that they
captured any great distance from their point of
entry to the system, she realized.
―Bring the gravity stress chart for this system up
on a screen,‖ she ordered Jualla. ―Focus on the area
where we found Hadra.‖
The chart was a patchwork of minor anomalies.
Jualla highlighted the point where Hadra was still
drifting. Rallya shovelled stew into her mouth as
she studied it. There was a pattern to those
anomalies, almost centred on Hadra…
―Trans-space breakthrough point,‖ Rafe said
crisply, identifying it from his survey training a
second before Rallya did. ―Hadra came here
through trans-space.‖
It fitted: the damage to a hull never designed for
exposure to trans-space, the input overload in the
web as the sensors went wild and the safety circuits
failed, the sudden death of the crew. Humans could
not survive in trans-space, the dimension or
dimensions
that
underlaid
jump-space;
experiments many years ago had demonstrated
that. Rallya had never heard of any species who
could.
―Who are they?‖ she asked Rafe, seeing that the
frown on his face was deeper than ever, as if transspace was not the answer he sought, only another
pointer to it.
―I don‘t know.‖ He shook his head to emphasize
his frustration.
―If the raiders are making trans-space jumps, our
drones aren‘t set to pick it up,‖ Jualla pointed out.
―Ought we to adjust them?‖
―Good thinking,‖ Rallya told her. ―Although the
gods know how we‘ll interpret the results when we
get them. There are only a handful of people in the

Survey Directorate who know enough about transspace to calculate a jump through it. Unless Rafe…‖
He shook his head again. ―If I could only
remember…‖ he muttered.
―Remember what?‖ Jualla asked.
―I know of a species who use trans-space,‖ Rafe
explained. ―I can‘t remember who, or where.‖
―How do you know about them?‖ Jualla asked
impatiently. ―Was it something you read, or
something you heard? If you can remember even
that much…‖
Rallya saw the tension in Rafe‘s back as he
realized the dilemma into which a combination of
tiredness and preoccupation had brought him.
Jualla would badger him ceaselessly until he
remembered, or convinced her to give up. Rallya
was curious to see how he would extricate himself.
―It isn‘t that easy,‖ Rafe told Jualla ruefully. ―I‘m
an Oath-breaker. I was identity-wiped ten years
ago. Anything that happened before that…‖ He
spread his upturned palms in a gesture of
hopelessness.
The admission took Rallya by surprise, but only
for a moment, not long enough to make her miss
Elanis‘s hiss of dismay. Emperors, if she had
needed proof of Rafe‘s tactical skill, this was it.
Even if he did not know that the rumour had
already reached Aramas zone, he must know that it
would eventually. Prevarication now would harm
him when the truth did come out, whereas his
frank, unsolicited, admission would take the sting
out of many of the criticisms that Bhattya‘s webroom might make. Witness the looks of shock, not
outrage, on the faces of his audience.
―Why?‖ Jualla was the first to find her voice,
albeit one an octave higher than normal.

―I presume, for being unwilling to swear
allegiance to the Old Emperor.‖ Rafe looked at her
without flinching. ―I can only guess, of course.‖
―Of course,‖ Jualla echoed uneasily. ―And you
really can‘t remember about…‖ She gestured at the
gravity stress chart.
―I can‘t remember how I learned about them,‖
Rafe corrected her, moving the discussion further
away from the realm of ethics into the realm of
facts. ―I might be able to remember what I learned,
but it‘s difficult. I can‘t guarantee it.‖
―You‘re not going to let it go like that, are you?‖
Elanis demanded. ―He‘s an Oath-breaker. He‘s
admitted it. Don‘t you care?‖
Rallya looked at the aristo with interest. He had
been dismayed when Rafe revealed the truth, but
now he was trying to make matters worse. Why?
―Rafe has never tried to hide his past,‖ she
pointed out. ―It was the first thing he told the Three
when we began courting him. Whatever he did or
refused to do ten years ago, he paid for it according
to the Guild‘s law. Are you saying that the law is
wrong?‖
―I‘m saying that no decent webber wants to share
a web-room with him,‖ Elanis said defiantly.
Rallya swept an interrogative look around the
web-room. ―Anybody agree with that?‖ she asked
them.
―As you said, he‘s paid for what he did,‖ Jualla
said uncertainly. ―We don‘t have the right to punish
him further. Even if we disagree with the law, we
have to accept its results while it is the law…‖
From Jualla, that was generous, Rallya thought
with satisfaction. It must be uncomfortable for her,
torn between a belief in the Unification of the
Empires that made Oath-breaking uniquely

difficult to forgive, her envy of Rafe for getting the
promotion she had hoped for, and her legalistic
passion for fairness. It was the last of the three that
was speaking and, if Rallya judged right, it would
continue to determine Jualla‘s reaction, making her
a strong supporter of Rafe where she might have
been an opponent if he had handled things
differently. There were other members of the webroom who might side with Elanis, but Jualla was a
key convert.
―Is there anybody who agrees with Elanis‘s
definition of decent?‖ Rallya asked.
―I‘d like to know why Rafe didn‘t tell us earlier,‖
Irinya said.
―He‘s ashamed of it,‖ Elanis sneered. ―Who
wouldn‘t be?‖
―You, probably,‖ Rallya retorted. ―Except I doubt
that you‘d ever be in Rafe‘s position. You‘d rather
swear a false Oath.‖
―I resent that!‖
―Go ahead, resent it,‖ Rallya said cheerfully.
―Threaten me the way you threatened Joshim when
he entered a formal warning in your record, if you
like.‖ She grinned ferally. ―I‘m not surprised
nobody agrees with your definition of decent.‖
Turning to Irinya, she asked, ―Did you tell your
web-mates every detail of your history as soon as
you joined Bhattya?‖
―No, ma‘am, but…‖
―Do you agree with Jualla about the law and
Rafe?‖
―Yes, ma‘am, but…‖
―Stop browbeating her,‖ Rafe interrupted
sharply. ―Irinya, part of the reason that I didn‘t tell
you sooner was that my past didn‘t affect my work
until now. But there was another reason too. I was

scared of how you‘d react. I‘d been looking for a
berth for over half a year before I joined Bhattya. I
know how people can react when they find out.‖ He
smiled sadly. ―I‘ll admit, I was hoping I wouldn‘t
have to tell you. I didn‘t, on my last ship. It was
never necessary. And, I suppose, I am ashamed of
being an Oath-breaker, even if I don‘t remember
why…‖
―I suppose we can‘t really blame you for any of
that,‖ Irinya conceded.
―Most people would,‖ Rafe remarked.
―You can‘t intend to go on sharing a web-room
with him,‖ Elanis protested.
―If you can‘t stand it, you leave,‖ Jualla told the
aristo curtly.
―There may be people who aren‘t here who agree
with Elanis,‖ Rafe reminded her quietly. ―They have
a right to be heard.‖ He was playing his hand
perfectly.
―I‘ll ask them,‖ Jualla promised, nodding
judiciously. ―If they want to talk to you about it…‖
―Of course,‖ Rafe agreed readily. ―But please,
after I‘ve had some sleep.‖
―I should think so,‖ Rallya put in. ―It‘s over an
hour since I ordered you to bed.‖ If Rafe wanted to
make a timely withdrawal after that display of
cunning, he deserved her support. She could hardly
have done better herself.
She left the web-room herself shortly after Rafe,
knowing that Jualla and the others present needed
no further persuasion, in spite of Elanis‘s intriguing
efforts to turn the tide. If those directing him
wanted to keep Rafe under observation, he would
hardly be doing his best to separate the two of
them. He could not be intending to follow Rafe to
yet another ship; that would arouse too many

suspicions. Nor could there be another watcher
ready to take over Elanis‘s role. If there were, the
risk of using Elanis again would not have been
taken. Besides, the conspirators would not want
Rafe‘s significance known to any except a select
few. Not that Elanis could be described as select,
she thought with grim amusement.
So, if Elanis wanted Rafe expelled from Bhattya
— and it must have been the aristo who planted the
rumour in the convoy at Jalset‘s World, Rallya
decided in passing — it was because something was
intended to happen to Rafe, but not aboard
Bhattya. Another murder attempt, made less risky
because Rafe had no sympathetic web-mates to
press home an investigation, or less risky still
because Rafe had been driven out of the Guild
completely? But if Elanis was a party to that plan,
he must also have known about Avannya‘s fate in
advance, and it was his controllers who were
responsible.
She was back to the question that she had asked
herself fifteen days ago: if they wanted Rafe
silenced, why wait ten years? Unless something had
changed recently, and Elanis had reported
something that made Rafe a greater danger to
them. The return of memory, or the first signs of it?
And if so, how had Elanis known about it?
Rallya swore silently. She should have realized
before. To be an effective observer, Elanis must
have concealed snoops to help him. Where? Rafe‘s
cabin was a certainty, Joshim‘s too, both
audiovisual snoops and tracers on their consoles.
The web-room and the rest-room would be
monitored too. In fact, Elanis had had the
opportunities he needed to scatter them throughout
the ship, and any spy with the background support

that Elanis had would have come equipped with the
comp access needed to override any locks that he
encountered.
Rallya shrugged indifferently, acknowledging
that she could not make a search without alerting
Elanis to her suspicions. So, let him watch and
listen. He could not monitor her thoughts and she
was not naive enough to trust any of this to a
console. Besides, he probably spent all his time
watching Rafe and Joshim together and blowing
steam out of his ears.
Gods, she wanted to know why Rafe had been
kept alive so long. It was so crazy, it had to be the
key to everything else. If he had once been valuable
alive, why were they now trying to kill him?
There was disagreement over him, she realized
triumphantly. A party who wanted him dead, who
had probably wanted him dead from the beginning,
and a party who wanted him alive. If power had
shifted between the two groups, or if one group was
acting without the other‘s knowledge… She smiled
contentedly. In a situation like that, there were
ample opportunities for them to make mistakes
that she could exploit.
What would they do next? There was no legal
way for them to separate Rafe from Bhattya
without the consent of her Three. The only options
open to them were to kill him while he was off-ship
or to destroy Bhattya herself. In their place, which
would she choose?
Simple murder would invite a storm of questions
so soon after Sajan‘s death when there were people
who were aware of the link between them, but
nobody would think twice about the loss of a
patrolship in an active zone. An attack on Bhattya
was the only safe alternative, in spite of the number

of people who would have to be involved — they
would have to send at least two ships to be sure of
success, and it would be an insult if they sent less
than three. They could not hope to use another
EMP-mine; a patrolship did not follow a
predictable course the way that a surveyship did.
Or… Rallya caught her breath. They would try
sabotage. A hidden explosive, or a modification to
the drive, or something more subtle, a trap in the
comp to send their navigation fatally wrong.
She could not bar Elanis from the maintenance
areas without making him suspicious, any more
than she could bar the station techs from the ship at
Aramas. And without knowing how widely Elanis
had sown his snoops, she could not deliver a
warning to Vidar and Joshim. But the snoops could
only report locally without being detected, she
realized; anything else would register in Bhattya‘s
comm sensors. And it would be no surprise when
Elanis left the ship on Aramas; after all, no decent
webber would share a web-room with an Oathbreaker. Once he had gone, Bhattya could be
scoured of every snoop, tracer and trap.
Rallya frowned uneasily. It was a calculated risk,
balancing her forty years of familiarity with
Bhattya‘s comp and Vidar‘s intimate knowledge of
every system aboard against the resources of the
saboteurs. If they found nothing… They would find
it, she promised herself, if they had to rebuild the
ship around them in the process. She smiled
wolfishly. There would be no retreating afterwards,
and no more waiting for her enemies to act.
Somewhere in Rafe‘s memory was what she needed
to know to take the war to them. She promised
herself she would find that too.

Conversation at the office of
Councillor Danriya Lady Carher
“The failure of the primary plan is unimportant. The
agent reports that the second line of attack was
activated before he initiated the first, and will be
effective within ten days of his departure.”
“Can’t he be more precise than that?”
“The trigger selected makes the timing imprecise,
but the results are certain.”
309/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

A tap on the door interrupted the long laughing kiss
into which Rafe had snared Joshim as they were
dressing. Reluctantly, Rafe rolled aside to let
Joshim get up, then sat up and reached for his shirt
as Joshim opened the door.
―Commander‘s compliments, sir, and would you
join her and the Captain in the sun-side observation
gallery,‖ Fadir said.
―Now?‖ Joshim asked in surprise.
―She said immediately,‖ Fadir confirmed
apologetically.
―But she didn‘t say why,‖ Joshim remarked
resignedly.
―No, sir, but I did hear some good news that the
dock supervisor told her, just before she sent me
with the messages for you and the Captain,‖ Fadir
volunteered. ―Elanis shipped out late last night, as a
passenger on the fast courier to Keltam.‖
―You‘ve got big ears,‖ Joshim teased. ―You‘re
lucky Rallya hasn‘t trimmed them for you.‖
―Yes, sir,‖ Fadir said seriously.

―She‘s plotting something,‖ Joshim said when the
apprentice had gone. ―Though the gods knows
what. She doesn‘t usually drag me and Vidar offship to sanction her schemes. She doesn‘t usually
bother to get our sanction,‖ he added drily.
―Whatever it is, she‘s been plotting it since we
found Hadra,‖ Rafe remarked. ―She‘s been acting
like a woman with a stack of emperors in a game of
drag, just waiting for the pot to reach a respectable
size before she plays them.‖
―And not one of them was in the box that the
other players drew from,‖ Joshim agreed.
Rafe laughed and tossed Joshim‘s shirt across the
room. ―You‘d better get dressed, or you may not
leave here in time to see her slip them onto the
table.‖
Joshim obeyed. ―Will you take the training
sessions if I‘m not back in time?‖ he asked, adding
with a wicked grin, ―Churi will be pleased.‖
Rafe groaned. ―Only Churi could think that being
an Oath-breaker was exciting,‖ he complained,
thankful that the rest of the web-room had reacted
more levelly to his admission. It was a relief not to
have to hide his past from them any longer. He had
not known when he confessed how they would
react; there had not been time to consider the
consequences, only to act on his instinct that it was
the right thing to do. He was still warmly surprised
by the scale of the acceptance he had received, by
their willingness to judge him on what he was
rather than on what he had been.
He frowned, thinking that he should not expect
the same tolerance outside Bhattya‘s web-room.
―I‘m surprised Elanis didn‘t spread the news
about me around Aramas station before he left,‖ he
remarked. ―It‘s not like him to miss a chance to

make trouble. Especially since he was more or less
forced to leave Bhattya because of me. It would
have been an obvious way to get even.‖
―Maybe he tried,‖ Joshim suggested. ―Our news
about the raiders has pushed everything else into
the background.‖
Rafe passed Joshim his tunic. ―Maybe,‖ he
conceded. It was true that Aramas station was
humming
with
speculation
and
counterspeculation. Everybody had a theory about who was
behind the raids or about who was making them
and, in the absence of any more facts than the few
Bhattya had discovered, everybody‘s theory was
equally viable and equally enthusiastically
proposed. Everybody‘s theory except Rafe‘s,
because Rafe did not have a theory. He knew. He
just could not remember what he knew.
―Stop it,‖ Joshim said firmly. ―You‘ll just make
yourself sick again.‖
Rafe flopped back to lie the bed, scowling. ―I
swear you read my mind,‖ he accused.
―No, just your body.‖ Joshim sat down next to
Rafe to put his boots on. ―It‘s not your fault you
can‘t remember. And whatever it is, somebody else
will know it. The whole Guild — in both Empires —
will be looking for the answer. You don‘t need to
feel guilty because you haven‘t got it.‖
―It‘s not guilt. It‘s frustration.‖
―You‘re as bad as Rallya.‖ Joshim wound one of
Rafe‘s short curls around his finger and tugged
playfully. ―She thinks the universe ought to revolve
around her.‖
―She told me it did.‖ Rafe pulled Joshim down for
a quick kiss, then reluctantly let him go. ―You‘d
better not keep her waiting, or I‘ll get the blame.‖
―Mmm. And I know how scared of her you are.‖

Rafe tied his hair up on top of his head and watched
Churi slip a headband around his.
―Ready?‖ he asked.
―Yes, sir.‖ Churi hesitated, then asked, ―Can I try
some internal monitoring this time?‖
―The schedule says signal practice.‖
―I know, but the Webmaster said I could try
monitoring as well.‖
Rafe gestured towards the doorway to the web.
―Come and talk me through the display on the
central monitor,‖ he instructed.
The youngster described the basics competently
enough, and identified the essential monitoring
functions without too much prompting.
―If there‘s time at the end, you can try five
minutes passive monitoring,‖ Rafe conceded,
adjusting the limits of the web to give Churi a
manageable size for his first attempt. ―I‘ll have a
priority override on you and I‘ll probably need to
use it. It isn‘t as easy in practice as it seems in
theory. And remember: if I do override you, don‘t
panic, just disengage normally. Understood?‖
―Yes, sir.‖
Rafe logged his name and Churi‘s, and their
purpose in the web. ―In you go then,‖ he told the
youngster.
He watched Churi attach his quiescent webcontacts and sink below the surface of the shub,
then moved around the circle to the next position.
The web-contacts waiting for him were warm,
active; as he attached them, he could sense the
shadowy web beyond, quiet and empty. Most of
Bhattya‘s sensors were inoperative in dock; her
drive was providing power for life support alone.
The web was like a sleeper, waiting to be woken.

Breathing slowly and steadily, Rafe slipped into
the shub. There was the inevitable twinge of
otherness as he started breathing shub instead of
air. When it had passed, he let go of his body and
entered the web, exchanging the kiss of the
circulating liquid against his skin and the familiar
citric tang on his lips for a deep-felt awareness of
himself at the heart of the silent ship.
He swept a trial signal through the empty
circuits, measuring the echoes and checking the
limits that he had set, then tested his override to be
sure it was working. With that in place, the worst
that could happen if Churi mishandled the
monitoring was a mild web-burn for them both.
Satisfied with his precautions, he activated Churi‘s
contacts.
The youngster did not allow his eagerness to try
something new to destroy his concentration on the
routine of signal practice, Rafe noted with approval.
Or else Churi realized that, if his signalling did not
meet Rafe‘s standards, he would not be allowed to
try monitoring. And there would be no arguing with
Rafe‘s decision when it was made; even if he dared
to try, Churi did not have the necessary
inventiveness with signals. Not yet, Rafe corrected
himself, not for another year or so.
As Churi worked on, Rafe mentally reviewed the
possibilities for Bhattya‘s next task, seeking to
identify the one for which Rallya was manoeuvring
into position. There was no real purpose to the
attempt; it was just an enjoyable challenge, to be
able to predict her thinking. It would be even more
fun to show her that he could; he could imagine
what her reaction to being predictable would be.
It was easy enough to guess that she would not
willingly accept escort duty again with the convoy

gathering for Tarin‘s Outpost. And Noromi would
not object too strenuously to her absence, Rafe
added cynically. Now that Meremir‘s Commander
had learned how to organize a convoy effectively, he
was eager to repeat his success without sharing the
credit.
The obvious choice was a return to the system
where they had found Hadra, to retrieve the drones
that had been left there and to search for the other
lost ships. The covert competition for that duty
would be intense, with its opportunities to learn
more about the raiders and its high probability of
an encounter with them. But Rallya had insisted on
replacing Bhattya‘s missing drones as soon as they
docked at Aramas, suggesting that she did not
intend to collect the ones they had left behind. Nor
did Rafe believe that she would look so
permanently smug if she was planning anything
obvious.
The only other task in the zone which called for a
patrolship was the routine patrol of the border with
Zfheer space, and that was a ceremonial duty,
necessary only because the diplomats had not yet
agreed upon the final details of the treaty that
would bring the near-human Zfheer into the Old
Empire. Rallya would rather agree to convoy duty
than undertake a patrol whose highlights would be
the rare meetings with their peaceable Zfheer
counterparts, Rafe decided with amusement.
Unless she knew something about the Zfheer that
he had missed in his research…
An irregular pulse out of place on the edge of the
web caught his attention and held it. It was not
Churi‘s doing, he realized immediately. Was it the
echo that Khisa had reported in the monitor
circuits, the one they had not traced in spite of an

exhaustive search? Whatever it was, it was growing
stronger, too quickly to take any risks with it. Safer
to examine it from outside the web.
[Immediate. Disengage.] He broke into Churi‘s
practice with the order.
[Acknowledged. Disengaging,] Churi replied
promptly. Rafe sensed him begin to obey, then halt
abruptly.
[Disengage,] Rafe repeated.
[Inability.] Worry made Churi‘s signal less than
perfect.
Rafe triggered the web-alarm by reflex,
simultaneously sent [Stand by for monitoring] to
Churi.
[Standing by.] Still worried, but under control.
Rafe made a rapid survey of Churi‘s linkage with
the web, found nothing to account for his difficulty
in breaking it. The intrusive ghost was still getting
stronger, interfering with the signal circuits,
threatening to cut them off from each other before
there was time to make a more thorough
examination. He had to get the youngster out now.
[Disengage. Will operate override,] he sent to
Churi.
[Acknowledged. Disengaging.]
Rafe triggered the override as Churi tried again,
using it to forcibly eject the youngster from the
web. For an instant, it worked. He felt Churi
disappear, felt him emerge into the dimly lit shub
around him, felt him become aware that —
incredibly — Rafe was still with him, felt the flare of
panic as he dropped them both back into the ghostridden web, setting up a wild oscillation that drove
them sickeningly back and forth across the
boundary between body control and web control.

Rafe tried to damp down the feedback, but the
ghost was amplifying it, blocking his attempts to
contain the situation. He swung uncontrollably
between the unstable web and the horrible
awareness of sharing a body with Churi, not sure
which of their bodies he felt struggling for breath in
the shub, not even sure that it was the same body
each time he occupied it. There was nothing but
overwhelming fear coming from Churi, the emotion
combining with the ghost to cloud Rafe‘s control
and destroying any chance of coordinating their
efforts to survive.
Close to panic himself, Rafe fought desperately to
isolate himself, from Churi, from the web, from the
insane combination they had become. He could feel
his nerves being seared by the overload channelled
through them, not yet true pain but the promise of
it. He prayed that he was feeling the flow through
Churi‘s nerves as well. His nerves would never
survive that apparent volume of current… .
He realized that Churi‘s terror was fading with
his consciousness. The result of over-breathing in
the shub, or the effect of the overload? If both of
them passed out, both of them would die. One of
them had to maintain a core of body control.
Unable to check the overload or to pull free, Rafe
gave up the losing battle, concentrated only on
regulating their breathing, keeping it down to a
level that the shub could support. It had only been
seconds since he triggered the alarm; it would only
be seconds before help came. Churi was no longer
fighting him, consciously or unconsciously, but
Rafe refused to think that he might be breathing for
a dead body. He had no choice; breathing for
himself, he had to breathe for both of them, until
they were torn apart.

Now they were being pulled out of the shub, laid
on their backs on the floor. Rafe had a confusing
vision of Jualla and Lilimya bending over him, one
superimposed on the other, their separate voices
coming from the same pair of lips. The webcontacts were wrenched away from Churi‘s neck
and wrists an instant before his own were torn off.
He sank into the haven of one controllable body,
seeing Jualla‘s frantic face through a blessedly
single pair of eyes. Then his brain reregistered the
damage his nerves had suffered. He screamed and
thankfully gave in to unconsciousness.
***
―Attention, Bhattya‘s Three. Attention, Bhattya‘s
Three. You have a Class One web-alarm. Repeat,
you have a Class One web-alarm.‖
Joshim was moving before the repeat, leaving
Vidar or Rallya to silence the broadcast. Class One
was serious injury or death! He pushed through the
packed corridor towards the docks, the webbers
there making way as they saw his insignia and
made the connection with the continuing
broadcast. Gods, if they had still been in the
observation gallery, instead of on their way back…
―Attention, all Webmasters. Attention, all
Webmasters. Bhattya urgently requires assistance.
Repeat, Bhattya urgently requires assistance.‖
―We‘re Bhattya! We‘ll handle it!‖ Rallya yelled
from behind him as somebody else started to run.
Joshim ignored them all, concentrated on the
end of the corridor ahead and the curve of the
docking ring beyond. He swerved left as he got
there, heading around the ring towards Bhattya‘s
open hatch. Hitting the ramp at a run, he bounced

off the safety rail into the riser and triggered the
speed override so that his stomach reached the top
a second after he did.
The web-room was a blur of anxious faces, the
web monitor a blaze of chaos that yielded no useful
information.
―I‘ll get it.‖ Rallya again, diving for the rest-room
and the R-K-D as Joshim entered the riser to the
web without breaking stride.
As he emerged at the top, his first glance
confirmed that the casualties were Rafe and Churi.
He had calculated that it would be so, prayed that it
was not. He dropped to his knees beside Lilimya,
who was stubbornly breathing air into Churi‘s lungs
as Peri and Caruya set up the respirator.
―What happened?‖ he demanded. ―Anybody.‖
―Full wave compound feedback,‖ Jualla said,
looking up from Rafe. ―And — we think —
transference. Rafe‘s breathing for himself,‖ she
added, the simplicity of the statement underlining
the harsh fact that it was the only good news she
had to report.
―How long since you got them out?‖
―Five minutes. Six since the alarm sounded.‖
Joshim had not even noticed the banshee wail of
the web-alarm filling the ship.
―Turn it off, somebody,‖ he called. ―Lilimya,
you‘re tired. Let Caruya take over.‖
If Rafe was breathing, he was in better condition
than Churi. That made the junior Joshim‘s first
priority.
―Churi was breathing when he came out of the
shub,‖ Lilimya reported, relinquishing her task. ―He
only stopped when we disconnected his webcontacts.‖

Joshim grimaced. ―Was he breathing in time with
Rafe?‖ he asked.
―Yes.‖ Lilimya looked down at her hands in her
lap, biting her lip. ―That‘s why we suspect
transference. And we haven‘t been able to start a
pulse. Or get a brain trace.‖ She gestured at the
electrodes lying on the floor beside them, and the
flat traces on the physio-monitor that they had
already hooked up to the youngster.
Joshim took Churi‘s flaccid wrist, looked at the
burned contact, the blue nails. Hypoxia, or the
shock of third degree web-burn, either would have
been enough to kill him. If there was no brain trace
and they had not started a pulse already…
―Here.‖ Rallya thrust a vial of R-K-D into his
hand. ―How bad?‖
―Bad,‖ Joshim said baldly, rising to his feet. ―Get
Churi onto the respirator. Lilimya, keep trying for a
pulse.‖ They had to go through the motions.
―Rafe?‖ Rallya asked anxiously.
―Breathing.‖
Gods, if Rallya had told him last night what she
had told him this morning, none of this need have
happened, Joshim thought angrily. He turned
away, unable to trust himself not to fling that
accusation at her, knowing that it was not her but
Elanis and the vile shadows behind him that he
ought to accuse.
Rafe‘s breathing was shallow with shock, his
pulse erratic, his skin waxy grey under the
congealing shub. But his brain trace was regular
under the spikes of residual discharge and he had
never stopped breathing, Joshim reminded himself
hopefully.
―Has he been conscious?‖ he asked Jualla.

―For a moment, when we pulled him out. Long
enough to feel the web-burn,‖ Jualla answered. ―I
put ten units of Daraphine into him.‖
―Good.‖
The web-alarm fell silent and when Joshim
looked up briefly, Vidar was moving away from the
central monitor. ―Pass me an empty injector,‖ he
told Jualla, breaking the seal on the vial that Rallya
had given him. ―Then get something to dry him off
with, and a blanket to wrap him in.‖ He took the
injector and used it to give Rafe twenty units of RK-D.
―How is he?‖ Rallya repeated, taking the place
that Jualla vacated.
―Alive,‖ Joshim said shortly. ―Gods know how.‖
He gestured angrily at the livid burns on Rafe‘s
wrists and neck, evidence of the unseen damage to
the nerves. ―Or for how long.‖
Rallya frowned calculatingly. ―Can you move
him?‖
―Not far.‖
―Your cabin?‖
―That‘s what I planned.‖ Joshim watched Rafe‘s
brain trace as he spoke, looking for the first effects
of the R-K-D.
―He‘s as tough as they come,‖ Rallya promised.
―He‘s going to make it.‖
―A pity Churi isn‘t so tough,‖ Joshim said bitterly.
―Gods and Emperors, do you think I don‘t know
it‘s my fault!‖ Rallya hissed. ―Do you think I don‘t
care?‖
Joshim shook his head. ―I know you do,‖ he
muttered. ―And you couldn‘t have predicted this.
Only filth like Elanis would think of this.‖ He shook
his head again, fixing firmly on the present. ―How is
Churi?‖

―On the respirator. Otherwise the same. Vidar‘s
with him.‖ Rallya leaned forward, ostensibly to
watch the traces with him. ―Now listen,‖ she
whispered. ―Rafe is going to die — officially —
shortly after you get him to your cabin. And you‘re
going to stay in there grieving while we take his
body into deep space for committal. Clear?‖
Joshim nodded comprehension. Rallya‘s idea
made sense, he thought angrily. The only way to
keep Rafe safe — if he survived — was to convince
his enemies that he was dead.
―I‘ll need more R-K-D than we have aboard,‖ he
warned.
―You‘ll have it. Anything else?‖
―You could try praying, if you ever knew how.‖
―I‘m praying already,‖ Rallya promised
vehemently. ―For Rafe‘s life. And for vengeance.‖

Death certificate dated 309/5043,
Aramas Zone, Old Empire
I, JOSHIM (OE-P5971-17529), Webmaster of Bhattya,
hereby certify that RAFE (NE-P9000-42775) and
CHURI (OE-P81113-07375) died this day as a result of
injuries sustained in the web, namely (i) systemic
nervous overload and (ii) transference shock.
Report by Palace Security Chief Braniya
to the Emperor Julur
…His body has been retained by the ship Bhattya for
committal in space. It will be possible to retrieve the
body from space later, if you wish, but not to intervene
at this stage…
…I have already made arrangements to question
Carher’s agent. The explanations for his absence
during this incident and the incident last year are
plausible, but…
…It remains a possibility that the death was an
accident, although my preliminary investigations show
that the ship Bhattya has an excellent safety record
and her Webmaster is well regarded by his peers… If it
proves to have been an accident, all those guilty of
negligence will be identified…
…I will continue to investigate personally.
323/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

Rafe moved restlessly and muttered something
unintelligible. Rallya paused in her jump
calculations and watched him closely, until she was
sure that he was not waking. Surely, it could not be
much longer until he did wake, she thought in
frustration. He had progressed so quickly to this
point, just below the threshold of consciousness.

She could not believe that he would hover there
indefinitely.
Nor did Joshim‘s apparent patience fool her. He
was as desperate as she was to know the true extent
of Rafe‘s injuries. To know whether there was
somebody they would recognize as Rafe within the
body they were tending, or whether there was deepseated brain damage that would never heal.
However much of a miracle it was that Rafe had
survived the overload at all, it would not be enough
unless he made a full recovery.
There were hopeful signs, she reminded herself.
Rafe‘s web continued to regenerate at a speed that
only his near-human blood could explain. He
moved and muttered and all his autonomic reflexes
operated. He took food if it was placed in his mouth
with a spoon, was no longer dependent on a
network of tubes. Best of all, Rallya thought,
Joshim now consented to leave his side, to eat in
the web-room or to work a shift in the web. That
must mean that the Webmaster was more
optimistic than he claimed. Or that he had admitted
to himself that there was nothing more he could do
for Rafe…
At least Joshim‘s reappearance had steadied
Bhattya‘s web-room. The death of two web-mates
in the web had shaken them so badly that it had
been easy to persuade Maisa that they were only fit
for the Zfheer border patrol. Learning the truth
about Rafe and the reasons for Churi‘s death had
jolted them out of their depression into a high pitch
of anger and expectancy, but that had shifted into
apprehension as the days dragged on and Rafe
stayed stubbornly unconscious. Even the ritual
farewell when they committed Churi‘s body to
space had only been an antidote to their confusion

for a few hours. Like Rallya, they wanted to be
doing something positive, instead of waiting
passively at the bedside of the only card they had
left to play, not yet knowing whether he was an
emperor or a fool.
Rallya still found it hard to believe that Elanis
had out-thought her, that she had missed
something as blindingly obvious as a trap in the
web. Of course, they had found no snoops when
they searched the ship; Elanis had removed them
all before he left. Of course, they had found no
explosives, no sign that the drive had been
tampered with, no subtle changes in the comp to
send their jumps astray, no evidence of anything
except a tragic accident. Elanis — or his backers —
had been thorough in covering their tracks.
They had provided an explanation for the
accident, a heat-damaged monitor circuit which
had failed catastrophically during the overload. The
station web-techs had taken it away for
examination, but they would find nothing
unexpected, Rallya told herself sourly. To flood a
web so rapidly, to bind its occupants so tightly, the
circuit must have been modified by an expert.
Somebody who knew their way around a monitor
circuit, and how to turn one into a death-trap, and
how to destroy the evidence afterwards. Somebody
who had to be a webber or an ex-webber, Rallya
added grimly. It was yet another piece of
circumstantial evidence. They were submerged in
circumstantial evidence, she thought savagely.
What they needed was proof.
―Wake up, damn you,‖ she urged Rafe angrily.
―Yours to command, ma‘am.‖ The voice was
scratchy with disuse.

She swallowed her surprise immediately. ―How
long have you been awake?‖ she demanded.
―You can‘t please some people.‖ He opened grey
eyes and blinked at the light. ―Not long.‖ His voice
was getting stronger. ―How long have I been out?‖
―Fourteen days.‖
―Gods.‖ He moved his arms and legs
experimentally.
―Everything works,‖ Rallya assured him. ―You‘ve
been thrashing around on that bed enough for us to
be sure of that.‖
―My web?‖ Rafe craned his head to look
anxiously at the monitor screen beside the bed.
―No permanent damage.‖ Rallya confirmed what
he could see for himself, a little envious of his selfcontrol. He was hardly wasting a word as he set
about getting the information he lacked. He might
have planned the sequence of questions in his
coma, she thought approvingly. Or while he was
lying there, pretending still to be unconscious, she
amended suspiciously.
―Churi?‖ It was the obvious next question.
―He died in the web.‖ He would not thank her for
withholding the truth, or for trying to soften it. He
had been conscious throughout the overload; he
would have felt Churi dying.
―Damn.‖ He closed his eyes again. ―The
committal?‖
―Five days ago.‖
―Damn,‖ he repeated softly. ―He‘ll hate being out
there alone.‖
Rallya said nothing, knowing that she had not
been intended to hear his grief. There was no
comfort she could offer him; even if there was, he
would not accept it from her. His image of a lonely
Churi drifting in dark space was one he would have

to cope with unaided. All Rallya could do was to
make it harder for him, by telling him the reason
for Churi‘s death, and Joshim had extracted a
promise from her not to do so until he was present.
―We‘ve left Aramas,‖ Rafe said after a short
silence, unfastening the bindings on his wrists to
release the monitor contacts as he spoke.
―Leave those,‖ Rallya suggested, avoiding his
unspoken question. ―Save Joshim the trouble of
putting them back.‖
Rafe carried on.
―Conscious, you‘re going to be a lousy patient,‖
she predicted, reaching for her messager and using
it to beep Vidar. Joshim was in the web; the
Captain would have to relieve him.
―Conscious, I‘m not going to be any kind of
patient.‖ Rafe pushed himself up the bed into a
sitting position. ―I can read those screens as well as
anybody.‖
―Then fourteen days ago, you would have thought
you were looking at a corpse,‖ Rallya said flatly.
―Want me?‖ Vidar asked, coming through the
door. Then he halted and smiled broadly, the first
true smile that Rallya had seen aboard Bhattya
since the web-alarm sounded. ―Should you be
sitting up?‖ he asked Rafe.
―No,‖ Rallya answered.
―Yes,‖ Rafe contradicted her.
Vidar laughed. ―I‘ll fetch reinforcements,‖ he
suggested mischievously. ―They‘re obviously
needed.‖
―Do that,‖ Rallya told him. ―I‘ll try tying him
down until Joshim gets here.‖
―You haven‘t told me where we‘re going,‖ Rafe
said when Vidar had gone.

His eyes said clearly that there was no hope of
him acting the invalid for her. Even Joshim was
going to have difficulty getting him to cooperate,
Rallya judged. Not because he did not feel weak —
there was a faint frown on his forehead that
suggested pain behind it, and his hands were
trembling slightly as they rested on the comforter —
but because it was his way of dealing with Churi‘s
death. If Joshim was not firm, Rafe would be out of
bed and trying to work days before he was fit.
Rallya decided that she would back Joshim to win
that argument, but not by much.
―You can have all the answers you want when
Joshim gives me the go-ahead,‖ she promised
honestly.
Rafe glared at her. ―Does that include the ones
you don‘t want to give me?‖ he asked.
―What makes you think there are any of those?‖
Rallya demanded, startled.
―The way that you‘re sidling around everything I
ask, unless I can work out the answer for myself.
The way you‘re waiting for Joshim‘s go-ahead,
when you wouldn‘t bother if it didn‘t suit you.‖ He
ticked his reasons off on the fingers of one hand.
―The fact that I‘m here, and not in the infirmary at
Aramas. The fact that you‘re playing nurse at my
bedside, with a face like an explosion waiting to
happen when you think nobody‘s watching you. Is
that enough?‖
That was the last time Rallya let anything show
on her face, even if she was sure she was
unobserved, she resolved. Damn him, how long had
he been awake before she noticed?
―There‘s something unnatural about anybody
who comes out of a fourteen day coma and notices
so much so quickly,‖ she said tartly. ―And you

needn‘t think that you‘ve won yourself any answers.
I did promise Joshim I‘d keep those until he was
here and I wouldn‘t put it past him to throw me out
if I don‘t. So sit still, shut up and concentrate on
convincing Joshim you‘re well enough to be told.
And that‘s an order.‖
―Yes, ma‘am.‖
―You‘re the only person I know who can pack
quite so much disrespect into that word,‖ Rallya
accused him.
―I try, ma‘am.‖ He closed his eyes, conceding a
temporary defeat or conserving his strength. Rallya
could not tell which. She realized with a jolt that
she had pulled rank on him for the last time. Gods,
he was unbiddable as a First; how much worse
could he be when he knew that he had been a
Commander?
―Who said you could sit up?‖
Joshim did not wait in the doorway for an answer
but crossed to the bedside, the relief on his face
giving the lie to the tone of his voice. As he gripped
Rafe‘s shoulders, Rallya had the distinct feeling that
her absence would be appreciated, at least
temporarily.
―I suppose they‘re swinging from the light fittings
out there,‖ she said. ―Somebody should go and
supervise the riot.‖
The two people clutching each other on the bed
gave no sign that they had heard her. And Joshim
had warned her against overtaxing Rafe.
Half an hour ought to be sufficient time for them to
disentangle themselves, Rallya thought as she
backed through the cabin door with a handful of
mugs and a bowl of stew balanced on top of them.
And if it was not, they could save the rest for later;

they would enjoy it more when Rafe was stronger.
If he still felt like it when he had heard what she
had to say.
―How long did it take you to reach that
compromise?‖ she asked them, finding Rafe still
sitting up but reattached to the monitor.
―He pulled rank,‖ Rafe answered.
―When all else failed,‖ Joshim admitted, taking
the bowl of stew and handing it to Rafe. Just half an
hour had eased the tension from the Webmaster‘s
face, although it would take far longer to erase the
lines that fourteen days of worry had carved there.
―Is he fit enough for some answers?‖ Rallya
asked, setting the mugs down within reach of the
bed.
―He‘s fit enough,‖ Joshim said, less cheerfully. He
slipped a protective arm around Rafe‘s shoulders.
Unnecessarily protective, Rallya decided. Rafe was
too tough to break under the weight of knowing
that he was indirectly responsible for Churi‘s death.
He might bend slightly, but it would be invisible
and short-lasting. Nobody reached the rank of
Commander without learning to live with the
consequences of their actions, direct or indirect.
Rafe listened in silence as Rallya talked, his face
showing little reaction to her words. Once he
nodded sharply, urging her past the explanation of
Sajan‘s death that she offered, making the
connections for himself. Once he frowned, as if
testing the name Yuellin Lord Buhklir against his
memory and finding no match. But throughout,
Rallya could sense his anger uncoiling to fill the
room, could see Joshim reacting to the tension in
his shoulders. The quality of the anger made her
ache with sympathy, left her braced for an
explosion when she finished speaking.

―Yes.‖
The word was exhaled more than spoken, and
with it passed the possibility of a violent reaction.
Rallya let her own breath go, less obviously than
Joshim.
―Joshim, we talked about restoring my memory
before.‖ Rafe was already back in control of himself,
his anger not blinding him to the essential next
step. ―How soon can we try that Aruranist
technique?‖
Rallya glared at Joshim. He had mentioned
nothing to her about Aruranist techniques when
she had been worrying aloud about restoring Rafe‘s
memory. She had known it must be feasible; if his
nervous tissue could recover so quickly from the
random trauma of a massive overload, surely ten
years was long enough for it to recover from the
systematic damage of identity-wipe. And if the
underlying nervous tissue had already healed, all
they needed to do to release the trapped memories
was to find the right key. She had spent a large part
of the last fourteen days fruitlessly trying to identify
that key.
―When did you two discuss this?‖ she asked, the
implications dawning on her. If it had been before
she revealed to Joshim her suspicions about Rafe,
then they must have believed that they were
discussing real Oath-breaking. It was a shock to
realize that Joshim might have considered it.
―Don‘t ask us that, ma‘am, and we won‘t ask you
exactly when you worked out who I was,‖ Rafe said
coolly. ―Joshim, how soon?‖
―Not for several days,‖ Joshim said firmly. ―You
nearly died in that web. You‘re still a lot weaker
than you want to believe and you know better than
anybody how much remembering takes out of you.‖

Rafe looked rebellious and Joshim tapped him
sharply on the point of his nose, to Rallya‘s secret
delight. ―I want the answers as much as either of
you,‖ he stated. ―The answers, and the people they
lead to. When you‘re strong enough, we‘ll try it. But
not before.‖
―Good enough,‖ Rallya conceded, eight years‘
experience giving her the edge over Rafe in
realizing when Joshim was immovable. ―Wouldn‘t
he feel better if he was horizontal?‖ she added
innocently. ―One way or another.‖
Rafe looked as if he wanted to throw his bowl of
cold stew at her, was prevented only by Joshim
taking it out of his hands.
―I think I preferred you when I was unconscious,
ma‘am,‖ he said as Joshim lifted him bodily and
laid him flat on his back.
―I‘m sure you did.‖ Rallya paused in the doorway.
―Since you‘re now an honorary Commander, there‘s
no need to call me ma‘am anymore.‖
―I‘m sure there isn‘t,‖ Rafe mimicked. ―But I
enjoy it, ma‘am.‖

From the classic Aruranist text
"Guidance for Seekers"
…Through the core of every life runs a vital thread of
experience, or a succession of interwoven threads,
around which that life was formed. If you would
remember a life, seek its centre. Find such a thread,
follow its course, explore its linkages…
…Be guided by one who undertakes to journey with
you, following at a distance, an anchor to the present.
This one will remain in control where you will surely
not…
333/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

―When you‘re ready, move the fingers on your left
hand.‖
Joshim‘s voice was filtered by the layers of
relaxation that lay between Rafe and him. Rafe
moved his fingers, detached from his own action by
that same depth of relaxation, and dimly sensed the
change in the air that he was breathing as Joshim
fed the hallucinogen through his drug-mask.
―Remember, when you want the antidote, the
signal word is Roshanir,‖ Joshim reminded him.
―Roshanir,‖ Rafe repeated obediently, still
drifting through a haze of muted reality, waiting for
the drug to bring the change that Joshim had
promised. He had no intention of signalling for the
antidote; they had too little of the arthane to waste
any. There was enough for three doses, and Joshim
judged that this first dose was unlikely to bring
results, would only make Rafe familiar with its
effects and the ways of controlling them. They
would have been better prepared if Rafe had not
turned down Joshim‘s idea the first time, but… If

only won nothing except wasted time, Rafe
reproved himself. He should be concentrating on
the clues that he had to the memories which he was
seeking.
Clues. Names. Yuellin Lord Buhklir. Sajan.
Janasayan. The last of the three would be the best
starting point, Joshim had suggested. Rafe‘s
previous name might be only a label for other
people to use, with less significance for him than it
had for them; it was true that the name still woke
no answer in him, for all the logic that said it had to
be his. And by her own admission, Sajan had not
been important to Yuellin. Although he had been
important to her in the end, and to his web-mates
aboard Avannya, and to Churi… Rafe turned away
resolutely from that chain of thought. Janasayan:
that was what he should be focusing on, the ship
that he had commanded.
He had been a Commander, should still be a
Commander: that felt satisfyingly true, a piece of a
puzzle slotting into place, even though the pieces
around it were still missing. And a ship‘s
Commander too, not one of the primping
politicians in External Liaison or the power-seekers
in Central Support. That was the major flaw in the
Guild‘s organisation: the best webbers were allowed
to cling to their ships and the real power fell into
other hands. Rafe could almost hear somebody else
— a nameless voice — saying that, and his own
faintly guilty denial.
A ship‘s Commander, then. Janasayan‘s
Commander. Rafe cast around for a reaction to that
fact, an echo to lead him on. The function of the
hallucinogen was to release his mind from its
familiar channels, to free him to follow those
echoes through his dormant memories. And it had

begun to take effect, he realized. There was a subtle
change in the quality of the sounds and sensations
reaching him, Joshim‘s voice, the texture of the bed
beneath him. Curious, he opened his eyes and
blinked at the world, the sphere around him that
expanded with each indrawn breath and contracted
with each exhalation. Joshim was still talking but
the words had ceased make sense, like a reck played
alternately too fast and too slow. Rafe grinned
reassuringly and Joshim smiled back, splitting his
face into two halves that stretched in opposite
directions across the cabin as Rafe watched,
fascinated.
―You‘re well away.‖
Rafe knew that the words had to be Joshim‘s, but
they bounced in a great circle around the universe
before they reached him like rain.
―Cheap drunk,‖ he responded, for the sake of
watching his own words bounce back.
―Don‘t forget why,‖ Joshim cautioned him.
―I remember why. Janasayan. My ship. One
third my ship.‖ Rafe closed his eyes against the
sight of the molten walls sliding into a puddle on
the floor. ―One third my ship. One third Hafessya‘s
ship. One third Baruchya‘s ship.‖ He opened his
eyes again smugly. ―I do remember. Why are the
walls melting?‖
―Close your eyes again,‖ Joshim advised him.
―Let me worry about the walls. You tell me about
Hafessya and Baruchya.‖
―Hafessya and Ruchya,‖ Rafe corrected him.
―Ruchya‘s Captain. Hafessya‘s Webmaster.‖ It was
easy to remember now; he could not understand
why it had been so hard before. ―She‘s a bully too.‖
The walls were not really melting; it was the curtain

of fluid falling in front of them that made them look
as if they were. ―Somebody should turn the tap off.‖
―They will.‖ Joshim reached out with a hand
inflated like a brown balloon and closed Rafe‘s eyes.
―You concentrate on remembering. Where did you
meet Hafessya?‖
―Jenadir Station, when she and Ruchya were
waiting there for a new ship. We got Janasayan
straight from the construction dock, the first
Amsiya class patrolship in either Empire. I spent
days just going around her, stroking the bulkheads
when I thought nobody was looking. Except
Hafessya was looking.‖ Rafe blushed at the memory
and felt his skin sing all the way out to his
extremities. ―She used to threaten to tell the webroom about it when she couldn‘t control me any
other way.‖ He opened his eyes and watched his
flesh ripple like waves on water, resonating with the
lingering blush. ―How does it do that?‖
―Trust me. Don‘t worry about it,‖ Joshim told
him. ―Carry on telling me about Janasayan. When
was she commissioned?‖
―Fifty-twenty-eight. Just in time for the F‘sair
troubles.‖ There was no need to open his eyes to
see; the room had seeped in through his eyelids and
was painted on the inside in colours he had never
seen before. ―Can‘t we talk later?‖ he asked Joshim.
―I want to watch the colours.‖ He had never realized
there were so many perfect colours.
―We‘ll talk now,‖ Joshim insisted. ―Do you
remember why it‘s important?‖
Rafe shook his head wilfully and the colours
broke up into dancing streaks of light. He laughed
and his laughter broke into shards of glass that
showered them both. He pulled Joshim towards
him protectively. ―Be careful. You‘ll cut yourself.‖

―I‘ll be careful,‖ Joshim promised. ―Tell me about
the F‘sair.‖
―Nice people, apart from a defective sense of
property. Don‘t believe in other people‘s property.
Steal anything that isn‘t bolted down. Stole me
once.‖
―They stole you?‖
―Apologized for it.‖ Rafe giggled. ―Very formal
apology. Didn‘t give me back though.‖ He could see
the canine war-leader ritually offering food and
drink, the interior of the warship, the ranked
warriors drawn up to do him honour. And to stop
him escaping. As if he could have escaped, the only
human on a F‘sair warship, not even knowing
where they were headed. Scared, but that was
something the F‘sair must not guess. Take the food
and drink. Compliment her on her ship, her
warriors. Wait. Keep waiting… He shied away from
the end of that wait, sensing the monster at the end
of the tunnel. ―Ugly, but nice people. Always did
what they‘d contracted to do.‖ Joshim was
dissolving in his arms. He grasped him tighter, felt
him slipping between his fingers. ―Don‘t go,‖ he
urged.
―I won‘t. Tell me, if the F‘sair didn‘t give you
back, where did they take you?‖
―Don‘t know. Don‘t remember.‖ As long as he did
not move, he was safe.
―Don‘t remember, or don‘t want to remember?‖
Joshim prompted.
―Don‘t know. Don‘t want to know.‖
Rafe opened his eyes, looking for something
outside himself to drive away the fear. He had
shrunk in the darkness into a tiny body on a
mountainous surface that would not keep still but
bucked beneath him like an angry sea. Far above

him, sounds were dropping out of an open cavern
rimmed with white slabs of stone. He twisted away
to avoid being crushed, clinging desperately to the
sea that was trying to throw him off.
―Close your eyes and hold my hands. Come on.
It‘s too soon to give in. Remember my name? Tell
me.‖
Joshim. Rafe formed the word in light and felt it
smear like warm oil across his skin, saw the cavern
twist into an open mouth and a face behind it.
―Tell me out loud.‖
―Joshim.‖
―Good. Now tell me your name.‖
Rafe. Closest name, never rejected. All the others
were escaping, like water through sand. He
clutched at the one that remained, anchored
himself to it. ―Rafe.‖
―Do you remember what we‘re doing?‖
―Remembering.‖ Rafe focused on that, on sorting
Joshim‘s voice from the cacophony pressing in on
him. ―Out of control.‖
―Not quite. Ready to go on?‖
―Ready,‖ Rafe agreed. ―Hold me still though.
Don‘t let me move or I‘ll fall.‖
―I‘ll hold you. Shall we talk about your family?
Your father?‖
―Don‘t know who he was. Mother never said. Not
even what he was, only near-human and anybody
could have told that from looking at me. She
needed a father for a child. Didn‘t matter who, only
when. Wanted me born before my uncle‘s first
child. And I was, by three days. She had me cut out
of her, to make sure I‘d be first. My uncle was
furious, not to have thought of it himself. Tried to
get it declared illegal. Couldn‘t. Had to accept me as
his heir. Officially. Never really accepted me.‖

His uncle‘s face wavered in the air around them,
with the angry scowl that was permanently reserved
for Rafe. Rafe made a rude gesture in return and
the old man vanished.
―He never believed I didn‘t want the title.
Buhklir, I mean. All I wanted was to be a webber.
Grew up on Guild ships. Never wanted to be
anything else. Mother was a diplomat. Dragged me
around in her baggage. Didn‘t trust her brother to
keep me safe while she was gone. Wasn‘t much
safer with her. She died on Hurth when the
negotiations went wrong. I would have died too but
they didn‘t kill children and they reopened the
negotiations before I got old enough to be killed.‖
Bright blue sun, too bright to go out in full
daylight. Dark underground warrens and shadowy
Hurthfolk. Watching her being led away and
waiting until she never came back. Spending a
lifetime learning from the priests who guarded him
how to play anash and kerisduan, all the games of
waiting. The floor of the room was an anash grid
scattered with bright grey game-pieces that moved
of their own volition, breaking the rules as if there
were none.
―What happened then?‖
The voice cut across the babble of the dancing
game-pieces. They quivered and grew faces, all the
same face, all Joshim‘s face, wheeling silently
around the grid like coins. Rafe reached out for one
and it burst like a bubble, spattering acid across his
icy hand.
―Tell me what happened next. After Hurth.‖
―After
Hurth? When
I
wasn‘t
dead?
Embarrassing as hell for my uncle. He‘d had me
declared dead, my cousin named heir. Had to get it
all annulled. Never forgave me for not being dead.‖

Rafe reached tentatively for the enormous face
hanging over him, flinched as he touched it, relaxed
as it did not shatter. ―I‘m babbling, aren‘t I?‖ he
asked plaintively.
―You‘re doing fine. What was your cousin called?‖
Rafe tried to form the name and was empty.
―Can‘t!‖ he said in sudden panic.
―Don‘t worry. Tell me your uncle‘s name instead.‖
―Madranis Lord Buhklir.‖ His panic subsided
when he found that there were still memories open
to him. ―Scheming Lord Buhklir. Wanted me dead,
but I did what he never expected. Didn‘t dare have
me assassinated then. Couldn‘t even withhold
permission for me to join the Guild. Had to smile
and say yes. Thought he‘d choke on it.‖ Rafe
laughed gleefully, tasting the sweet notes on his
tongue.
―What did you do?‖
Rafe groped for the answer and found outrageous
darkness where it ought to be. Angry, he pushed at
the wall, struggling to find a crack, a chink that he
could slip through. After remembering so much,
this failure was unfair, unbearable, unacceptable.
He would remember. He would. He tore at the wall
with his hands. If there was no chink, he would
make one. He refused to accept that there was no
way through.
―Don‘t force it. There‘s plenty of time. If you can‘t
put it in words, can you make yourself a picture?‖
His hands were being held in a vice from which he
could not break free. ―A place, or a face?‖
A picture, yes. If the words were all locked away
from him, the visions were not, and a single face
held the answer, all of the answers. He called light
to his hands, wove it, stubbornly fought its
tendency to unravel and fly out of his grasp, slowly

built the face that was the key. There, he challenged
the darkness triumphantly. You can steal the words
but not the pictures. And I will have the name. All
of the names.
As he stared at it, the face blurred, divided into
two, into four, mirrored in every surface. It was a
crowd: watching him, smiling at him, speaking to
him, shouting at him, reaching for him, laughing
with him, saying hello, saying goodbye, loving with
him, crying with him, coming towards him, going
away, giving to him, taking from him… And all
cruelly nameless, mocking him.
He shouted in fury and the sound shattered the
mirrors, dispersed the crowd, left only the single,
known, unchanging face. Joshim. In bitter
frustration, he recognized that the face he had so
laboriously built had been Joshim; it had not come
from behind the dark wall. He cursed vehemently,
taking no pleasure in the complex of sounds but
repeating it aimlessly to fill the uninvited silence in
his head.
―That‘s enough for today.‖
Joshim drifted in and out of reach; Rafe made no
effort to fight the motion.
―I‘m cold,‖ he announced. Joshim‘s motion was
tuned to his shivering.
―Breathe in deeply. And out. And in…‖
Rafe obeyed, wanting to be free of his
helplessness, to be back in control, back in a reality
where everyone had names.
―I really am cold,‖ he complained, as the light in
the room sharpened and the harmonics in Joshim‘s
voice died away.
―That‘s normal.‖ Joshim pulled the comforter
over him. ―What else do you feel?‖
―Flat. All the edges have gone.‖

―That‘s normal too.‖ Joshim smiled briefly. ―How
many fingers?‖
―Three. Two. Four,‖ Rafe answered dutifully.
―And a thumb.‖
―Good enough.‖ Joshim adjusted the valve on the
canister attached to the drug-mask. Rafe watched
him work, then closed his heavy eyelids for a
second, just to rest them. ―What is that stuff?‖ he
asked suspiciously.
―The antidote.‖
―I didn‘t ask…‖
―You weren‘t in any fit state to ask. Go to sleep.
That‘s what you need most.‖
―What if I forget…‖
―You won‘t.‖ Joshim removed the drug mask,
dropped a soft kiss on Rafe‘s lips. ―You did better
than I expected.‖
―The faces were all yours,‖ Rafe confessed.
―It happens like that, sometimes, the first time. It
won‘t last.‖

From the rules of anash, as played by
the priests of Hurth
…It is permitted to move your game-pieces when
your opponent is not watching. But if your opponent
correctly challenges such a move, the pieces moved
are forfeit…
336/5043
ARAMAS ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

―So, Commander Yuellin. The only halfway helpful
thing we‘ve learned from your excursions into
Aruranism is that you were stun-gassed during a
dirtside liberty on Gharan, and woke up on a F‘sair
warship, going you can‘t remember where,‖ Rallya
summarized. ―Joshim, what are the chances that
he‘s going to remember anything useful in the near
future?‖
―Not good,‖ Joshim answered. ―Somebody went
to a lot of trouble to erase one group of memories
more thoroughly than the rest. Now that the
arthane has provided a context, they‘ll come back
gradually but…‖
―Not quickly enough that we can afford to wait
for them,‖ Rallya growled. At least the arthane
trances had not been a complete failure. It would
have been astonishing if the key memories had not
received the most attention from the psychsurgeons, but the relationship between the gaps in
Yuellin‘s memory and their context might still be
enough to reveal the truth to anybody with the
brains to look for it.
―Who was your heir?‖ she asked Rafe. ―This
cousin that you can‘t remember?‖

Sprawled comfortably across a seat in the corner
of the rest-room — as if he owned it, Rallya thought
irritably — Rafe shook his head. ―Buhklir goes down
through the oldest child of each generation. I
inherited from my uncle, and my niece — Madranya
— will inherit from me. She‘s probably inherited
already, if I‘ve been declared dead,‖ he added. ―She
would have come of age four years ago.‖
Rallya frowned. ―And before she came of age?‖
Rafe shook his head again. ―No motive there.
True, my cousin would have been Madranya‘s
regent, but she was already regent for me. She‘d
nothing to gain by my disappearance, and a lot to
lose. She‘d have been my regent until I retired, not
just until Madranya reached twenty.‖
―She?‖ Joshim queried.
―She?‖ Rafe echoed, puzzled, then nodded. ―A
female cousin,‖ he agreed, smiling.
―The marvels of Aruranism,‖ Rallya muttered.
Even if the damned cousin was not responsible —
and she had to accept Rafe‘s assessment of that
situation since, thankfully, she had no experience of
aristo in-fighting — Rafe‘s abduction had to be
linked with the tangle of his Buhklir heritage; that
was the only thing that marked Yuellin apart from
any other Commander. He had had no immediate
ambitions beyond the hull of his ship — or none
that he could remember — and no known enemies
in the Guild. The answer had to be New Empire
politics or aristo bloodlines.
―How old were you when you inherited?‖ she
asked. ―And since when did aristos let the family
heir join the Guild?‖
―My uncle died when I was seventeen. A year into
my apprenticeship. My regent was…‖ Rafe stopped
abruptly.

―The same gap or a new one?‖ Joshim asked
sympathetically.
―The same.‖ Rafe shrugged. ―Also responsible for
allowing me to join the Guild, ma‘am.‖
―So now we know that the anonymous person
who‘s wandered through your life at irregular
intervals since you were fifteen is a benevolent
relative,‖ Rallya said tartly. ―Another aristo, of
course. Or wouldn‘t that have been a necessary
qualification to be your regent?‖
Rafe frowned. ―Normally, yes. But not a
relative…‖
―A lover?‖ Joshim suggested.
Rafe nodded decisively. ―Yes. And that might
explain the faces…‖
―Probably,‖ Joshim agreed infuriatingly. ―It‘s a
common effect. I should have realized earlier.‖
Rallya ground her teeth silently. If she had been
present during the arthane trances, or if Joshim
had agreed to tape them, she would not have to
contend with this conspiracy of censorship. Yes,
Rafe was entitled to his privacy, but who knew what
details he and Joshim had missed, and what vital
directions Joshim had failed to explore?
―A male lover?‖ she inquired. ―From Sajan‘s
comments, and your current preferences…‖
―You‘ve never asked me my preferences,‖ Rafe
said casually. ―But male, yes.‖
Vidar chuckled. ―Any connection between this
lover and your cousin?‖
―Apart from their common anonymity?‖ Rafe
asked. ―There must be, but I don‘t know what.‖
―Who was Madranya‘s father?‖ Fire enough
questions and something might escape from his
subconscious, Rallya thought.
―Jalmair Lord Rarthen. Sorry.‖

Rallya had the distinct sense that she was
following a line of questioning that Rafe had
already exhausted privately, or with Joshim.
―It was only a thought,‖ she said drily. ―Based on
the baroque intricacies of most aristo relationships.
Tell me, have you deduced anything about this
mystery lover of yours that I ought to know about?‖
―Nothing worthwhile,‖ Rafe said unrepentantly.
―I‘ll let you know if I have a flash of inspiration.‖
―Is this getting us anywhere?‖ Vidar asked. ―If
Rafe doesn‘t have all the answers…‖
‗…and the ones he does have aren‘t admissible as
evidence in any legal court…‖ Rallya interrupted
sourly.
‗…we‘ll have to collect some admissible
evidence,‖ Rafe finished. ―Central, Commander?‖
he asked, arching an eyebrow at her.
―Central,‖ she confirmed, glaring back at him.
―And the records of Yuellin Lord Buhklir.‖
She was not yet sure that she liked having
somebody only half a step — if that — behind her
thinking. And two Commanders was one too many
on any ship; once this was all over, Rafe would have
to find his own. If they came out on top of the
situation, that should not be too difficult, she
thought wryly. And if they did not come out on top,
a ship to command would be the least of his
worries.
―The medical data in those records will put Rafe‘s
identity beyond any legal doubt,‖ Joshim was
telling Vidar.
―And since being kidnapped on Gharan is not a
legitimate precursor to identity-wipe, we‘ll have
enough evidence to set an official investigation in
motion,‖ Rafe added.

―By the time Central Support set up that
investigation — always assuming they‘re not in this
muck up to their armpits — the scum that we‘re
looking for will have covered their tracks beyond
finding. Or made a run for it,‖ Rallya said testily.
―What do you want to do?‖ Rafe challenged.
―Hunt each one down personally?‖
―You‘re willing to settle for a lot less than I am,‖
Rallya said angrily.
―I‘ll settle for the very most I can get, ma‘am,‖
Rafe said coldly. ―But I won‘t gamble everything on
an impossible drive for revenge. Or delude myself
that we don‘t need help. I‘ll admit that Central
Support is probably rotten at the core; I couldn‘t
have been framed as an Oath-breaker without their
help. But there are a lot of honest webbers who‘ll
give us a hearing, and back us if we give them
enough proof.‖
―Why do I have this insane urge to duck
whenever I‘m in the same room as these two?‖
Vidar asked Joshim in a loud whisper.
―That‘s not insanity. That‘s self-preservation,‖
Joshim answered.
―You could always turn the fire-jets on us,‖ Rafe
suggested wickedly.
Rallya snorted. ―Try it,‖ she threatened. ―You‘ll
need to do more than duck.‖ She swivelled her seat
around and keyed a command into the rest-room
console. Rafe was right, but she was not going to
thank him for pointing out what she already knew.
And she was not going to like it. ―Here. I‘ve done
the calculations for a jump to Central…‖
―Directly there?‖ Vidar queried.
―You and Jualla claim this ship can punch a jump
through anywhere,‖ Rallya reminded him. ―This is
your chance to prove it. Rafe, with ten years in

survey behind you, you‘re better qualified than
anybody else to check these results.‖ A jump from
the Zfheer border to Central was at the limits of
Bhattya‘s performance, even with all the unofficial
modifications she had undergone at the hands of
Vidar and his predecessors.
―Arrival point in the Disputed Zone?‖ Rafe asked,
crossing the room to look over her shoulder.
―I wasn‘t planning to dock at Central uninvited
and set off every alarm on the station,‖ Rallya said
tartly. ―But nobody‘s going to pay much attention to
another shuttle sneaking in from the Disputed Zone
for some unofficial liberty.‖
Rafe grunted agreement. ―I‘ll be in the web for
the jump…‖
―No, you won‘t,‖ Joshim interrupted. ―You may
have put in some web-time before then, but you
won‘t be fit to work a full shift. And certainly not to
work during a jump that critical. And don‘t look at
me like that, or I‘ll tell Rallya what Hafessya saw.‖
―You ought to play anash,‖ Rafe said sourly. ―The
most important rule is only to cheat when you can
get away with it.‖
―Anash sounds more like Rallya‘s game,‖ Vidar
said provocatively.
Rafe shook his head. ―Kerisduan maybe. That‘s
quick and nasty, won by going for the jugular. But
it‘s too late for you to learn to play anash well,
ma‘am. You have to learn when it‘s the most
important thing there is. And when you‘ve got a lot
of time to spare.‖
Rallya snorted; everybody with a new strategy
game made the same claims, and every game she
had ever learned could be reduced to a new set of
rules and an old set of tactics. ―How long did it take
you to learn?‖ she asked.

―Two years, and I had nothing else to do,‖ Rafe
said with an odd smile. ―A single game can last a
lifetime, if it‘s played properly. The aim is to
postpone the end, or to force your opponent to
make the last move. Anash players are judged by
the number of their unfinished games, and the
length of time they‘ve been running. I‘ve only got
two in progress. One on Hurth, from thirty-five
years ago, and another…‖
‗…with your lover,‖ Rallya guessed. ―It‘s been at
least ten years since you made your last move in
that one. Think he‘s still waiting for you?‖
―Maybe.‖ Rafe yawned. ―I‘ll write you up a copy
of the rules after I‘ve checked that jump. I‘ve got to
have something to do, if I‘m not allowed in the
web.‖

Report by Palace Security Chief Braniya
to the Emperor Julur
…In the light of the unsatisfactory interview with
Carher’s agent (transcript attached), I intend to
question Carher herself. She is currently attending a
Guild Council meeting at Guild Central. With your
permission, I will leave for Central immediately…
339/5043
CENTRAL ZONE

Joshim sensed Rafe disengage cleanly from the
shuttle‘s web, noting with personal and
professional pleasure that there was little sign in his
web control of the injuries he had suffered. He still
lacked stamina, and his range and extension had
not yet returned to normal, but in another ten days
he would be ready to web a full shift. Or to con the
shuttle, instead of riding the journey out on filtered
standby, a decision he had protested as strongly as
Joshim‘s decision to keep him out of the web
during the jump from Aramas.
―Ready?‖ Rafe asked, already waiting by the
hatch as Joshim removed his web-contacts.
―Half a minute.‖ Joshim fixed his infocorder to
his belt, checked that he had the wad of credits that
they would need to pass the dock supervisor.
―Ready,‖ he confirmed.
The section of dock beyond the hatch was almost
deserted, only occupied by a pair of webbers
passing supplies up through the hatch of the
neighbouring shuttle. They stiffened when they saw
Joshim‘s Webmaster‘s badge, then relaxed as Rafe
gave them a high-sign. One of them signalled

cheerfully back, then jerked her head at the dock
exit and waggled a warning hand.
―How much?‖ Rafe asked softly.
―Thirty creds,‖ she answered.
―Robbers. Who is it?‖
―Shikur, still trying to make his fortune early,‖
the woman said sourly. ―Claims the price is higher
today because there‘s some aristo from the Old
Emperor‘s Palace on station and Security is out in
force. Not that you‘d notice it, anywhere except in
Shikur‘s greedy imagination.‖ She gave Joshim an
inquisitive look. ―Never knew Webmasters had to
come in through the back door like the rest of us.‖
―We do if we want a quiet sight of the vacancy
lists before Personnel hear we‘re looking,‖ Joshim
said easily. ―Webmaster and Commander. Old
Empire. Heard of anything?‖
―Sorry. I‘m New Empire. Luck to you though.‖
―You‘ve done this before,‖ Joshim accused Rafe
as they walked on around the curve of the dock.
―Once or twice,‖ Rafe admitted. ―I was assigned
to the Zone for half a year when I was a junior.‖ He
grinned. ―Twenty-eight years ago, but the routine is
the same. The only thing that‘s changed is the price.
And I‘ve never met Shikur.‖ He chewed his lip
briefly. ―Hope our friend was right about Security.‖
Joshim nodded silent agreement. The jump from
Aramas to a point in the Disputed Zone just outside
Central‘s border had gone without problems,
thanks to the skill of Bhattya‘s web-room, but the
longer the ship waited out there, the higher the
chances that their presence would be noticed and
questioned. Any increase in Security activity on the
station would make it harder for Rafe and Joshim
to move around quickly and, if they were asked for

an account of themselves, their story would only
withstand cursory questioning.
The greatest risk was that Rafe would be
recognized under either of his names. There was
not much that could be done to disguise his
diminutive stature or colouring, but they had to
take the chance, since nobody else could gain access
to Yuellin‘s records.
―I hear we‘ve a VIP visitor,‖ Rafe remarked as
Shikur made out the docking certificate that they
had bought for thirty credits.
―Uh-huh. Came in on the Old Emperor‘s Number
One yacht,‖ Shikur told them. ―To deliver a message
for the Council, or something.‖ He added an
identity-code to the certificate which would
certainly not tally with his own. ―How long do you
want this for?‖
―Half a day,‖ Rafe suggested. ―Although, if we
managed to buy some web-time while we‘re here..?‖
His wink made it clear he was talking about webtime for two, without monitoring.
Shikur sniggered. ―Call Jimsan, in Station
Control. He might be able to arrange something.‖
―Mention your name?‖
―Uh-huh.‖
―That‘s your reputation ruined,‖ Rafe said
playfully as they walked up the radial outside the
dock. ―Did you know you blushed when Shikur gave
you that certificate?‖
Joshim laughed and tucked his hand comfortably
in the back of Rafe‘s belt. ―I plead extreme
provocation.‖ The clowning helped to relieve his
nerves, and Security were likely to be less
suspicious of a couple obviously enjoying
themselves than they were of two solemn faces. He
hoped.

The radial disgorged them onto a hub walkway
and they looked around for signs directing them to
the library. Joshim had not been here before, and
Central was built on a larger scale and to an older
pattern than the stations near the borders of the
Old Empire that he was used to. It took him a
moment to adjust to the layout.
―Thirty degrees left.‖ Rafe spotted the sign first
and led the way around the curved walkway. It was
midmorning, station time, and the walkways were
busy with a mixture of station crew, webbers from
the ships and shuttles in the docks, and occasional
dirtsiders come to negotiate for one of the Guild‘s
services. And, no doubt, to make a few private
arrangements with their counterparts from the
opposing Empire, if the opportunity arose; Central
being the only place in the Twin Empires where
such peaceful contacts were possible.
The library was two-thirds of the way along a
radial, and three levels up. Joshim fixed in his mind
its position relative to the dock where they had left
the shuttle. Out to the ring, thirty degrees right and
down: that was the fastest route back.
Inside the library, an uninterested clerk gestured
them towards the rows of soundproof privacy
booths. Rafe chose the nearest one to the entrance
that was not already in use, locked the door behind
them and then visibly relaxed.
―I feel like I‘ve got my name — both of them —
printed on my forehead out there,‖ he complained
softly. ―How in hell do you look so calm?‖
―Webmaster‘s secret,‖ Joshim said. ―We practice
in front of mirrors.‖ He spun the booth‘s seat
around. ―Sit.‖

Rafe sat, activated the console. ―Before we go
after my record, I want to check something else,‖ he
explained as he requested the station news.
―The Old Emperor‘s yacht?‖ Joshim asked, seeing
what Rafe was scanning.
―Just curious.‖
Joshim read over Rafe‘s shoulder. The yacht
Havedir, assigned for the Emperor Julur‘s use. One
passenger, Braniya Lady Rujur, personal aide to the
Emperor, and her entourage. Arrived two days ago,
duration and purpose of visit unspecified.
―Personal aide?‖ he queried.
―Means she‘s somebody important,‖ Rafe
explained. ―The ones without explicit titles are the
dangerous ones…‖ He froze; another memory had
returned, or almost returned. Joshim waited but
Rafe finally shook his head in frustration. ―Don‘t
say it,‖ he said ruefully. ―I‘m getting a lot of practice
at patience.‖
He cleared the news off the screen and keyed in
the access sequence for Active Records, New
Empire, followed by an identity-code. The screen
spat Unknown Record at them and Rafe swore
mildly.
―You‘ll have to try the Historical Records,‖ he
told Joshim, vacating the seat. ―I‘m obviously dead,
for the third time in my life.‖
Historical Records required a Webmaster‘s
general access rights. Joshim entered his identitycode and inserted his hand in the bio-probe for
confirmation. When his name was displayed on the
screen as a signal that his access rights had been
noted, he entered the sequence for Historical
Records, New Empire.
―Identity-code?‖ he asked.
―NE-P8271-31586.‖

Joshim keyed it in as Rafe supplied it. The screen
said Specify Access Privileges. Joshim answered
None and the screen said Access Denied.
―Bio-locked, as we guessed,‖ Rafe said
thoughtfully. ―Be interesting to find out who has
access besides me, if we can crack those locks.‖
―And if they haven‘t removed your access,‖
Joshim said pessimistically, re-entering the enquiry
sequence. To the question about access privileges,
he replied Bio. Rafe submitted to the bio-probe and
they were looking at the record of Yuellin Lord
Buhklir.
―012/5032. Gharan, Yerjin Zone. Accidental
death,‖ Joshim read the last chronological entry
aloud.
―Some way that didn‘t leave any identifiable
tissue,‖ Rafe predicted. ―Go on to the personal
details. Next of kin.‖
Joshim obeyed. ―Just a comm destination code,‖
he said in disbelief. ―You were expecting your
lover‘s name?‖
―My previous lover,‖ Rafe said deliberately.
―Though that would have been too easy.‖ He
reached around Joshim to scan rapidly through the
rest of the record. ―Nothing else we should follow
up here. Let‘s copy it and go.‖
As they left the library, Joshim glanced back
along the radial towards the hub.
―Damn. Provosts,‖ he alerted Rafe quietly.
―Identity spot-checks, by the look of it.‖
Rafe looked back. ―Act normally. Maybe they‘ll
pick somebody else to hassle. Especially since
you‘re wearing a Webmaster‘s badge.‖
They walked on towards the outer ring,
hyperconscious of the team of provosts behind
them. There was no reason for them to warrant

special attention, Joshim told himself repeatedly,
wishing there were more people in the corridor to
give the provosts a choice.
―Damn it,‖ Rafe said vehemently. ―You‘d think
they could keep the faffing risers working, wouldn‘t
you?‖ He gestured angrily at the Out-of-use sign on
the riser gate. ―We‘ll have to go the long way round,
via the hub.‖
―Identities?‖
The challenge came as soon as they drew level
with the provosts. Predictable, Joshim thought
savagely, trying to remember which gods he had
neglected recently and offering a blanket prayer as
an insurance policy.
―OE-P5971-17529
Joshim,‖
he
answered.
―Webmaster, Bhattya.‖ They would have the extra
information on their portable console soon enough,
and it might help to remind them of his rank.
―Verify, sir.‖ The provost-sergeant squinted at the
readout of the bio-probe. ―I hadn‘t heard Bhattya
was in the Zone.‖
―Just arrived,‖ Joshim explained. ―We‘re on
station to pick up the latest gossip. And to check the
vacancy lists.‖ He was talking too much, he
realized; he should just let the woman get on with
her job.
―NE-P9000-42775 Rafell,‖ Rafe said when he
was asked. ―First, Bhattya.‖
―Yes?‖ The sergeant looked at Rafe suspiciously;
Joshim‘s heart sank as he realized what was wrong.
―Verify,‖ the woman continued. Rafe obeyed and
she looked bemused. ―Chadir, will you take a look at
this. Ever seen anything like it?‖
The second provost looked at the data on the
console. ―Says he‘s dead.‖

―Dead?‖ Rafe protested. ―Do I look dead? What
kind of joke is this?‖
―No joke.‖ The woman showed him the screen.
―Deceased on 309/5043.‖ She grinned. ―It‘s going
to make the top-sergeant‘s day, having to sort this
one out. Chadir, call in and tell them we‘re on our
way home.‖
―Emperors,‖ Joshim protested. ―You‘re not going
to haul us in over a stupid mistake?‖
―We‘re not hauling you in,‖ the sergeant said,
offended. ―We‘re just going to help you sort out the
problem in your First‘s records.‖
―I can do that from Bhattya,‖ Joshim growled.
―And we‘re due on patrol too damned soon for this
nonsense.‖
―Can‘t have dead people wandering about Central
unescorted,‖ the woman said gleefully. ―Even if you
don‘t look very dead, short-stuff,‖ she told Rafe,
―appearances can be deceptive.‖
Did they teach you that in provost-school,
Joshim wondered sourly. It was probably all they
taught, that and the art of finding any excuse to cut
short a patrol.
He sought Rafe‘s eyes, found agreement there.
The corridor was not the place to jump the
provosts, not with their escape route blocked off at
one end. They would have a better chance in the
hub, with the crowd to lose themselves in and a
choice of exits.
―Let‘s get on with it,‖ he told the sergeant
resignedly.
―This is a waste of time,‖ Rafe remarked as the
provosts escorted them along the radial. ―Once the
Commander finds out why we‘re late back, she‘ll kill
me anyway.‖

Joshim grunted an acknowledgement, thinking
ahead. The provost‘s office would not be far from
the hub; he and Rafe would have to act almost as
soon as they reached the walkways. They might get
some covert support from the webbers in the
crowd; evading the provosts was a time-honoured
sport for liberty parties. Since the provosts were not
expecting trouble, they would have the advantage of
surprise, and there was nothing to link them
quickly with their shuttle, whose arrival had gone
undocumented on anything except the flimsy in
Joshim‘s pocket. They could get away with it yet…
―Isn‘t that the Old Emperor‘s high-class go-fetch?
In ten lengths of gold lace?‖ Chadir asked as they
stepped onto the walkway.
―Where?‖
As the sergeant turned her head to look, Rafe and
Joshim dived into the crowd. In opposite
directions, but the important thing was to get away,
Joshim told himself as he dipped in and out of the
bystanders; they would meet up at the shuttle.
The provosts took a second to react, long enough
for Joshim to put several convenient bodies
between him and them.
―I‘ll get the dead one,‖ the sergeant yelled to
Chadir as Joshim swerved around a pack of
goggling dirtsiders. ―You call in for help!‖
That left Joshim free of immediate pursuit. He
rounded an angle in the walkway and ploughed
through a bunch of laughing juniors.
―Maintenance hatch back here,‖ one of them
hissed, pushing him in the right direction. By the
time Chadir passed the group, Joshim was tucked
safely in the access space, hoping that Rafe had had
the same kind of luck. From here, he could take the

ladder down to the level of their shuttle and circle
back round to meet Rafe.
―They got your friend,‖ his rescuer whispered,
halting him as he started down the ladder.
―Damned Security jumped him… Wait a moment.
There‘s some kind of argument going on. Between
Security and the provosts and some aristo, the one
who came in on the Old Emperor‘s fast yacht. Now
the provosts are moving on. The aristo‘s got her
arm round your friend. He doesn‘t look too healthy
— Security must have hit him hard. Now Security
are leaving too, but they don‘t look pleased about it.
Your friend‘s being carried away by those two thugs
that the aristo calls her entourage. Looks like he‘s
out cold. The aristo‘s going with them, towards the
VIP dock. Now they‘re all out of sight.‖
―Thanks,‖ Joshim said through the acid taste in
his mouth. ―Which is the fastest way to the VIP
dock?‖
―Are you crazy? With the provosts and Security
looking all over for you?‖ his rescuer objected. ―Let
the search die down first.‖
―No time,‖ Joshim protested. ―I…‖
―Hold it, provosts,‖ another junior interrupted.
Joshim dropped down below floor level as the
juniors moved to shield the hatch. Gods, why had
Braniya intervened, and what did she want with
Rafe? He remembered the touch of memory that
Rafe had felt in the library, the way he had thought
it necessary to find out about the aristo. Did it mean
that she was involved in his past, that her presence
at Central was no coincidence?
―All clear,‖ the signal came at last.
―The VIP dock,‖ Joshim repeated urgently.
―Down one, right forty-five.‖ As Joshim moved
out of hearing, the voice added, ―He‘s crazy.‖

"He" probably was, Joshim reflected grimly as he
descended. The Security presence around Braniya‘s
ship would be heavy; not even the Old Emperor‘s
aide could snatch a webber from the Guild‘s
custody with impunity. Worse, Joshim had very
little time in which to act; soon his connection with
the unregistered shuttle would be recognized and
he would be cut off from it and from Bhattya. But
he could not abandon Rafe without trying.
The access ways took Joshim out along a radial
as far as the VIP dock and then stopped dead at the
dock‘s safety bulkhead. By crouching down beside a
maintenance hatch half a length from the end, and
peering through the air-grille, he had an angled
view of the dock entrance and the two sets of
guards standing there, a full team from Guild
Security and an equal number wearing the livery of
an aristo. From the tension in their stances, they
were as wary of each other as they were of anybody
approaching, but Joshim had no illusions that they
would not act in concert for as long as it took to
capture him, if they were given the chance.
He retreated down the radial. It was worse than
he had expected. There was no way through that
entrance to the VIP dock, and no visible access to
the dock‘s maintenance space. It would take time to
backtrack, to search for a way in, time that Security
would spend tracing him back to their shuttle. Even
if he did reach the dock, there would be further
guards there and inside Havedir, and if the guards
outside the ship were only armed with sleepguns as
the Guild demanded, the guards within would be
lethally armed. Joshim clenched his fists in angry
impotence, seeing no way that he could rescue Rafe.
―Let us through. We wish to speak to Lady
Rujur.‖

―I‘ll ask if she wishes to speak to you.‖
The curt exchange carried from the entrance to
the dock. Joshim crept back towards its source and
crouched motionless by the air-grille to watch and
listen. Two webbers were waiting by the dock
entrance, denied access by Braniya‘s guards. The
sleeve of one of them bore a Councillor‘s insignia,
and he guessed that the other was equally highly
placed. They must have come to demand Rafe‘s
return, he decided uneasily. Without knowing why
Braniya had snatched Rafe, or who his enemies on
the Council were, it was impossible to know where
he would be safest.
―The Lady Rujur will be here shortly.‖
―We wish to talk to her aboard her ship.‖
―The Lady Rujur will be here shortly,‖ the guard
repeated stolidly.
―Very well.‖ That was the second of the two
Councillors, the woman. Her companion looked
annoyed at the capitulation but did not argue
publicly.
Would the benefits of waiting to hear this
conversation outweigh the risks of being trapped
aboard the station? Joshim fretted. Yes. They had
to. He must learn what he could about Braniya‘s
intentions and the Council‘s; if nothing else, he
must return to Bhattya knowing in whose custody
Rafe was.
The sealed hatch behind the guards opened and a
woman came though. Dressed in ten lengths of gold
lace, one of the provosts had said, and the
description fitted Braniya exactly, but the lace was
the only softness about her. Commandingly tall,
with glossy black hair cut unusually short for an
aristo, she had a presence that fitted Rafe‘s

description well: the ones without explicit titles are
the dangerous ones…
―Councillor Lady Carher, Councillor Ferin. You
wish to talk to me about the unfortunate incident
earlier?‖ Her voice was pitched low and level.
―We do,‖ Ferin agreed grimly. ―More precisely,
we wish you to return the webber whom you
removed from the custody of our Security police.‖
Braniya laughed. ―I should be glad to do so, had I
custody of any such webber. But I only have
custody of a young lad who thought it would be
amusing to impersonate a webber. When your
provosts discovered the deception, he panicked,
with the unfortunate results of which you are
aware.‖
―There were two webbers involved,‖ Ferin
retorted. ―One of whom was positively identified.‖
―And was my ward also positively identified? I
believe that the identity he claimed was that of a
webber who died in a recent, tragic accident. A
careless decision, I thought.‖ She smiled coldly.
―Lady Rujur, there are many things about this
affair which are not easily explained,‖ Ferin said
stubbornly. ―We request that you make your ward
available to answer questions.‖
―I regret that will not be possible at this time,‖
Braniya parried smoothly. ―He is still recovering
from the injuries caused by your security police.
Injuries which will undoubtedly distress the
Emperor Julur, who has a certain fondness for the
youngster. You will recall, Councillor Lady Carher,
that we have discussed the lad in that context
recently.‖
―We have,‖ Carher admitted stiffly. She was
scared, Joshim recognized. Why?

―And you would recognize the lad if you saw him,
would you not?‖ Braniya continued. ―I‘m surprised
you didn‘t recognize the description given by your
Security police. He is, after all, very distinctive. Not
the sort of person about whom one easily makes a
mistake.‖ The aristo seemed amused by the idea.
―Would it satisfy you both if Councillor Lady Carher
verified that my ward is who I say he is and not
some abducted member of your Guild?‖
―Councillor Ferin should also verify that your
ward meets the description of the webber we seek,‖
Carher said quickly.
―Of course, Councillor Lady Carher.‖ Braniya
smiled widely. ―Since I‘m accused of the abduction
of a webber, I can understand your desire for safety
in numbers.‖ She was taking pleasure in baiting
Carher, her words seeming to have a hidden,
uncomfortable meaning for the Councillor.
―On reflection, I see no need for either of us to
verify your ward‘s identity,‖ Carher said hastily.
―The description I heard could be nobody else.‖
Ferin glared at her but she ignored him.
Carher was scared that, if she went aboard
Braniya‘s ship, she would not be allowed to leave,
Joshim realized. And she knew who it was that
Braniya had rescued from Security. Which could
only mean that she was one of those responsible for
what had happened to Rafe.
―My ward does have a reputation for causing
trouble, does he not?‖ Braniya was murmuring.
―Now that this matter is resolved to universal
satisfaction, you‘ll allow me to return to his
bedside? We shall wish to leave soon. The Emperor
will wish his protégé to recuperate in the Imperial
Palace.‖ She gave Carher another of her freezing
smiles. ―We will have to continue our discussions at

a later time, Councillor Lady Carher. But be certain,
I shall find time to fit them in.‖
And that was a threat, not a promise. A careless
decision, I thought. The Emperor Julur,..has a
certain fondness for the youngster…. Notice was
being served that Carher would not escape
retaliation for the attempts on Rafe‘s life. As
Braniya disappeared through the hatch to the dock,
Joshim did not find it reassuring that Rafe was in
her hands.
***
Rallya plucked at the pins that held her shubcoated plaits close to her head as she sat at the edge
of her web-position to hear Joshim out. The
intervention of the provosts had been pure bad
luck, but it seemed that in every direction that they
turned in this tangle, there was a new hand
meddling. Braniya, aide to the Old Emperor…
Rallya slowly licked the shub from her lips. That
was raising the stakes in this game higher than she
had anticipated.
―I want ears open for any whisper of this on the
full comms band,‖ she told Jualla, who was waiting
anxiously for orders. ―And I want to know the
movements of every ship within sensor range.‖
So. The obvious precautions had all been taken.
Bhattya was on full alert, her sensors wide open,
her web full, her comp programmed with a
sequence of escape jumps in case they had to flee.
All that remained to be done was to extricate Rafe
from Braniya‘s clutches. All, Rallya snorted silently.
The little scut caused havoc in no proportion to his
size.

―Are we going to get him back, ma‘am?‖ Jualla
lingered to ask.
Rallya pressed her lips together. ―One way or
another,‖ she promised. ―Although I hadn‘t planned
to take on the Old Emperor as well as the Guild
Council. At least, not at the same time.‖ And when
Jualla repeats that, the web-room will think that
everything is under control, she thought wryly.
―You think the Old Emperor himself is involved?‖
Joshim asked in disbelief when Jualla had gone. ―If
he‘s broken his Oath…‖ He trailed off, unwilling to
follow that thought to its unsettling conclusion.
―Braniya is his Palace Security Chief,‖ Rallya said
bluntly, ―or so the rumour goes. When she moves,
it‘s because he‘s pulling the strings. Gods, Joshim,‖
she exploded, ―why can‘t your pretty boy be
satisfied with the kind of enemies that the rest of us
make?‖ She gestured angrily that she did not expect
an answer. ―At least now we‘ve put names to both
sets of his enemies. If there are only two,‖ she
added drily. ―He seems to have a talent for
collecting them.‖
Joshim smiled tightly. ―And they for collecting
him.‖ He moved restlessly to the centre of the web,
watched the activity displayed on the monitor
there. ―We‘ve got no choice now,‖ he said abruptly.
―We‘ve got to petition the Council for a hearing,
before they allow Braniya to take Rafe away.‖
Rallya sighed. ―We can‘t do that,‖ she said gently.
―Rafe is only safe with Braniya as long as she
believes that his significance is still a secret. No
matter how important his life is to the Old
Emperor, Braniya would kill him rather than let
him give evidence about Julur‘s Oath-breaking.
And Havedir is an immune ship,‖ she added,
forestalling Joshim‘s next protest. ―If we tried to

take him back by force, we‘d be fighting every other
ship in the zone. And if by some miracle we won
against odds like that, we‘d have forfeited any
chance of getting a hearing afterwards.‖
―What are we going to do then?‖ Joshim
demanded. ―Slink back to Aramas and pretend
nothing has happened? Let Braniya take Rafe to the
Old Emperor, who doesn‘t give a two-credit kiss for
Rafe as a person, only as a pawn? Who may decide
to give him another identity-wipe and another
identity outside the Guild? Who may decide to kill
him after all because he isn‘t worth the trouble or
the risk and more?‖ He stopped shouting as
abruptly as he had started and turned his back on
Rallya. ―I should have tried to get him out when I
had the chance,‖ he said bitterly.
Rallya stood up, ignoring the twinge in her hip,
seized his shoulders and shook him fiercely. ―You
never had a chance,‖ she said vehemently. ―If you
had, you‘d have taken it, and Rafe will know that
too. So stop wallowing in guilt and answer this.
What use is a pawn to Julur? Any pawn?‖
Joshim turned back to face her, his attention
caught. ―Ultimately everything Julur does is aimed
at Ayvar,‖ he said slowly.
―The New Emperor,‖ Rallya confirmed. ―If Julur
has a use for Rafe, Ayvar will want to know what‘s
going on.‖
Joshim‘s face clouded. ―What good can he do?‖
he asked. ―He can‘t dictate to the Guild. If he could
dictate to Julur, we‘d have one Empire, not two.
And Rafe will still die as soon as Julur realizes that
he‘s a threat.‖
―Possibly,‖ Rallya conceded brutally. ―There isn‘t
any certainty in this, Joshim, but it‘s the only
chance we‘ve got. Rafe‘s life is the least important

thing at stake now,‖ she added ruthlessly. ―Julur‘s
broken his Oath. At least one member of the
Council has broken hers. If we don‘t act against
them now, we can say goodbye to the Guild that we
know. And we can‘t win against opposition like that
without support from an Emperor as well as from
within the Guild. And we have to have something
ready to fill the vacuum that will be left when we‘ve
won. Which means we need Ayvar.‖ She laughed
without humour. ―Not that I think he‘s any better
than the other one. He may even be worse. But he‘s
the only Emperor I‘ve got left to play.‖
―You‘re talking about giving both Empires to
Ayvar? About changing everything?‖ Joshim
breathed.
His doubts helped to ease Rallya‘s own. ―If
necessary,‖ she said more confidently. ―If there‘s no
other choice. Most people live their entire lives
without caring how many Empires there are, or
who claims to own them. It only makes a difference
to damned aristos like Rafe who get themselves
involved with matters above their heads. And it‘s
long past time the Guild stopped shoring up a
ridiculous war whose sole purpose is to stop two
immortal fools from getting bored.‖
Joshim inhaled deeply, then let his breath go in a
rush. ―The worst thing is, Rafe would agree with
you about this,‖ he said grimly. ―Well, if we‘re going
to change the shape of history, we‘d better get
started. I‘ll take over from Vidar in the web. You go
and tell the web-room what‘s going on.‖
Rallya
nodded,
then
took his
wrists
affectionately.
―Don‘t,‖ Joshim said, refusing the comfort she
wanted to offer.

***
Rafe splashed cold water on his face, dribbled it
over his head, temporarily driving back the
unmistakable after-pain of a sleepbeam. A
stateroom was the last place he had expected to
wake; neither the provosts not Security habitually
provided such accommodation for their guests.
Which left a very large question to be answered:
whose guest was he?
Or rather, whose prisoner. When he tried the
door of the stateroom, it was locked. There was an
intercomm on the wall that might yield the
answers, but he ignored it in favour of a rapid
examination of the rest of his surroundings.
Standard model luxury stateroom, the storage units
empty except for a selection of clothes that were
suspiciously close to his size and had the look of
new fabric. An inactive console, hidden behind a
decorative panel of real wood. A range of personal
items in the san, all new. Nothing that suggested
how he had arrived here, or why.
He remembered being trapped between Security
and the provost sergeant, catching the edge of a
sleepbeam as he moved to avoid it. After that, his
memory was less clear. A condition he should be
accustomed to by now, he jibed at himself. There
was a vague impression of being supported by
somebody, then the deadening sensation of another
sleepbeam. Then nothing until this stateroom.
He contemplated the intercomm. Notify his
captors that he was conscious, or wait for them to
come to check? Or did they have the stateroom
under observation, and already know that he was
awake? It might be informative to wait, to confirm

that he was being watched. He lay back on the
spacious bed.
Wherever he was, he was not aboard a ship in
transit; the almost subliminal vibration of a ship‘s
drive was absent. Still at Central then. Or had they
kept him unconscious long enough to take him
elsewhere, he thought in an instant‘s panic. No. If
they wanted to keep him unconscious so long, they
would have used drugs, not a sleepbeam. His
headache had the heavy overtones that only a
sleepbeam left behind.
―They could have provided me with some
painkillers,‖ he said experimentally.
Had Joshim escaped? If he had not had the same
bad luck as Rafe, there was an excellent chance that
he had, Rafe decided with relief. Which meant that
Bhattya had the evidence of Yuellin‘s record. My
old record, he corrected himself, although Yuellin‘s
memories still did not seem an integral part of him.
That would come, Joshim had promised; it was the
gaps that caused the illusion of distance.
The stateroom door opened with a whisper. Rafe
opened his eyes and looked at the woman who
stood there. Ten lengths of gold lace, one of the
provosts had said, and Braniya Lady Rujur was still
wearing it. He remembered the moment in the
library when a memory had almost returned and
was only slightly surprised.
―Did you bring the painkillers?‖ he asked
impudently.
She inclined her head courteously. ―I did.‖ She
placed two tablets on a convenient surface. ―Should
I introduce myself?‖
―It would eliminate the possibility that I‘ve
guessed incorrectly,‖ Rafe told her, sitting up and
reaching for the tablets.

―Guessed?‖
―I don‘t recall that we‘ve ever met.‖ Rafe
examined the tablets. They looked like the
painkillers they were said to be and he dissolved
them in his mouth gratefully.
―Braniya Lady Rujur, your host,‖ Braniya
confirmed. ―And you are Rafell, a member of the
Guild of Webbers. Or you were until your recent
death. And you‘re correct. We have never met.‖
―I shall have to take your word for that, Lady
Rujur, since I have trouble with my memory from
time to time.‖ Rafe bowed politely. ―Including the
period covering my arrival here, and the reasons for
it.‖ Had Braniya discovered his identity before she
intervened, or afterwards?
―You‘re here because it suits me to have you here.
And since you are officially dead, the Guild cannot
reclaim you,‖ Braniya added with cold humour.
―Which is to your advantage as well as mine, since
there are certain interests within the Guild who
would wish to turn an official fact into reality.‖
Rafe grinned back. ―I had noticed,‖ he said
plainly. ―It can be dangerous to be associated with
me.‖
Braniya took a seat, her lace rustling around her.
Armour-cloth, not lace, Rafe realized. And there
was the faint glow of a field-shield around her head.
A powerful woman with her own enemies. Rafe
shivered without moving. Braniya knew too much
about him for hers to be a recent interest. Was she
the one who wanted him alive, but identity-wiped?
He would have to guard every word, in case she
realized how much he had remembered. Aide to the
Old Emperor… A ferreter in corners, an enforcer of
secret policies? Gods, was he part of one such secret
policy?

―We could amuse ourselves indefinitely, fencing
with each other for information,‖ Braniya said
when she was comfortable, her hands clasped
incongruously on her lap like a highbred child.
―However, for reasons which need not interest you,
I have a desire to learn certain specific facts from
you and no others. In return for your answers, I
offer equally specific answers to certain of your
questions.‖
―And if I don‘t take your bargain?‖
―Then you will never receive your answers, but I
will receive mine, eventually.‖
―Whether I wish to give them or not,‖ Rafe
deduced. ―Tell me, Lady Rujur, do you conduct your
own interrogations?‖
―I have said, there are things about you I have no
wish to learn. But you will be interrogated, yes.‖
She frowned momentarily. ―Or perhaps not. The
decision is not mine.‖
―Whose decision is it?‖
―Answers for answers, Rafell.‖
―What happens if I inadvertently tell you
something you‘d rather not know?‖ Rafe asked
mischievously..
―At the worst, I would have to submit to a partial
memory-wipe,‖ Braniya said calmly.
―I don‘t recommend it,‖ Rafe advised. ―It‘s an
unpleasant state in which to live.‖
Braniya smiled wintrily. ―It is nevertheless a state
of living. My predecessor made the mistake of
trying to learn too much about you; it lead to his
death. I shall not repeat his error.‖
Or at least, not when there is a chance of it being
discovered, Rafe thought cynically. Braniya did not
seem to be somebody who would accept willingly a
restriction on her curiosity. And it would be

instructive to learn how she knew about her
predecessor‘s mistake.
―Were you the one to report his transgression?‖
he asked provocatively.
―Your profile says that you‘re clever,‖ Braniya
conceded. ―Clever enough to accept my bargain?‖
―Or fool enough,‖ Rafe agreed, lying back on the
bed with his hands under his head. ―Your
questions, Lady Rujur?‖
―Clever and cocky,‖ she said measuringly. ―Why
are you at Central?‖
―Because there have been two attempts on my
life. To my knowledge,‖ Rafe added thoughtfully. ―I
may have missed others. Or they missed me.‖
―Two attempts only,‖ Braniya said confidently.
―The attempt to destroy Avannya, and the
malfunction in Bhattya‘s web.‖
―Which you believed had succeeded,‖ Rafe said
casually.
―Which I was investigating.‖ That was all that
Braniya would admit. ―Whose idea was it to report
you dead?‖
―Not mine. At the time, I was very nearly dead.‖
―Bhattya‘s Commander,‖ Braniya decided. ―She‘s
got a good reputation, in her limited field.‖ She
would not say that if she had ever met Rallya, Rafe
thought with bleak amusement. It was a slight
comfort to think that Braniya was underestimating
one of her enemies. ―Why did you come to
Central?‖ Braniya continued.
―Something Sajan said before she died.‖ Rafe saw
the briefest frown on Braniya‘s face. She did not
know about Sajan, but she was not going to admit
it. ―I reminded her of somebody she knew in the
New Empire. An aristo called…‖
―Not the name,‖ Braniya said sharply.

Rafe considered giving it to her anyway, out of
spite. But the woman had information he wanted,
and might withhold it if he provoked her too far.
―An aristo from the New Empire,‖ he continued.
―I came to Central to see if I could read this aristo‘s
records. Which I couldn‘t,‖ he added flatly. ―The
rest you know.‖
―Your companion?‖ Braniya waited a few
moments, then accepted that Rafe was not going to
answer. ―Your Webmaster lover, no doubt. You‘ll be
pleased to hear that he escaped. A shuttle left the
station shortly after you both escaped from the
provosts, and joined a ship just over the border of
the Disputed Zone. The ship — which I assume to
have been Bhattya — jumped within an hour of the
shuttle‘s return, without making any attempt to
contact Central about a missing crew-member. You
wouldn‘t care to speculate about their plans?‖
Rafe shook his head. ―I couldn‘t begin to guess
what Rallya will do,‖ he said truthfully. Rallya had
the evidence that Rafe and Yuellin were the same
person, and that Yuellin could not have been
lawfully identity-wiped. Was she going to gather
support from within the Guild, thinking that Rafe
was being held by Central Support, and thus losing
his trail when Braniya took him…?
―Where do you intend taking me?‖ he asked.
―To the Imperial Palace.‖ By which she meant the
Old Imperial Palace; like most aristos in the Old
Empire, she only admitted the existence of one
Palace.
―For the Emperor, or am I not quite that
important?‖ Rafe asked with a pretense of
arrogance. The idea unaccountably started his
stomach churning.

―For the Emperor,‖ she said imperturbably. ―As
you‘ve discovered already, you‘ll travel in comfort.
The Emperor has ordered that you come to no
harm.‖
―Was that before or after the efforts to kill me?‖
―There will be steps taken against those
responsible,‖ Braniya promised. ―Elanis Lord
Khalem is already enjoying my hospitality.‖ She
smiled again, with her mouth alone. ―Not as much
as you are, I assure you. And he will enjoy it even
less, now that his guilt in this in proven.‖
Nobody had told Elanis that the Old Emperor
was involved, Rafe guessed; the arrogant aristo
would never have had the nerve to go against
Julur‘s wishes. But he would get no sympathy from
Rafe; for Churi‘s death, he deserved whatever
punishment Braniya planned.
―I may give Danriya Lady Carher her freedom a
while longer,‖ Braniya said thoughtfully, unclasping
her hands. ―She will make a suitable diversion to
occupy your Commander.‖ She nodded with
satisfaction. ―Yes. Carher will fight for control of the
Guild, for the power she hopes will save her. And
while the Guild tears itself apart, who will be
looking for a long-dead Oath-breaker?‖
Rafe withheld his reaction, knowing too well that
what she planned was possible and the
repercussions would be disastrous. A prolonged
power struggle within the Guild would destroy the
impartiality on which its strength was based, giving
the Emperors a chance to gather up the fragments.
He was chilled by the thought of the Guild split
between the Emperors, carrying the war out of the
Disputed Zone into regions where people lived.
Gods, would Rallya see the risk? Even if she did,

and abandoned the battle before it began, Carher
had nothing to lose.
―Have I answered all your questions?‖ Braniya
inquired.
―What does the Emperor plan to do with me?‖
Rafe asked. ―Or is that something else he won‘t let
you know?‖
―I can‘t say,‖ Braniya said haughtily. ―He has a
certain regard for your physical health, but I expect
you to undergo a new identity-wipe. And perhaps
cosmetic surgery to alter your appearance before
you‘re placed in a new environment. That will be
my recommendation.‖
―Recommend another twenty cents in height,
would you?‖ Rafe asked cheerfully. ―I‘m getting a
pain in my neck looking up at you.‖
When she had gone, Rafe closed his eyes and for
a moment gave in to despair behind them. By the
time Rallya had wrested control of the Guild from
Carher — and he had to believe that she would do
so because the alternative was too bleak to consider
— his memory would have been ripped from him
again. And his face, and his web, he realized
bitterly. And this time there would be no mistakes
made in the identity-wipe, no loopholes left
through which memory could return. Under
interrogation he would reveal all that he had
remembered — nobody could hold out against the
truthseeking drugs — and they would finally and
irrevocably steal him from himself.
If he waited for them to do it, he thought angrily.
How would Julur react if Braniya delivered a selfkilled corpse? Although, he realized as he thought
about it further, there was nothing in the stateroom
with which killing himself would be easy or certain.
He recoiled from the grotesque self-mutilations

that were his only choices if he wished to commit
suicide. And from the idea of giving in when there
was still time left to fight.
What did Julur want him for? Gods, it made no
sense, that the Old Emperor had broken his Oath to
the Guild for Rafe‘s sake. If the truth were ever
discovered, the Guild could withdraw its Oath to
Julur and their services from his Empire. The chaos
that would follow could topple Julur, which was the
real reason that the Emperors kept their Oaths.
Even if the danger of division within the Guild
made it likely now that Julur would escape the full
consequences of his action, ten years ago when he
had Rafe kidnapped he would have had no such
reassurance.
Somewhere in the missing memories between the
F‘sair warship and waking as Rafell the Oathbreaker, a memory of Julur must be lurking. Of
Julur, of Braniya‘s predecessor, of interrogation, of
the process of identity-wipe… No wonder he shrank
from remembering that part, Rafe thought ruefully.
Braniya had aroused no memories, or nothing
specific, only the odd certainty that she reminded
him of somebody. He was probably thinking of her
dead predecessor, he decided sourly. Would
meeting Julur trigger anything fresh? A memory
that gave the reason behind this inexplicable
tangle? Joshim had said that meeting somebody
who figured in the missing memories could cause
them to return.
There was something that could be deduced from
Julur‘s interest in him, he thought darkly, and that
was that the New Emperor must have a
corresponding interest. Yuellin had been an aristo
in the New Empire and the head of a family; surely
he must have met the New Emperor at some point

in his life. As a child, he had been presented for the
Emperor‘s acknowledgement as the Buhklir heir.
He strained to remember, but it was too long ago or
too unmemorable to the infant he had been; all he
could recall was being dressed with great precision
by his nurse, and the stern back of his uncle
preceding him up an endless aisle. When he tried to
remember another occasion he had been at court,
he failed.
Was that the pattern of the residual identitywipe, he thought excitedly. Did it cover the periods
when he had visited the New Imperial Palace? If
Yuellin‘s lover had been at court, Julur would have
taken extra trouble to erase those memories, to
expunge everything to do with the Emperor Ayvar.
His excitement faded as he realized that knowing
the pattern of the missing memories was no help in
recovering them. There were a thousand
explanations he could invent for the pattern, and
Joshim had warned him that true memories were
easily concealed by an overactive imagination. Rafe
wished miserably that Joshim was with him, to
comfort him, to drive away the fear that Braniya
had sown so effectively. Still, if he could not have
that comfort, he could have the satisfaction of
applying Joshim‘s Aruranist techniques to
consolidate the memories he had and to chip away
at the barriers remained. Havedir could not reach
the Old Imperial Palace in less than ten days, not
when Julur‘s paranoiac security stopped ships from
jumping into his defensive sphere. By the time
Julur tried to steal his identity again, Rafe swore he
would have reclaimed it fully. And when he knew
what had happened to him in the Old Emperor‘s
hands last time, he would be better prepared to

change things this time. As long as he knew who he
was, he still had a chance.

Security alert dated 346/5043,
for the attention of Yulenda, Head of Security,
New Imperial Palace
Facial pattern HA-72541 matched on entry at Main
shuttleport. Subject identifies self as Guild Webmaster
Joshim, accompanied by Guild Commander Rallya.
Webber status verified by bio-probe. Routine
surveillance continues.
347/5043
IMPERIAL ZONE, NEW EMPIRE

―We‘re being followed,‖ Joshim said without
warning. ―Tall, dark haired woman, yellow-brown
skin, deep brown tunic. At the top of the steps
now.‖
Rallya squinted in the bright sunshine, looking
along the trackcar platform for the woman that he
described and cursing the milling crowd of tourists
blocking her view. Everything on New Imperial was
hidden behind a crowd of tourists, or else — like the
New Emperor — swaddled in layers of equally
impenetrable bureaucracy. But at least the
bureaucracy could be bypassed, or would be when
Rallya had her way. The only good thing that could
be said for the tourists was that they allowed her
and Joshim to move anonymously around the city.
And if Joshim was right, they were not even doing
that effectively.
―She‘s out of sight now,‖ Joshim said. ―She‘ll pick
us up again down on the street.‖
―Are you sure she‘s following us?‖ Rallya asked
sceptically.
―Certain,‖ Joshim insisted. ―She was outside the
hotel when we left. She didn‘t get onto that trackcar

until she was sure we were taking it. She waited
until we got off before she did. And she watches
everyone around her all the time. With the notable
exception of us. Every time she looks at us, her eyes
skid past as if we were greased.‖
Rallya grunted less doubtfully. Even distracted
with worry about Rafe, Joshim could be trusted to
notice a detail like that, and to interpret it correctly.
But, if they were being followed, who had arranged
it? Nobody should have been able to guess where
Bhattya had gone after Central. Nobody should
have been able to locate them so quickly on New
Imperial, unless they had been spotted at the
shuttleport when they arrived. And if that was the
case, the place was more thoroughly riddled with
Julur‘s agents than Rallya had expected. They were
right to be avoiding the official channels for
contacting Ayvar, the channels that would have
carried their request to every interested ear in the
Palace. Safer — and quicker — to find somebody to
help cut through the bureaucracy and get them a
secret audience with the New Emperor. Yuellin‘s
lover or his cousin, once either had been identified.
If one of them could be trusted — and if the
presence of the woman following them had not
changed everything.
What instructions had Julur‘s agents been given
about Bhattya, and when? Braniya must have sent
a warning to watch for Bhattya before she left
Central; the woman deserved credit for covering all
the options, Rallya admitted grudgingly. The
important question was whether she had issued
instructions only to watch and report, or orders to
prevent them from making contact with Ayvar.
―Is she alone?‖ she asked Joshim as they took the
steps down to street level themselves.

―I‘ve not seen anyone else.‖
―Hmm.‖ If Joshim said she was alone, she was
alone. Which suggested that she only held a
watching brief; that Braniya had not guessed their
intention when she issued her orders. So, they were
in no immediate danger. And if they could dislodge
the spy or distract her, maybe they could still
accomplish what they came to do.
When they reached the street, the woman was
examining the fruit in a street vendor‘s booth a few
paces away. As they passed, she glanced up to
watch them in the mirror behind the display of
fruit. A few moments to let them get a safe distance
ahead and she would be in place behind them
again, Rallya judged. Did she know she had been
spotted? If she was wearing an audiohancer, she
must know, but in the crowd of tourists an
audiohancer would be a liability. Even if she did
know and had called for help, it would not arrive in
time to forestall what Rallya planned.
―Let‘s get something to drink,‖ she said, leading
Joshim into the nearby eating-house which
occupied the ground floor of one of the massive
creamstone buildings that formed the heart of the
city. Inside, she chose a booth screened by the
greenery that New Imperial‘s citizens miserably
failed to keep in its proper place, out of doors: let
the woman read their lips through that!
Joshim gave their order to the table attendant
and sat back, glancing significantly at the choice of
exits. The woman entered and took a booth that
would allow her to see when they left but not close
enough to draw their attention. She did not know
she had been spotted, Rallya decided with
satisfaction, or was not sure of it.

The drinks arrived, refreshing in the morning
heat. Rallya waited for the attendant to withdraw,
then said, ―We leave here one at a time in different
directions. She‘ll have to choose one of us to follow.
Whoever it is takes her on a fool‘s errand.‖ She
scowled, reckoning that as Commander, she would
be the one condemned to a wasted day. But Joshim
knew more of Yuellin‘s history, would be more
competent than she was to do the research that
needed to be done. And with Rafe‘s life at stake, she
could rely on him to be wary about whom he
approached for help. ―The other goes on with our
original plan. We meet up again this evening at the
hotel.‖ And be careful; no need to add that.
―If one of us goes missing?‖ Joshim asked
bluntly.
―Scrap the plan and go for the direct approach,‖
Rallya told him. ―Make as much noise about it as
possible. We‘ll have lost the advantage of secrecy
anyway.‖ If one of them went missing, it would be
because the watcher‘s role had changed; neither of
them was a match for a professional assassin. She
was glad that she had left Vidar behind with
Bhattya rather than bring him along to be yet
another target. She snorted angrily. If she was
starting to congratulate herself on obvious
decisions like that, it was past time that they were
moving.
***
―And here is the Great Throne Room,‖ the guide
announced, gesturing dramatically through a
enormous pair of double-height doors. ―Here, the
Emperor meets his subjects in ceremonies going

back to the dawn of the Empire. Masked, upon his
Great Throne…‖
Joshim tuned out the commentary as he followed
the rest of the tour party through the doors, a few
paces behind his faithful shadow. He wondered
sourly if she was enjoying herself on the fool‘s
errand that Rallya had called for, and also, angrily,
why she had chosen to follow him. It was hard
enough to know that there was little he could do to
help Rafe; it was unbearable to be prevented from
doing even that little.
Rallya would have reached the Imperial Archives
by now, might even have discovered the names they
needed to know, be on her way to ask for help from
one of them. Rafe‘s cousin probably. She would be
the easiest to find; New Imperial was the Buhklir
homeworld and the Buhklir estate was on the edge
of the city. If Rallya had listened when she was told
that Rafe had been confident that his cousin could
be trusted, they could have gone straight there
without wasting any time. Or one of them could, he
reminded himself bitterly.
He glared round the cavernous room,
remembering the role that he was playing. Walls
clad in fine mosaics and studded with precious
stones, a floor tiled with clouded crystal, and at the
far end of the room, a simple wooden throne raised
on a dais and another pair of double-height doors.
Beside the dais, a pair of impassive guards stood,
dressed in a ceremonial black and silver livery and
armed with far from ceremonial flash-swords. Two
more guards stood in front of the doors behind the
dais, the four of them the only sign of security
Joshim had seen during the tour. Were they there
to reinforce the dignity of the throne, or were they
guarding something else? The doors, of course. The

New Emperor would not enter his Throne Room
through the public halls; the doors behind the
throne must lead to the inner palace.
Joshim crossed the floor to the foot of the dais. A
pair of children were standing there, daring each
other to climb the steps to the throne, apparently
ignored by the guards. That would change as soon
as one of them plucked up courage, Joshim
thought. He grinned as he watched the girl push the
boy — her brother, by the look of them — onto the
first step. The nearest guard moved, as if to warn
them away, then looked at Joshim and, to his
intense interest, hesitated as if doubting his
approval. Why should his presence and apparent
indulgence influence her?
―Come away from there!‖ the children‘s escort
called and they went back to him guiltily. Joshim
gave the guards another experimental grin and was
rewarded by a visible stiffening of their backs. They
thought that they recognized him, he realized
excitedly. Who did they think he was? And more
importantly, where did they think he was allowed to
go?
The guide was shepherding his charges out of the
Throne Room, promising them the delights of the
Crown Jewels. Joshim‘s shadow would leave
without a glance behind her, too cautious to betray
herself by overt interest and quite reasonably
convinced that there was no way he could escape
her inside the palace. But if he could get through
those double doors… Although, what would he do if
he could? Well, there was a way of finding out. And
the gods knew he had been praying for a chance to
do something; they would not offer it again if he
refused it now.

He lingered until he was the last in the room,
then walked casually around the dais, jerked his
head at the doors and raised his eyebrows in what
he hoped was an obvious gesture, not wanting to
speak because his voice might betray him. The
guards at the door saluted smartly. One of them
spoke a word into the voice-lock, pressed his palm
onto the contact pad; his companion pulled the
door open. Joshim nodded his thanks and walked
through. The door closed silently behind him.
To his relief, the wide corridor immediately in
front of him was empty. On either side of him,
stairways led up; above him, the lowered ceiling
suggested a viewing gallery looking out over the
Throne Room. He paused to think. How far would
his luck take him? Just entering the palace should
bring him quickly to the attention of a higher level
of authority than he and Rallya could have reached
through the normal channels. Should he settle for
that, or should he try to reach the New Emperor?
He laughed at his own presumption. He could
hardly wander unchallenged around the palace
until he found the man; his impersonation might
have fooled the guards, but it would not survive a
sterner test.
The corridor led to an octagonal courtyard, a
sunny water-garden surrounded on all sides by
shaded walkways. There were three more corridors
beyond the walkways, and nothing to tempt him up
any of them. There was also a seat where he could
sit and watch the fountain; it was as good a place as
any to be found. He did not want his intentions to
be mistaken, and he certainly did not want to give
the New Emperor‘s security staff any reason to
think he was dangerous; it was too important that
he get a hearing. If he waited here until they came

for him — and they would, once his absence from
the tour party had been discovered and the guards
in the Throne Room had been questioned — he
might intrigue them enough for them to listen.
It was thirty minutes before anybody came, just one
woman with curly grey hair, short, plump, Joshim‘s
age or a little younger. Dressed in black and silver
that echoed the livery of the guards in the Throne
Room, she wore a flash-sword at her belt, but she
was not a guard. Joshim studied her with interest,
wondering who had taken his bait.
―You like the garden,‖ she said with a hint of
amusement. Her voice had the soft accent that he
associated with Rafe and he flinched momentarily.
She did not miss it.
―Something wrong?‖ she asked.
―Your voice reminds me of somebody,‖ he told
her.
―And you bear a close resemblance to somebody
else.‖ She sat down beside him.
―So I‘ve discovered, although I don‘t know who.‖
―Don‘t you?‖ She patently did not believe him.
―That didn‘t stop you taking advantage of it.‖
―I have a need to be here,‖ Joshim said mildly. ―A
need to talk to the Emperor.‖
―Have you?‖ the woman said dangerously. ―Have
you indeed, Webmaster Joshim?‖
They had worked quickly to discover his identity.
―May I know your name?‖ he asked.
―Yulenda.‖ She watched him closely for a
reaction, as if he might recognize it. ―If you have a
need to talk to the Emperor,‖ she continued, ―why
are you sitting here?‖
―Would I have found him if I‘d looked?‖

Yulenda laughed, genuinely amused. ―No. And
you won‘t find him by asking to see him either. Not
until I‘ve heard what you‘ve got to say.‖
Joshim searched her face. Not an honest face,
because it hid a great deal, but a face he trusted
instinctively.
―It‘s about the Old Emperor and the Guild and
somebody called Yuellin Buhklir,‖ he said, making
his decision.
―Is it?‖ She stood up abruptly. ―Then it‘s nothing
we should discuss out here. Come to my office to
talk.‖
―The name means something to you,‖ Joshim
realized, alarmed by the strength of her reaction.
―Among other things, he was my cousin. And a
very good friend.‖
―It‘s an interesting story,‖ Yulenda said
thoughtfully. ―Do you have any proof that your Rafe
is the same person as Lin?‖
―I‘ve Rafe‘s record and Yuellin‘s in my
infocorder.‖ Joshim set it on the desk in front of
him. ―If the bio-locks are compared with each
other, and with his medical records if they still
exist…‖
―I‘ll have it done now.‖ Yulenda clipped the
infocorder to her belt. ―You have a personal interest
in this, don‘t you?‖ she added shrewdly.
Joshim nodded. He had not tried to keep his
feelings out of his story, was not surprised that she
had detected them. ―If the bio-locks match, what
will you do?‖
―I‘m going to take your story to my superior. He‘ll
make that decision.‖ She paused to study Joshim‘s
face and smiled, the first time she had done so. ―If
you‘re telling the truth — and I‘d like to believe you

are — your face is one hell of a coincidence. And if
you‘re not telling the truth, it was done by one hell
of a good surgeon. It isn‘t a perfect match, but it‘s
damn close.‖
―Who do I look like? Somebody Yuellin knew?‖
He had the answer before she spoke. Yuellin‘s
lover. Rafe had not seen Joshim‘s face in the
arthane trance; he had seen the face he had been
struggling to see. If they had only realized that then,
Joshim thought bitterly, it would have unlocked the
rest of his memory and they would not have needed
to make that catastrophic visit to Central…
―You look like my superior,‖ Yulenda was saying.
―He may want to talk to you and Commander
Rallya himself, so I‘ll have her collected and
brought here, when you tell me where to find her.‖
―The Archives,‖ Joshim said automatically.
―Trying to find out who you are. And Yuellin‘s
lover.‖ How much of Rafe‘s love for him had been
an echo of his love for the stranger who shared his
face? Gods, as if that mattered now, when there was
no guarantee that he was even alive…Let us get him
back safely, Joshim prayed, before we start dividing
him between us.
―You‘d better warn whoever approaches Rallya to
be careful,‖ he remembered to warn Yulenda. ―She‘s
ready for trouble. One of Julur‘s agents was
following us this morning. That‘s why we split up.‖
―Tall woman, with you when you entered the
palace?‖ When Joshim nodded, Yulenda frowned.
―She‘s mine. When we‘ve time, I‘d like to know how
you spotted her. It shouldn‘t happen, at least not
when she‘s trailing amateurs. But Rallya‘s right to
be careful. Braniya and her people are very
thorough. Too much interest in Lin‘s history will
bring somebody around to ask why.‖

***
Rallya dismissed the Court Record (300-325/5008)
from her screen and called up the next in the
sequence, cursing under her breath at the
procession of old and worthless news. Aristos
getting born and dying, making alliances and
breaking them, winning court appointments and
losing them… Everything, in fact, except the one
item she was searching for, the appointment of a
regent for the underage heir to Buhklir.
Getting the date of Yuellin‘s succession had been
simple; his obituary gave it, and the name of his
cousin, and the names of the aristos who had
attended his memorial rites. But there was no
indication that one of the aristos had meant more
to him than the others, that any of them had
attended out of more than duty, in spite of the
glowing words of the death-notice. Held in deep
affection at court and sorely missed… Rallya
snorted derisively; after she was dead, they would
tell similar lies about her.
She had just started to scan the next Court
Record when there was a quiet tap on the door of
her carrel. As she turned to look, the door opened
and a stranger stepped inside without waiting to be
invited.
―Excuse me, Commander. I must ask you to come
with me,‖ he said politely.
―Not without knowing who you are,‖ Rallya said
flatly. ―And why.‖ There was no getting past him to
the door, and her ears told her that he had at least
one companion outside; they did not intend to lose
her again. She wondered anxiously what had

happened to Joshim and, in passing, how they had
found her.
―Emperor‘s security police, ma‘am. That‘s all I
can tell you here.‖
Which Emperor? she asked herself sourly, as if
she did not know. ―Prove it,‖ she challenged him.
―My identification, ma‘am.‖
Rallya took the proffered card, handed it back
after a close inspection. ―Picture looks like you,‖ she
conceded. ―And the card looks impressive. It could
be the real thing.‖ She was willing to bet that it was
close enough to convince anybody who came in
response to a call for help. And though it seemed
that they wanted to take her away without
attracting attention, if she refused to move they
might find it worthwhile taking her out unconscious
or dead. In neither of those states would she have
any chance to escape. So let him think that she
believed him, that she would go with him meekly.
―Just let me finish up here…‖ she suggested.
―No need for that, ma‘am. One of my colleagues
will tidy up after we‘re gone.‖
To make sure that there was no record of the
material she had been consulting, no doubt, in case
there were questions asked after her disappearance.
Rallya stood up slowly, deliberately favouring her
hip. If they had not been fully briefed, they might
believe that she was lame, an advantage that she
could use later.
―I‘ll have to search you, ma‘am. Orders,‖ he said
apologetically.
Rallya smiled wintrily. ―I understand.‖ She
cooperated in silence during the search, turning
around clumsily when asked.
―This way, ma‘am,‖ he said when he was satisfied
that she was unarmed.

He had two companions outside. One of them
slipped into the carrel that Rallya had just vacated,
the other took up position behind her. Her original
captor walked beside her, slowing his pace to
accommodate her limp. It was a short walk to the
entrance down the dimly lit exhibition hall with its
displays of ancient documents. As they stepped
outside, the intensity of the light made them all
blink. Rallya took her chance before her captors
recovered, swerved away from them down the
broad gentle steps to the plaza below, pushing
through the crowds of tourists, seeking shelter in
their numbers.
―Police! Stop her!‖
The shot that Rallya expected did not come. Held
off by fear of hitting someone else in the crowd?
One of the tourists made a half-hearted grab for
her; she kicked him on the knee and left him
clutching that instead. The next one might not be so
easy to dissuade… She grabbed the nearest person
that was smaller than her and too slow to get out of
her way, wrapped an arm around his throat and
jabbed two fingers into his back, praying he was
scared enough to take them for a weapon.
―Back away, or I kill him!‖ she shouted harshly.
The crowd moved back reluctantly, clearing a
wide circle around her and her hostage.
―Stay where I can see you!‖ she ordered her onetime captors. Not that they cared about the boy‘s
life, but they had a role to play and the presence of
the crowd would make them obey. She hoped.
―It‘s a bluff! She hasn‘t got a gun!‖ the one who
had searched her shouted.
―You missed the knife in my boot!‖ Rallya yelled
back. If there had been such a knife, only a
contortionist could have removed it on the run, but

the crowd was so scared they would believe
anything and Julur‘s agents had not had clear sight
of her since she broke away from them.
―You can‘t get away!‖ he threatened, a boltbeamer now in plain sight.
―Am I trying to?‖ Rallya said scornfully. ―I‘m
going to wait here until the real police come to see
what‘s happening. I assume somebody‘s had the
sense to call them.‖
The boy in her arms was trembling; belatedly she
realized that she was throttling him and she relaxed
her hold just enough to let him breathe. No point in
saving herself to face a murder charge.
The hum of an aircar cut through the angry
murmuring of the crowd. Reinforcements for the
enemy or support for her? By the look on the faces
of Julur‘s people, by their sudden inclination to slip
away out of sight, it was nobody that they
welcomed.
―Emperor‘s security police! Nobody move!‖
The announcement broadcast across the plaza
was enough to sway the crowd. Julur‘s agents found
their way blocked, the beamers wrenched from
their hands, everyone a hero now that no real risk
was involved. Rallya let her captive go, judging the
crowd might take it upon themselves to force her if
she did not. He ran for the dubious shelter of his
friends‘ arms, as if she might change her mind if he
lingered too long in her vicinity.
―Commander Rallya?‖ The woman who stepped
out of the aircar was the woman Joshim had
spotted that morning. ―You‘re wanted at the Palace.
Your colleague is waiting for you there.‖
Rallya rubbed at her hip, which was taking its
revenge for the unexpected exercise, and watched

Julur‘s agents being hustled into the aircar. How in
hell had Joshim got himself into the palace?
―If I ask you for proof, you‘ll only show me
another of those fancy identity cards,‖ she told the
woman tartly. ―Well, I suppose you can‘t all be on
the same damned side.‖
The resemblance was impossible, Rallya decided,
watching Joshim and Lord Dhur study each other.
Face, height, build — all so close, they could be
twins. What were the odds against such a
coincidence? Not just of their appearance, but of
their role in Rafe‘s life? She shivered; she was too
old to start believing that it was not a coincidence.
Far too damn old.
―It‘s disturbing,‖ Dhur said into the uneasy
silence. ―I almost didn‘t believe Yulenda. Having
lived with this face so long, to see it on somebody
else…‖
Their voices were not the same, Rallya heard with
relief; that one difference made the similarities less
intense.
―You have something else in common,‖ she
reminded them, calling their attention to the reason
they were there.
―Somebody very precious to both of us,‖ Dhur
agreed.
―And currently very precious to the Old
Emperor,‖ Rallya said sharply. ―If the little scut is
still alive.‖
―He is,‖ Dhur said, with an irritating and totally
unfounded confidence. ―If Julur found a reason to
keep him alive for ten years, he won‘t kill him
wantonly now.‖ He gestured around the room to
which they had been brought. ―Please, sit down.
You weren‘t hurt at the Archives earlier,

Commander Rallya? You seem to be limping quite
badly.‖
Now she knew who had honed the edge on Rafe‘s
tongue, Rallya thought as she seated herself with
icy precision opposite Dhur, disciplining herself not
to favour her hip.
―Nothing was damaged at the Archives earlier.
Except the secrecy I‘d hoped for,‖ she admitted
grudgingly.
―I think not even that,‖ Yulenda put in. ―I sent a
team to clean out Rhalan‘s nest as soon as the biolocks proved Lin was still alive; we netted Rhalan
himself on the plaza. And a F‘sair diplomatic
courier was involved in an unfortunate accident at
the shuttleport an hour ago; while he was receiving
medical care, the contents of a certain unmarked
message capsule were edited. It will be several days
before Braniya realizes I‘ve taken Rhalan out of
circulation and asks herself why.‖
―That may be enough.‖ Dhur pressed the points
of his fingers together and looked at them
consideringly. ―If we move quickly, we can be in a
position to stop Julur before he does anything
irreversible to Lin.‖
―Rafe isn‘t important,‖ Rallya told him bluntly.
―If we can get him back safely, it will be a bonus,
but…‖
―On the contrary,‖ Dhur interrupted her. ―The
only important thing is to retrieve him safely.‖
―I doubt the New Emperor would agree with
that,‖ Rallya snapped. ―Or that you‘ve the authority
to make that decision for him.‖
―Let us consider your authority first, Commander
Rallya,‖ Dhur said softly, leaning back in his seat.
―You‘re offering the support of the Guild of
Webbers to strip power from the Old Emperor and

hand it to the New. Tell me, is control of the Guild
included in the bargain, or do you intend to keep
that for yourself? And how much support do you
have in the Guild, outside your own web-room full
of Oath-breakers? What gives you the right to alter
the balance of power in the Empires?‖
―Should I let Julur get away with Oathbreaking?‖ Rallya countered. ―Should I let him
worm his way into control of the Guild, with all that
would mean for the balance of power? No, Lord
Dhur. Control of the Guild is not included in the
bargain, neither for Julur nor for Ayvar nor for me.
But I will have its support, once I expose Julur‘s
Oath-breaking. And if the New Emperor doesn‘t
think that‘s important enough to take action over,
the Guild will be reconsidering its loyalty to him
too.‖
―I believe you.‖ Dhur sounded more amused than
anything, to Rallya‘s added fury. ―Now we‘ve
established that your authority is spiritual whereas
mine is only temporal, shall we try to agree a set of
common goals? Given that I insist on Lin‘s safety,
and you insist on the Guild‘s independence and
renegotiation of the Emperors‘ Oaths.‖
―Which will include an end to the war in the
Disputed Zone,‖ Rallya said promptly.
―Agreed.‖
―You can‘t…‖
Rallya stopped, belatedly recognising the sound
of total self-certainty. Dhur did have the right to
negotiate with her; he was doing it on his own
behalf. She looked at him, past the likeness to
Joshim, past the infuriating patience with which he
waited for her to realize exactly how much
authority he did have. How had she expected an
immortal to look? she asked herself angrily. Not

like Joshim, and that had blinded her to the
preternatural depth of this man, his almost physical
aura of power. She laughed aloud, first ruefully at
herself, then more forcefully at Rafe‘s hubris. The
New Emperor‘s lover. It made truth of that
ridiculous obituary — held in deep affection at
court — and it made sense of Julur‘s interest in
him.
Or partial sense. ―I understand now why Julur
might have wanted Rafe dead,‖ she said, ―but why
take the risk of snatching him? And why keep him
alive this long?‖
―It wouldn‘t have been enough for Julur, just to
kill him,‖ Ayvar claimed. ―He would have wanted to
own him, to have the pleasure every day of knowing
that he had stolen something from me and made it
his. And the pleasure of knowing that I didn‘t know
what Lin was suffering,‖ he added bleakly.
―Why did you put Rafe in that position?‖ Joshim
demanded. If he was impressed by his
doppelganger‘s identity, it did not show, to Rallya‘s
approval.
―I held out against him for three years,‖ Ayvar
said mildly. ―He was sixteen when he first tried to
seduce me.‖ A smile at the memory. ―He was
fighting for survival and he needed a friend more
powerful than his uncle. He decided it was going to
be me. I took his side, but I didn‘t take him into my
bed — I knew what the dangers for him would be if
I did. He isn‘t the first lover that Julur has
reached.‖
He released the pressure on his fingers, as if he
had only just remembered what he was doing, and
watched the colour flood back into their tips.
―Three years later, he was on his half-year leave,
between his apprenticeship and taking his Oath.

There was no doubt that he would take the Oath,
and I thought that it would only be for a short time,
that it wouldn‘t last after he took his Oath. I was
wrong,‖ he said ruefully. ―And I was wrong when I
thought that the one person who would be safe
from Julur was a webber,‖ he added bitterly. ―Even
when he died in an aircar crash, I didn‘t guess. And
I should have guessed — you can blame me for
that,‖ he told Joshim.
―I hardly took better care of him,‖ Joshim
muttered. ―Do you really think Julur will keep him
alive, even now?‖
―Alive, yes,‖ Ayvar said. ―But he‘s still in danger.
There are things Julur might do that couldn‘t be
reversed…
―Tell me, Commander Rallya, did you come here
hoping that I had the answers, or do you have some
suggestions of your own?‖
―All I require from you,‖ Rallya said stiffly, ―is a
guarantee that you won‘t interfere between the
Guild and Julur. Which I assume I have, in view of
your obsession with Rafe‘s safety.‖
―Obsession? Yes, it could fairly be called an
obsession,‖ Ayvar said, unruffled. ―But you don‘t
have a guarantee. Not unless you can guarantee
Lin‘s safety in return.‖
―Nobody can do that,‖ Rallya objected.
―Then I feel free to interfere. After all, there are
other ways to obtain what I want. I could negotiate
with Julur directly. Offer him my support against
the Guild perhaps…‖
―You won‘t do that,‖ Rallya said shrewdly. ―You
can‘t afford to lose the Guild‘s services any more
than Julur can.‖
―The
Guild
isn‘t
irreplaceable,‖
Ayvar
commented.

―No, but could your Empire really survive the
change?‖ Rallya challenged. ―Do you think the
F‘sair would wait for you to build up an effective
space force of your own? Are all your aristos so
loyal that they wouldn‘t make private treaties with
the Guild, treaties that encouraged them to secede
from the Empire?‖
―And you‘d stand by and watch that happen?‖
Ayvar asked.
―If Julur gets control of the Guild, neither of you
will have a choice,‖ Joshim snapped. ―Which is
more important? Finding out who‘s going to have
the last word — and I would have thought it was
obvious, Rallya; he‘s had several thousand years
more practice — or doing something to stop Julur?‖
―You‘re right, Joshim.‖ Ayvar made a gesture of
apology to him. ―I‘m afraid I find it difficult to resist
a new challenge.‖ He repeated the gesture to Rallya.
―You should be glad he isn‘t wearing your face,
Commander. It‘s disconcerting to be told off by
your own double.‖
―He‘s usually right,‖ Rallya muttered. ―That‘s
what I like least about Webmasters.‖ Not that she
was convinced that a few thousand years made so
much difference, but there would be time to settle
the point later.
―Since you‘ve no real intention of negotiating
directly with Julur, even if he‘d listen to you, which
I doubt, what do you intend to do?‖ she asked
directly.
―Support you in regaining control of the Guild,
and then use you as a lever to make Julur
negotiate.‖ Ayvar‘s face clouded. ―He won‘t bend to
a threat to withdraw the Guild‘s services from his
Empire; he can afford to wait out a few hundred
years of chaos. And he knows there‘s a limit to what

I will allow to happen to him. I won‘t take his
Empire from him.‖ He raised a hand to forestall
Rallya‘s protest. ―What would you do with an
Empire without an Emperor? Rule it yourself? Give
it to me? Neither of us could hold it together, and if
one Empire falls, they both do.
―And what would you do with an Emperor
without an Empire? He won‘t retire to a backwater
world to watch the flowers grow, and he won‘t
disappear gracefully off the edge of the map. And
even if you could bring yourself to kill him, I
couldn‘t allow it.‖
Rallya scowled. It was uniquely obscene, the idea
of killing a person who might otherwise have lived
forever, the thought of destroying an unbroken
thread of existence. And that was the reason the
Empires were saddled with a pair of immortal fools.
There was nothing that could be done with them,
other than make them gods or Emperors. And if it
was not done for them, they would do it themselves,
like oil inevitably rising to the top of water. Or scum
separating out, in Julur‘s case.
―If we can‘t threaten to kill him, and we can‘t
threaten to take his Empire away, just how do we
persuade him to give Rafe back and renegotiate his
Oath?‖ she demanded.
―I didn‘t say you couldn‘t threaten to kill him,‖
Ayvar corrected her. ―If the Guild were to besiege
Old Imperial, I wouldn‘t be able to prevent you. I
might protest convincingly from a safe distance, but
that‘s all I could do. And fear for his life is the one
thing that will make him release Lin.‖
―It would be a dangerous precedent to set,‖
Rallya said slowly. ―Let some of Julur‘s aristos — or
your own — know that it can be done and they‘ll be
hiring Outsider fleets to try it themselves. The

Empires would be run by whichever aristos most
recently scared you shitless.‖
―Not if the Guild guarantees our protection,‖
Ayvar argued.
―I don‘t like it,‖ Rallya said stubbornly. ―And it
isn‘t necessary. We can break Julur‘s hold on the
Guild without it, and maybe even renegotiate the
Oaths.‖ She snorted. ―For what that would be worth
in his case.‖
―But we couldn‘t get Lin back safely,‖ Ayvar said
flatly. ―I told you, Commander, that matter is not
negotiable.‖
Could five thousand years warp a perspective
that far, Rallya asked herself in disbelief. ―What if
the Guild decides that Rafe is expendable?‖ she
questioned. ―That we aren‘t willing to spend the
lives it would cost to get him back.‖ And it would
cost lives, she thought grimly; Old Imperial was not
a soft target.
―Whatever it costs, you won‘t leave him,‖ Ayvar
said confidently. ―You won‘t found your Guild on a
betrayal like that, Commander Rallya.‖
Damn you, Rallya thought furiously. I would like
to pull the cocky little scut out of the trap he sprung
on himself when he jumped into your bed. I would
like to drag Julur out of his palace and send him on
a one-way jump to the other edge of the galaxy. But
I will not condemn the people of the Old Empire to
a few hundred years of chaos. I will not throw away
webbers and ships to salve your pride. And I will
not have my options dictated by you.
―I‘ll need a fleet to dislodge Carher,‖ she told
Ayvar coldly. For now, let him think she had
capitulated. ―I want every ship you‘ve been assigned
for use in the Disputed Zone; you can change their
orders without anyone questioning it. And I want

Khirtin station too — that‘s your command centre
for Zone operations, isn‘t it? I want the ships
assembled there in five days time. Flash a message
to the Stationmaster to call them in. Tell them to
reserve the first arrival slot for your yacht and
another one four days from now, also to be notified
to you. And I‘ll need a coded tight-beam to pass
that information on.‖
She would have liked to have Bhattya there
earlier in the sequence, but it could not be done.
The shuttle with Caruya and Peri aboard would not
reach the ship for three more days. And Vidar
would want to move out of the rings around New
Imperial‘s neighbouring gas giant; that was no
place to start a fixed-window jump with only a
Second and a Third to back him in the web.
―You‘ll have all of it,‖ Ayvar assured her.
―Yulenda, warn Khetya to expect us. Four
passengers: Lord Dhur, yourself and two
anonymous guests.‖
―You‘re not coming,‖ Rallya decreed, standing up
to leave.
―Commander, you and I still have guarantees to
discuss.‖

From The Guild of Webbers’ Guide to Navigation
Imperial Zone, Old Empire: a Class One restricted
zone. Prior authorization to enter must be obtained
from the Imperial Palace; access is permitted via a
single jump point (O-I-1). A defensive sphere is
maintained around the system; any unauthorized ship
penetrating this sphere is liable to attack without
warning.
349/5043
IMPERIAL ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

It was impossible to know, Rafe thought shakily,
which one of them would speak first. Or, if the Old
Emperor was first to break the silence, whose
victory that would be. Blurred memories — which
he was struggling to rebury, in spite of the days that
he had spent aboard Havedir fighting futilely to
unearth them — told him that, in some warped way,
it would be Julur‘s victory if Rafe outlasted him,
because Rafe dared not speak until he had control
of his voice and the same blurred memories had
deprived him of that control.
The waiting had ended without warning, ten days
of isolation curtailed by the soporific that had
flooded his stateroom. Rafe had regained
consciousness strapped into this seat, free only to
see, to hear and to speak, in a room brightly lit
around him and shadowed at the edges. Julur was
in the shadows: visible, not recognizable, but it
could only be Julur. Cat-and-mouse would not be
Braniya‘s style, not once the hunt was over, but
Julur took delight in it. Rafe fought off more
unwelcome images, of a similar room or the same
one, of a similar struggle for silence.

He had no way of knowing how long it had been
between losing consciousness and regaining it, no
way of knowing what they had done in that time.
Had they sorted through his head, to discover how
much he had remembered, and how much he had
not? What else might they have done? There had
been games that Julur had played the last time…
―Shall I call you Lin or Rafe?‖
A triple shock. The ending of the silence, for all
that he had known Julur would speak eventually.
The voice, better remembered than the face,
because it had been possible to close his eyes but
not his ears… And the name, Lin, indisputably his,
bringing with it a stream of fresh associations that
he could not dam, ice-clear memories of the man
who had bestowed it upon him. And because no
reaction was more appropriate to the enormous
irony of that shared face: Rafe laughed.
―The question did not warrant hysteria.‖
―I‘d explain the joke,‖ Rafe said, sobering
abruptly, ―but as I remember, you‘ve no sense of
humour.‖
―And yours, I remember, is odd in the extreme.
And fails you eventually.‖
Julur came out of the shadows, his appearance
no new shock because Rafe‘s newly intact memory
had primed him. Blond, blue-eyed, slightly plump,
even for his unusual height, and his face alarming
in its apparent youth. A thousand years or more
older than Ayvar, he looked as if he had been frozen
as a gauche adolescent while Ayvar looked like a… a
forty-six year old Webmaster.
Let nobody tell me the gods have no sense of
humour, Rafe thought bitterly.
―You do remember me, I see,‖ Julur remarked,
watching Rafe intently. ―And how much else?‖

―All of it,‖ Rafe said flatly. A denial would do him
no good.
―That would be surprising, since you were hardly
coherent for much of your time with me. I take it
that you mean you remember your life as Lin.‖
―Which you took so much trouble to erase. Yes.‖
It gave Rafe perverse pleasure to think of that
wasted effort. There was no other success he could
claim against Julur, no information about Ayvar or
the Guild that he had withheld, no information
about himself that Julur had not drawn from him.
He flinched from remembering how easily he had
answered questions at the end, answered them
before they were asked, volunteered information
out of fear of the pain, out of terror of what the
drugs did to him. The other choice had been to
submit to the pain and the drugs, to pay a higher
price for providing the same knowledge with the
same scant dignity. His choice had not eventually
mattered; Julur had used the drugs anyway, had
vindictively inflicted the pain. And in a final,
grotesque and unseen gesture to Ayvar — who
surely could not know — he had destroyed Lin and
given the Oath-breaker Rafe to the Guild.
―Was I supposed to be grateful that you left me
alive?‖ he asked rashly.
―You are asking whether I intend to repeat my
generosity, are you not? I do, but not perhaps in the
same form.‖ The Emperor stretched his damp lips
to show his teeth. ―It is unfortunate that the
identity-wipe failed. The alternative is more drastic,
forfeits more of the original and there are aspects of
the original worth preserving. The intelligence, for
example.‖
―Has anybody ever accused you of being subtle?‖

―Humour, I believe, is an inevitable casualty of
personality disintegration.‖ Julur returned to the
shadows and Rafe heard the whisper of his clothes
as he sat down. ―Before that, however, I shall
discover why the identity-wipe failed. It would be a
pity to destroy you so thoroughly when something
less might serve.‖
Silence would be interpreted as capitulation; a
defiant response as desperation. Neither was far
from the truth, Rafe thought miserably, choosing
silence. A tactical problem for you, Commander
Rallya. You are the prisoner of a mad Emperor — a
paranoid Emperor who wears armour-cloth for
every hour of the day, who has not left his palace
for over a thousand years, a palace infested with
fanatically loyal guards trained from birth. You are
unarmed and unable to move. Discuss methods of
escape. He sighed wryly, reckoning that even Rallya
would not get far with the problem.
What was she doing now? Probably gathering
support against Carher. Lin had known Carher by
reputation, an ambitious woman, elected to the
Council half a year before he had his "accident".
Her record as a patrolship Commander was solid,
not outstanding; she had won her place on the
Council largely by virtue of being unopposed by
anyone better qualified. He felt a flash of guilt over
that. The councillor elected for the New Empire in
the
same
election
had
been
equally
undistinguished. He — Lin — had been urged by his
friends and by Ayvar to fight that election; he had
refused, not ready to give up the joy of commanding
Janasayan for the responsibilities of a councillor.
Not that it would have been long before Julur
relieved him of those responsibilities, he reminded
himself angrily. And if he had joined the Council, he

would always have been open to accusations of
being influenced by Ayvar, of being the New
Emperor‘s passport to control of the Guild, as
Carher had been intended to be Julur‘s. At least
Rallya would prevent that, and the scouring she
would undertake would be thorough enough to
leave Julur — and Ayvar, he acknowledged dryly —
no possibility of replacing their pawns for several
years.
―What do you intend to do about Carher?‖ he
asked boldly. Better to concentrate on that than on
his own predicament, about which Rallya could do
nothing, primarily because she did not know about
it. Bhattya probably thought he was dead, he
realized with a pang of grief for Joshim. When
Ayvar learnt the cause of the conflict within the
Guild, he would know that Julur was involved, but
by then it would probably be too late…
―There is no need for me to do anything. Lady
Carher will be dealt with by her opponents within
the Guild.‖
―It‘s unlike you to neglect an opportunity to be
vindictive.‖
―You seem to be feeling better.‖ Julur was
moving about; Rafe could hear the rustle of
armour-cloth, the chink of metallic items being
gathered together. ―Lady Carher has a certain utility
in distracting interest from you. If she outlives her
usefulness, Braniya will arrange her execution.‖
He moved out of the shadow, began to arrange
the items he was carrying on the table to Rafe‘s left.
Rafe refused to turn his head to watch. ―You should
not use my interest in you to judge my interest in
mortals like Lady Carher. You have a certain quality
that makes you uniquely rewarding.‖

Or a certain relationship with the only person
you care about, Rafe thought bleakly. The only
person who is real to you. Gods, Ayvar could be
strange at times, when he talked about somebody a
thousand years dead as if he had spoken to them
only yesterday, when he wore that haunted
expression that told of the events around him
having been played out before by the same
characters wearing different faces… But at least he
knew that mortals were real. Real enough to take
one as a lover, to bind him with a mixture of fierce
possessiveness and brusque insouciance, so that he
would hold Lin bruisingly tight all night as if he
were the one person who would never leave him
and then send him back to his ship at the end of his
liberty with a joke about the queue to share his bed
when Lin was gone. Sometimes, Rafe thought
ruefully, it was a struggle not to be swallowed whole
by the man and at others, it was impossible to get
close to him…
―Do you remember the effect of this?‖ Julur
inquired, showing Rafe a injector. ―Gadrine. Not
unduly unpleasant, but effective.‖
Not unduly unpleasant if you had no objection to
losing control over your tongue, to spilling out the
contents of your head for Julur to pick through.
Rafe remembered Joshim‘s support during his
arthane trances, the anchor to reality that he had
provided. Julur would not be so concerned for
Rafe‘s sanity, for the necessary distinctions between
past and present.
―We‘re going to explore the failure of your
identity-wipe,‖ Julur continued. Rafe felt the
injector enter his arm. ―The stimuli that caused it,
the speed with which it progressed.‖ He smiled as
he withdrew the needle. ―If you are fortunate, the

failure will not be inherent in the process, but will
be due to something in your environment. If that is
so, I may not resort to personality disintegration…‖
Gods, Rafe thought frantically. Joshim. Of all the
factors — his work in the web, Commander Rallya
and Bhattya — Joshim must be the most
significant, his likeness to Ayvar the essential
trigger. And Julur did not know about him yet.
When he did know, how much danger would
Joshim be in? If Julur took pleasure from
destroying somebody who had been Ayvar‘s lover,
how much would he enjoy destroying somebody
who wore Ayvar‘s face? It was painful enough that
Rafe had unconsciously used Joshim as a substitute
for Ayvar — and that was what he had done, he
realized in a tide of raw guilt — but now he was
going to expose him to the danger of Julur‘s hatred,
and he knew that he could not avoid it.

From the History of the Empire
by Dhelmen Lady Hjour,
taken from a copy made in 3087
…And the Emperor Ayvar came in haste to Khirtin,
bringing with him such of his establishment as were
loyal to him, and on Khirtin they abided for a year. But
Khirtin is a poor world and so Boronya Lady Buhklir
came to the Emperor Ayvar and offered him her
homeworld of Buhklir to be his home for all time and
he was gracious to accept, raising her family high in
his affections…
…And a great assembly was held at Lhorphenir and
the Empire was divided…
351/5043
KHIRTIN ZONE, NEW EMPIRE

―So that‘s what‘s happening now,‖ Joshim said
wearily. ―Every ship assigned to Ayvar for the
Disputed Zone is coming here. The Stationmaster is
going grey watching them come out of jump and
praying they all get their calculations right.‖
―I don‘t blame her,‖ Vidar said feelingly. ―Five
minutes after us, a courier arrived so close we could
read the markings on its hull unmagnified.‖
―Stop complaining. At least Bhattya‘s got a place
in dock. The couriers and the supplyships are stuck
in a holding pattern. The priority is getting the
patrolships battle-ready.‖
―Uh huh.‖ Vidar stood up. ―Back in a minute,‖ he
promised.
He was, with a mug of alcad that he put into
Joshim‘s hands. ―Sounds like you need that.‖
―I‘ve been talking my throat raw. Every Three
that comes in wants to hear the story from the
source.‖

―I‘ll take that on,‖ Vidar offered. ―After six days in
those damned dust rings with nothing else to do,
this ship is in better condition than when she left
the construction dock.‖
―I expected as much.‖ Joshim gave him a tired
smile of gratitude. ―We won‘t see much of Rallya
before the fleet leaves here. When she isn‘t talking
tactics with the other Commanders, she‘s arguing
with Ayvar.‖
Refusing to accept his priorities; refusing to
commit herself to anything beyond ridding the
Guild of Carher, least of all an assault on Julur.
Balancing possibilities and costs: the future of the
Guild, the future of the Empires, the lives — all of
them, not just Rafe‘s — that could be lost if the
upheaval she started got out of her control. And
Ayvar was insistent on Rafe‘s safety, at any price.
Gods knew what was driving him: injured pride
perhaps, a determination not to yield anything to
Julur. Not even an immortal could love Rafe so
fiercely that he was willing to sacrifice the peace of
both Empires for him. Or maybe I won‘t allow
anyone to love Rafe more than me, Joshim thought
wryly.
―Is the Emperor here at Khirtin?‖ Vidar asked.
―That isn‘t public knowledge,‖ Joshim warned.
―Officially,
Lord
Dhur,
the
Emperor‘s
representative is here. Confusing the hell out of
anybody who‘s met me.‖
―How close is the resemblance?‖
―It‘s frightening. Like looking in a mirror.‖
Joshim blew on his alcad to cool it down.
―No wonder…‖
‗…Rafe fell for me. Yes.‖
―No wonder Rafe started remembering,‖ Vidar
contradicted him. ―What‘s he like as a person?‖

Joshim shrugged. ―I‘m not the person you should
ask. I‘m trying not to like him.‖
Vidar grunted. ―How many ships will we have at
Central?‖ he asked, changing the subject.
―Twenty patrolships, if they all get here in time.
Five armed couriers. The supplyships are staying
here.‖ Joshim yawned. ―That reminds me. We‘re
leaving the apprentices behind too.‖
―They won‘t like that.‖
―Fleet Commander‘s orders. Says they‘ll only be
underfoot.‖
Vidar laughed, knowing as well as Joshim that
Rallya wanted the apprentices out of danger.
―She‘s expecting a fight then?‖ he queried.
―She‘s ready for one. Although Carher might run
for it,‖ Joshim said hopefully. ―She must know that,
even if she wins, Julur will still want her hide. It
depends on how good she thinks her chances are of
making peace with him.‖
―What opposition will we be facing?‖
―Open a book on it,‖ Joshim suggested, yawning
again. ―If it hasn‘t already been done.‖
―Not this time,‖ Vidar said somberly. ―You
should…‖ He stopped, held up a hand to silence
Joshim while he listened to his messager. ―There‘s a
visitor for you,‖ he reported. ―Lord Dhur.‖
―Tell him to go away,‖ Joshim said. ―Tell him I‘m
asleep.‖
―You should be,‖ Vidar agreed. He relayed the
message, listened to the reply. ―He‘s already on his
way up,‖ he reported.
Joshim swore.
―I‘ll keep him out,‖ Vidar offered.
―No.‖ Joshim found a strained smile. ―Let‘s not
all three of us get on the wrong side of him. Not
until Rallya‘s got no use for him anyway.‖

There was a tap on the rest-room door,
characteristically Fadir. ―Come in,‖ Joshim called.
―Lord Dhur, sir.‖ The apprentice‘s eyes swivelled
from Ayvar to Joshim and back again, looking for
differences.
―Thank you, Fadir,‖ Ayvar said, smiling slightly.
―Sir.‖ Fadir backed out, still comparing.
―You have a fine ship, Captain Vidar,‖ Ayvar said.
―Don‘t let me keep you from your work.‖
―You‘d better let the web-room know what‘s
happening,‖ Joshim said resignedly. ―And break the
news to Fadir and Rasil that they don‘t get to join
in.‖
―You need some sleep,‖ Vidar said pointedly. ―I‘ll
be back in an hour to make sure you get it.‖
―Thank you for seeing me,‖ Ayvar said when
Vidar had gone. ―I won‘t keep you long. But we
ought to talk about Lin — Rafe, if you prefer —
while we can.‖
―Before we know he‘s alive?‖
―Trust me,‖ Ayvar said gravely. ―I know Julur. He
won‘t kill him.‖
It would be a relief to have his certainty, Joshim
thought with longing. Not to live with the misery of
not knowing. Not to lie awake in the dark
cataloguing the possibilities. Maybe he was right;
the gods knew, there was nobody else qualified to
understand the workings of an immortal‘s mind. Or
maybe Rallya was right, and Ayvar was as far from
sanity as Julur was, if in a different direction.
―What are you thinking?‖ Ayvar asked.
―You‘re right, or you‘re insane, and I can‘t tell
which.‖
―And you‘ve no talent for believing something
because you want to believe,‖ Ayvar said
sympathetically.

―I‘m an Aruranist,‖ Joshim said, amused. ―I‘ve
heard it said that that‘s wishful thinking.‖
―About reincarnation, I wouldn‘t know. But the
rest… somebody gave you my face and put you into
Lin‘s life so that he would remember me.‖
―Maybe.‖ Joshim had had the same thought
himself. ―Maybe they put you into Rafe‘s life so that
he would recognize me when he found me.‖ He ran
a hand over his chin, trying to remember when he
had last depilated it. Four days ago, on New
Imperial. He must look as disreputable as he felt.
―He isn‘t an Empire to be divided up by treaty,‖ he
said angrily, knowing what Ayvar really wanted to
discuss.
―That wasn‘t what I intended,‖ Ayvar said. ―I just
don‘t want to make it any harder for him than it has
to be. Julur won‘t kill him, but he won‘t be gentle to
him either. He‘ll need time to recover, when we get
him back. He‘ll be in no condition to make a
decision between us.‖
―So you want to make it for him now.‖ Joshim
was still furious.
―Not that either.‖ Ayvar sighed. ―He makes his
own decisions. He always has, and they‘re often not
the decisions I‘d have him make. Like staying in the
Guild. I‘ve asked him to leave before. I shall be
asking him again. This time, perhaps he‘ll agree.
He‘s always said that his Oath binds him, but if the
Emperors‘ Oaths can be rewritten, his can be
dissolved.‖
―He won‘t give up webbing,‖ Joshim said
confidently. ―If you could web with him, you‘d know
that.‖ He felt a tinge of jealous pleasure at the
knowledge that Ayvar could never do so.

―He needs the power it gives him,‖ Ayvar
admitted, ―but there are other ways he can have
that.‖
Joshim shook his head, although there was truth
in what the Emperor said. Power would always be a
lure for Rafe, the power of the web or the power
hanging in the air around Ayvar which would call
him like a sailfly to a flame. But webbing was not
only power. There was the magic inherent in
sharing that power with others, in guiding a junior
who was learning their first skills, or working in the
web in perfect concert with a team. Nothing that
Ayvar could offer would give Rafe that joy, or the
trust and companionship of a full web-room.
―You don‘t know him as well as you think you
do,‖ he observed.
―I know that he‘ll be grateful to you. To
everybody who helps to rescue him. And he‘s
obsessive about paying his debts.‖
So he may be generous to me, out of gratitude?
The Rafe I know… could be that stupid, Joshim
realized painfully. What if it was my face that
attracted him, if he thought he loved me because of
his love for Ayvar… Gods, it was too tangled to see a
way through. Especially at Ayvar‘s persuasive
prompting.
―I‘m not fighting over him,‖ he said flatly. ―He
isn‘t mine to fight over, any more than he‘s yours.
And neither of us can be sure what he‘ll feel, what
he‘ll do. After ten years as Rafe, he isn‘t the Lin you
knew, and once he‘s remembered Lin, he won‘t be
Rafe either.‖
―That may be true,‖ Ayvar conceded. He was
silent for several seconds, then shrugged gracefully.
―Go to bed, Joshim. And be glad you‘ve got
something useful to do. Having given your

Commander a fleet and pointed her at Julur, there‘s
nothing for me to do except wait. And Lin would
tell you, that isn‘t my favourite role. It makes me
bad tempered. Makes me want to settle the things
that I can settle.‖ He laughed briefly. ―And the
things that I can‘t.‖
It was an apology of a kind, or a peace offering.
An appeal for sympathy. ―You are worried,‖ Joshim
realized.
―The thought of Commander Rallya with a fleet
at her back and an Emperor as her target would
make any sane man worry. What if she decides she
does want control of the Guild? And of both
Empires? What would be the cost of stopping her?‖
―No. Not Rallya,‖ Joshim said positively. ―You‘d
have to back her into a corner with no choices left
before she‘d accept any of it. And even then, she‘d
probably find a way to wriggle free.‖
―I‘ll remember that.‖
―Want to tell me what you‘re really worried
about?‖ Joshim suggested.
Ayvar looked at him quizzically. ―Lin always said
that Webmasters could read minds.‖ He linked his
fingers together, stared at them. ―What will you do,
if what we get back isn‘t Lin or Rafe but something
that Julur has twisted or emptied?‖ he asked
abruptly. ―Something mindless or insane.‖
Joshim shook his head in distress. ―I don‘t know.
There would be ways of healing him…‖
―I hope so, yes. Could you be part of that, Joshim,
if you were needed? For as long as it took?‖
Gods, that was a question. Joshim took a deep
breath, let it out without speaking. Was that the
measure of how much he cared for Rafe, that he
hesitated to give up the web for him?
―I don‘t know,‖ he said finally.

―That‘s an honest answer.‖ Ayvar took Joshim‘s
face in one hand and studied it as if he would find a
different answer there. ―We could be twins. I
wonder how deep it goes…‖
There was a knock on the door. Ayvar released
Joshim‘s face.
―Come in,‖ Joshim called.
―General broadcast, just received,‖ Fadir said
excitedly. ―The Captain said you‘d want to see it at
once.‖
―Thank you.‖ Joshim took the flimsy that the
apprentice was clutching, scanned it rapidly. ―Did
he tell you what it meant?‖
―He said we‘d be fighting at Central, sir. If
Commander Carher has declared Bhattya
renegade, it means she‘s decided to oppose us.‖
―She has no choice,‖ Ayvar said harshly. ―If she
runs, one of her supporters will execute her for
Julur. But she thinks she‘ll have something to
bargain with if she fights and wins.‖ He laughed
contemptuously. ―It won‘t be enough, but she won‘t
find that out until it‘s too late. If Julur doesn‘t kill
her, I will.‖
―Couldn‘t we tell her that?‖ Fadir asked.
―In my experience, Fadir, things are rarely that
simple,‖ Ayvar said kindly.
―The Commander will have thought about it,‖
Joshim promised. ―But Carher wouldn‘t believe us,
and it would do her no good if she did. The best she
could hope for from us is identity-wipe, and I doubt
the Commander would be that merciful.‖ He
sighed. ―You‘d better start packing, Fadir. The
Commander may take us out early, before Carher
gathers too much support.‖
―Do I have to stay behind, sir?‖
―Yes,‖ Joshim insisted.

―I shall be needing somebody to carry messages
for me,‖ Ayvar said. ―Can I borrow Fadir from you?‖
―Do you mind?‖ Joshim asked the apprentice.
―No, sir. I suppose it will be better than doing
nothing,‖ Fadir said dejectedly.
―Good.‖ Ayvar smiled generously. ―If you
remember to call me Lord Dhur in public, you can
call me Ayvar in private.‖
―Really?‖ Fadir swayed in shock. ―Is he, sir?‖ He
looked to Joshim for confirmation.
―He is,‖ Joshim said.
―But only you and your Captain and Webmaster
know that,‖ Ayvar warned. ―And Commander
Rallya, of course.‖
Fadir nodded gravely, the effect spoiled by the
fact that he was blinking so rapidly that his
eyelashes were almost a blur. ―I‘ll remember, sir,‖
he promised.
―Good. I‘ll wait here for you while you pack,‖
Ayvar offered.
Fadir paused on his way to the door. ―Can I bring
Rasil with me?‖ he asked. ―Two of us will be more
useful than one, don‘t you think?‖
―You‘d better bring Rasil then,‖ Ayvar agreed.
―That was kind of you,‖ Joshim said when the lad
had gone.
―The three of us can be miserable together,‖
Ayvar dismissed it. ―Don‘t worry. I won‘t lay a
finger on them. I only make my mistakes once, and
anyway, they can‘t have half the charm that Lin had
at that age. At any age.‖ He lifted the pendant that
hung around Joshim‘s neck to examine it closely.
―Will the Commander respond to that broadcast?‖
―She‘ll have to, or we‘ll be fighting ships at
Central that think Carher is telling the truth.‖
Joshim grimaced. ―We probably will anyway.‖

Ayvar let the pendant fall. ―What will she send?‖
―I‘m guessing,‖ Joshim warned. ―A broadcast
accusing Carher of Oath-breaking. Of murder. Of
unlawful identity-wipe. Of conspiracy with Julur.‖
―She can‘t,‖ Ayvar said tautly. ―If she mentions
Julur, he‘ll know I know about Lin.‖
―She has to mention Julur. None of the rest
makes sense without it. You won‘t talk her out of it.
She has as much responsibility for the people that
might die because they don‘t know what‘s
happening as she has for Rafe.‖ Joshim closed his
eyes in despair. ―You think it will stampede Julur
into hurting him.‖
―The gods know. Julur knows the value of what
he‘s got. That‘s why he tried the identity-wipe first.
He‘ll move slowly while he thinks he‘s got the time.
And he won‘t believe that Rallya has the nerve to
attack Old Imperial until it happens,‖ Ayvar said
hopefully. ―If she does…‖ He put a hand on
Joshim‘s shoulder and shook gently. ―Get to bed,
Webmaster. You‘re dead on your feet and I‘m
relying on you to keep Rallya pointed in the right
direction.‖

General broadcast from Rallya,
Commander Bhattya
To all ships and stations:
Be advised that serious charges of Oath-breaking
will be laid against Councillor Carher at the first
opportunity, to include: conspiracy with the Emperor
Julur to subvert the Guild; unlawful identity-wipe of a
Guild member; and conspiracy to murder Guild
members. Evidence will be presented at Central to
support these charges. It is requested that Councillor
Carher be detained until that time.
Directive from the Emperor Julur to Palace
Security Chief Braniya
…I will move to the deep levels of the palace
immediately. The prisoner will be transferred with me…
352/5043
IMPERIAL ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

―The Emperor is pleased that you keep yourself
fit,‖ Braniya announced herself from the entrance
to Rafe‘s stateroom.
He paused in the daily sequence of exercises that
he had set himself, to fill a little of the time while he
waited. He did not have access to a console; nobody
visited him except the pair of silent guards who
delivered his meals. He had exhausted the
possibilities for escape from the stateroom, not by
trying them but by satisfying himself that there
were none. All that was left for him to do was to be
ready for the possibilities that there might be, in
other places, at other times.
―And the Emperor must be pleased at all costs?‖
He was pleased that his voice was steady, without a

trace of his apprehension about her visit, his fear
that it meant another session with Julur.
―Most people find his pleasure rewarding.‖
―Faced with the prospect of a second identitywipe — or worse — to please him, I can‘t share their
enthusiasm.‖ Rafe stood up and stalked through to
the fresher to find a towel to dry his sweat. His legs
were surprisingly steady too. ―Was the state of my
health the only reason for your visit?‖ he called
back to her.
―No. You‘re being moved. Immediately.‖
―May I dress first?‖
―Do. Everything else will follow you.‖
Rafe chose breeches and a shirt at random.
―Where am I going?‖ he asked as he pulled them
on.
―Down,‖ Braniya said succinctly. ―The Emperor
has chosen to move to the deeper levels. You‘re to
go with him.‖
―How deep is deep? This palace is rumoured to
go a long way down, and I‘d hate to be trapped at
the bottom by a surface strike.‖
―Don‘t alarm yourself unnecessarily,‖ Braniya
advised. ―The life-support systems down there are
good for a few hundred years, and the planet would
have to be destroyed to seal all access to the deep
levels.‖ Her lips twitched. ―Accommodation down
there is not a privilege extended to many.‖
And you would dearly like to know why I am
honoured,
Rafe
thought
with
malicious
amusement. It was interesting to know that Julur
was worried about an attack on his palace. Fear of
the Guild might be enough to make him scuttle for
shelter, if he thought they knew what he had done.
Rafe tucked that speculation away for later
examination.

―Do I walk or will I be carried?‖ he asked Braniya
lightly.
―It would be quicker if you walked, and there are
other matters which require my attention.‖ Her lips
twitched again. ―I am allowed to tell you that one of
them is the execution of Lord Khalem.‖
―You could tell the Emperor that there are gifts
I‘d like better than Elanis‘s death.‖
―I understand that the news is the gift, not the
death. Are you ready?‖
―Does it make a difference?‖
―The Emperor requires you to be treated with
courtesy.‖
That was not the description Rafe would have
used for the interrogation Julur had carried out;
but then the Emperor was exempt from his own
requirements. It had been a shock afterwards to
wake in a luxury stateroom with his mind — he
believed — still intact; there had been no similar
treatment ten years ago. He distrusted it, as he
distrusted this move, judging that it was meant to
unbalance him.
There were six guards waiting for him outside,
anonymous behind their visors. Rafe let Braniya set
their pace, not bothering to conceal his interest in
the route she chose, just as she did not bother to
conceal her amusement at his interest. Not much
profit in memorizing it, he reckoned, but he did
anyway, in the faint hope that there was a pattern
that would help him if he was ever free to chose his
own route through the palace.
The riser to which Braniya led him was locked to
her voice, its controls not labelled with the levels it
served. The descent took ten minutes at high speed:
a very long way down. Rafe‘s ears popped with the
changing pressure and his nose itched with the

faintly musty smell that greeted them when they
stepped out, the smell of infrequent occupation.
The tunnels at the lower level were less
ornamented than the upper corridors, their walls
heavily reinforced and each junction marked by
bulkheads waiting to be swung into position. It was
possible to believe that Julur could live through a
few hundred years down here. Rafe wondered if
there was a similar bolt-hole beneath Ayvar‘s
palace. It was more likely that Ayvar had his hiding
place somewhere else, somewhere his enemies
would not know to look; he did not have Julur‘s
phobia of the universe beyond his palace.
―Gods.‖ Rafe swore aloud at the sudden shooting
pain in his arms and his back, leaned against the
tunnel wall with his eyes closed fighting it. Webcramp, he thought hazily, twisting away from one of
the guards who was trying to urge him on. ―Wait,‖
he pleaded.
―What is this, Rafell?‖ Braniya demanded.
―A minute,‖ he insisted. ―Just that.‖ The pain was
receding, to a level where he could stand straight
again. He squinted at Braniya through watering
eyes. ―No trick,‖ he promised.
―You‘re ill.‖ It sounded like an accusation. As if
she suspected him of arranging it deliberately.
―Web-cramp,‖ Rafe said, moving away from the
wall experimentally. ―It‘s over now. For the
moment.‖ It would be back though. He had last
worked on the day that Churi died, more than forty
days ago, and he would not be back in the web for
the foreseeable future, he thought bleakly.
―You can walk?‖ Braniya asked. ―It isn‘t far now.‖
―Your concern is delightful.‖

―The Emperor requires you to be kept in good
health,‖ she said stiffly. ―I will be reporting this
episode.‖
Much good it would do Julur to know about it.
The cure for web-cramp was webbing, or
deactivating the offending web, both of which
would require the cooperation of the Guild. And if
Rafe was right, the cooperation of the Guild was in
short supply for Julur at the moment. He
smothered a cynical grin. He might still manage to
frustrate the Old Emperor‘s plans. Admittedly, at
the cost of considerable discomfort, but that was
probably down on the agenda already; the webcramp was just hurrying things along. The thought
made him perversely cheerful.
―In here,‖ Braniya ordered. ―Wait outside,‖ she
told the guards.
―Impressive,‖ Rafe said honestly, looking around
him. ―All for me?‖
―Leisure accommodation,
sleeping
room,
sanitary facilities. And an small gym. Please
explore,‖ Braniya invited graciously.
―Later. The wisest thing I can do now is lie
down,‖ he told her frankly.
Braniya followed him into the sleeping room.
―How serious is web-cramp?‖ she asked.
―In my current circumstances?‖ Rafe gave her
one of his best smiles. ―Probably fatal.‖
―That can be checked.‖
―Ask Julur. He knows everything I do.‖
When she had gone, he curled on his side on the
bed. Web-cramp was a perpetual headache and
creeping weariness and unpredictable spasms like
the one in the corridor. If he were back on Bhattya,
Joshim would give him a tablet to ease the
headache and then, when his concentration could

be trusted, he would put him in the web to stretch
the cramp away. If he were back on Bhattya,
Joshim would… As well wish to be an apprentice
back on New Imperial, with the choice that had led
him here still unmade.
Joshim would have problems of his own now,
supporting Rallya when she made her bid to oust
Carher. And afterwards, avoiding Julur‘s attention
without knowing that he needed to do it. For
survival‘s sake, he needed to know about his
resemblance to Ayvar, but it hurt to know how
much that knowledge would hurt him. Hurt to
know what Joshim would think. Hurt to think that
it was partially true, and that Joshim would talk
himself out of being angry about it. Everybody had
the right to be angry about a gods‘ trick like that.
Ayvar would be angry when he knew. Not about
the gods‘ trick. About the wasted mourning he had
done ten years ago — I save it for the people who
are worth it, Lin — and about the fresh mourning
he would have to do, knowing there was nothing he
could do to rescue Rafe, nothing that would not cost
more than Rafe was worth. He would protect
Joshim, as well as he could, and maybe Julur would
be wary enough of the Guild to leave the
Webmaster alone. But there was no power in either
Empire that would make Julur hand Rafe back, not
without letting chaos loose. The Old Emperor need
not worry about an attack; Rallya would not do it,
had too much sense to do it, however much she
hated to back off. Some deal would be made to
cover the cracks between Julur and the Guild, and
everybody would hope fervently that Rafe was dead.
Which he would be, if Julur was pressed for
evidence; his body would be produced with
apologies and Braniya would be handed the blame.

Rafe hoped that Rallya and Ayvar would insist on
proof; Ayvar at least would know the importance of
that.
The hiss of a sliding door told him that somebody
had entered the suite. Braniya, or somebody
bringing the clothes that had been provided for
him. He curled up tightly, ignoring the footsteps
coming towards the sleeping rom.
―You are unwell.‖
Gods, that voice. Julur, come to see if he was to
be deprived of his entertainment.
―I have web-cramp.‖ Rafe uncurled slowly,
balancing hatred for Julur against a desperate wish
not to push him too far too soon. Braniya was there
as well, a sleepbeam trained on him in case he
indulged himself and tried for Julur‘s throat.
―You did not suffer this on a previous occasion.‖
―How would you know? How would I have
known? I wasn‘t identifying every piece of pain.‖
―You will not die of it.‖
―Is that a request or an order?‖
―It is not usually fatal.‖
―Not when there‘s a chance of webbing, no. Or
when there‘s somebody around who knows how to
deactivate a web. Going to ask the Guild how to do
that?‖ Thank the gods that was a secret that not
even the Threes knew.
―That will be the long term solution,‖ Julur said
evenly. ―But the Guild is currently preoccupied with
internal politics. Such a request would not be
welcome.‖
―If you don‘t come up with a short-term solution,
you won‘t need the long-term solution,‖ Rafe said
spitefully. ―You could give me access to Havedir‘s
web. If your yacht‘s web-room swallowed my
abduction from Central, they‘ll swallow that.‖

―You will not leave the palace.‖
―Then I suggest you enjoy watching it while you
can.‖
―This web is a complication that endangers your
health,‖ Julur said, as if Rafe had not spoken.
―Braniya, he is to be sedated for my investigation.
And have the Webmaster of Havedir brought to
me.‖
Braniya coughed. ―Havedir are still refusing to
accept our orders, sir. Until the situation within the
Guild is clarified.‖
Julur muttered something that sounded very like
a curse. ―Are you capable of commissioning a web?‖
he demanded of Rafe.
―How large a web?‖ Rafe asked, intrigued. Julur
had a web within the palace?
―It was used for amusement only.‖
―It‘s not my speciality, but I should get by,‖ Rafe
said cautiously. ―Providing it isn‘t too far from what
I‘m used to.‖ Gods knew how old it would be; if
Julur was anything like Ayvar in his memories, that
amusement could have been fifty years ago or five
hundred. ―Where is it?‖
―If medical examination proves the necessity, you
will be taken to it. Braniya, you will arrange for the
supply of the necessary tools and technicians.‖
―Expendable technicians?‖ Braniya queried.
―The prisoner‘s existence is to remain a secret,‖
Julur agreed. ―You,‖ he added to Rafe, ―will
commission the web for your own use. You will be
interrogated before you are permitted to use it, to
verify that what you have done is acceptable.‖
Rafe nodded, not understanding why he was
being given this lifeline when his life was measured
in tens of days anyway, but finding that he could
not turn it down. Julur was mad. There was no

understanding him except on his own terms, and he
was the only one who knew what those were. But if
he could not be understood, perhaps he could be
manipulated a little. If he did not want Rafe to die
of web-cramp, Rafe would not die of web-cramp.
But it would take time to commission a web, time in
which — perhaps — Julur would put off any other
action.

Broadcast from Commander Rallya
To all ships in Khirtin Fleet:
The fleet will depart at 03:00/353/5043…
353/5043
KHIRTIN ZONE, NEW EMPIRE and CENTRAL

[Fleet Group Three in position for jump,] Vidar
reported, relaying the message from the Group
Commander. [Fleet Group Six undocking
complete.]
[Acknowledged.]
Rallya checked the information against the
timetable for the jump. Still on schedule and if the
gods were kind — or at least looking the other way
— still with the advantage of surprise. The charges
against Carher had been broadcast from the other
side of the Disputed Zone; no message had been
sent from Khirtin without her approval; no ship
that had approached the station had been allowed
to leave. There was no way that Carher could know
the scale or timing of what she faced. Unless the
pickets around Khirtin had missed the jump flare of
a spy‘s arrival, and Rallya would have somebody‘s
ears for web-bands if they had. If they were going
to jump into a shooting gallery around Central, she
wanted to know about it in advance.
Whatever they were going to jump into, she
would have liked to know about it in advance. But
there had been no response from Central to the
charges she had made, neither from Carher nor
from the rest of the Council. There would have been
a denial if the Council was backing Carher; the
silence meant that Carher was in control, but
without their support. Which meant that she would

only be able to rely on her co-conspirators to
defend her, and there was no knowing how many of
those there were, or how quickly she could gather
them at Central. Which meant there was no
knowing what was waiting for Rallya‘s fleet when it
came out of jump.
[Damage control Team One in place,] Vidar
signalled. [All nonessential power drains being shut
down.]
[Acknowledged.] That too was on schedule,
Bhattya‘s own preparations for the jump and
afterwards. It was a familiar routine, familiar to her
but to very few of the other members of the fleet‘s
web-rooms. To them, real fleet battles were history,
in the Homir wars and before that. All they were
used to were the push-and-shove imitations in the
Disputed Zone, or kiss-and-run encounters with
Outsider raiders, not full-scale shooting wars where
both sides had everything to lose. It had made
Rallya feel damned old to realize it and damned
worried about how they would stand up to what
was coming.
[Damage control Team Two in place. With
passenger.] There was a flavour of amusement in
Vidar‘s message.
[Query passenger,] Rallya sent sharply.
[Fadir. Found in his cabin.]
Rallya swore inwardly. Of all the times for Fadir
to find out that he had some initiative… Only he
would be stupid enough to give up a safe berth
running errands for Ayvar in favour of being
underfoot on a patrolship in battle. Or maybe not,
she conceded; in his position, she might — just
might — have pulled the same stunt. And he had
done well to remain undiscovered for so long, until

there was no time left to put him off. There might
be some hope for him yet.
[Query Rasil,] she sent.
[Negative.]
At least they had one apprentice who knew how
to obey orders. [Message to web-room for Fadir,]
she told Vidar. [Sit down, shut up and consider a
future without ears. Copy to web and damage
control teams.]
Since he was aboard, he might as well be useful.
Tension was building up in the web; she could feel
the undercurrents of fear. It would be worse where
Jualla‘s team and Lilimya‘s waited in the
maintenance spaces with nothing to do until —
gods forbid — the ship took damage. It would do
them all good to know that Fadir had sneaked
aboard, give them something to laugh about.
Battles were not only won by conserving every erg
of energy for fighting with, they were won by
knowing your web-room‘s strength, by knowing
how to blunt the razor-edge of waiting that cut
away at concentration.
[Fleet Group Four in position for jump,] Vidar
reported.
Two more groups still manoeuvring into
formation. Ten more minutes until jump. Ten
minutes in which to consider all the mistakes she
might have made, the possibility that Carher did
have the support of the Council, that she was
waiting at Central with the capability to destroy all
of them as they came out of jump. If she had
enough warning, if she had enough ships, if
somebody miscalculated the jump from Khirtin and
emerged in somebody else‘s shadow…
[!] The signal from Joshim was just a flicker, a
warning that her jitters were leaking out into the

web. Disgusted with herself, Rallya returned an
equally brief acknowledgement. Pre-battle nerves
were another familiar part of the routine, but she
had never forgotten herself so far as to let them
show. Only Joshim would have noticed, but that
was no excuse. Nor was being tired from five days
of drumming sense into a collection of
Commander‘s skulls. If a junior had made the same
mistake, she would have expected Joshim to dump
them from the web.
[Fleet Group Five in position for jump.]
No trace of nerves in Vidar‘s web-presence, not
even concern that his beloved ship systems were
out of his control. Comms control was a senior‘s job
in battle, but Bhattya was short of seniors and
Rallya would not trust her link with the fleet to
anybody else. She wanted somebody she could rely
on to feed her the information she needed when the
data inflows were too great for a single person to
handle. Somebody who would know which
messages to pass to her, which messages to handle
themselves. Somebody who would not crumble if
things went wrong.
Joshim‘s presence in the web was so light that it
was possible to forget he was there. Until he flicked
you a warning that your web control was slipping.
Or decided that you were fading and swapped you
out to filtered standby to snatch some sleep in the
shub. He had better think carefully before he tried
that with her. She had designated him as her
backup because he had insisted she choose one. He
was the best Webmaster she had worked with in
years, and an adequate tactician for Outsider
encounters. He was not a Commander. Especially
not a Fleet Commander.

[Fleet Group Six in position for jump. All
Commanders report ready and counting.]
[Acknowledged. Five minute warning.]
The alert confirmed what everybody knew, that
jump and combat were imminent. Rallya felt the
telltale shift in concentration throughout the web as
minds and bodies tensed in anticipation. She sent a
test signal down her direct channels, to the sensors
team, the drive team, the weapons team, the shields
team. Ritual more than routine, a final reassurance
for her and for them that they were in contact, that
she was in control of the ship, that Bhattya was
part of her body as the fleet would never be,
although they took her orders too.
[One minute warning.]
The drive team signalled readiness; the
parameters for the jump were locked into the
system ready to be activated. Rallya put the shields
on triggered standby; they would be raised as soon
as they came out of jump. She switched her primary
input to the wide scanner, for an instant overview
of Central when they emerged.
[Activating jump.]
She rode it with her inputs open, shedding the
chaotic data that flowed in for the no-time they
were in jump space. As the shields came up and the
vanes moved out to restore the drive field, she drew
the wide scan matrix into herself, looking for
threats, immediate and deferred.
The fleet had come through in perfect formation,
a slowly contracting sphere focused on Central.
There were several ships in dock, others forming a
ragged shell between the station and the fleet. Ten…
eleven of them. Patrolships by their sleek lines and
the heat patterns on their hulls. Patrolships with
their shields up and their weapons primed but still

taken by surprise by the fleet‘s arrival, their
weapons targeted on the station, outnumbered two
to one by the incoming ships.
[Fleet broadcast,] Rallya flashed to Vidar. [Status
one.] Which was fire only when fired upon, by the
code she had agreed with the other Commanders.
[General broadcast: Invitation to surrender. To
Central: Query situation.] To the sensor team, she
sent [Identify all hostile ships.]
Some of Carher‘s ships were moving away from
the station, sacrificing its shelter to give themselves
more room in which to fight. Or run, if they could
escape the station‘s mass-shadow. No Commander
who deserved their berth would like such uneven
odds. Their web-rooms would probably prefer to
surrender if they were given the choice. Most of
them would be cut off from the comm circuits, deaf
to everything that their Threes did not want them
to hear, but their sensors would show them what
was going on. It would not take them long to work
out what their chances were and nothing crippled a
ship more effectively than discord in the web.
[Message from Central,] Vidar notified her.
[Station secure. Long range comms damaged.
Unable to assist.]
Not with four armed patrolships looking down
their throats, Rallya agreed grimly. Stations were
never armed, could not be shielded, were too
complex and fragile to invite being fired upon. And
the ships in dock could not move without
jeopardizing the station. Unless some of them were
hostile, but there was no sign of activity among
them. It looked as if she had interrupted an attempt
to capture the station. As if none of Carher‘s ships
had reached dock or they had been forced out by
the station‘s resistance. Where was Carher? On one

of the ships preparing for action, or still clinging to
the shelter of the station? At least she did not have
control of the station; that was the bloodiest of the
scenarios that Rallya had planned for.
[General broadcast,] she told Vidar. [All ships to
hold current position or be fired upon. Fleet
broadcast: status two.] Select targets and prepare to
fire on signal.
The sensors team were feeding her names for
Carher‘s ships and for their Threes; the station
must be broadcasting the data, doing as much as
they could to help. Carher‘s name was tagged to
Keldir, hugging the station within Bhattya‘s field of
fire. Rallya marked her down as the prime target for
the weapons team. There were other names that she
recognized, names that held no surprises. Most of
the Old Empire aristos in the Guild had swarmed to
Carher, like flies to a dung heap. She saw Meresya‘s
name on one of the outbound ships, and Dhanar‘s.
Thirty-five years ago they had both slipped through
the Council‘s ineffective net. But not this time.
[Message from Keldir,] Vidar sent. [Withdraw, or
we will fire on station. Also coded broadcast, same
source.]
Instructions to her other ships, as Rallya was
instructing hers. [Fleet broadcast: code five,] Rallya
responded. Fire on any ship that tries to jump. [No
reply to Keldir.]
Carher was bluffing. Outnumbered and caught in
Central‘s mass-shadow, she was hoping to negotiate
a way out of the trap, trying for time to regroup and
try again. As long as she believed she had a chance
of winning, she would try to preserve Central and
the secrets it held: the formula for R-K-D and the
drugs that deactivated a web, the navigation
libraries, all of the other keys to the power that she

needed to survive. And she was gambling that
Rallya would not risk crippling the Guild by
endangering Central‘s records. Hellishly stupid to
have kept them in one place, Rallya thought
fleetingly; that would have to change. After she had
seen Carher‘s bet.
[Lock on target,] she ordered the weapons team.
[Acknowledged.]
One of the outbound ships folded its vanes and
dropped its shields in a single well-planned move.
Then it was debris, hit by fire from two directions
as it tried to jump.
[We have surrenders,] Vidar reported almost
immediately. [Four. Now six.]
It had taken those web-rooms long enough,
Rallya thought angrily. Gods knew if the webbers
who had just died had been the most fanatic or only
the most stupid…
[Nonnegotiable conditions,] she sent. [Dropped
shields, folded vanes, cold weapons. Skeleton team
in each web, the rest of the web-room in suits on
the hull. Group One Commander to take
possession. One ship from each group to assist.]
And gods help anybody who got in the line of fire if
Carher made a break for it, friend or enemy. [Fleet
broadcast: status two.] There were still four ships to
deal with. [General broadcast: will open fire in five
minutes.]
[Message from Keldir: will surrender at station.]
There was a ripple of disbelief in Vidar‘s signal, an
unnecessary flicker of warning from Joshim.
[Negative. Conditions for surrender have already
been stated. Remaining ships will move away from
station before surrender will be accepted.]
Nobody willing to double-cross Julur would fold
so easily. Carher had something planned; every

length she moved away from Central reduced the
danger that the station would be caught in the
crossfire when she tried it. Though gods knew what
it was: Keldir was too deep inside a mass-shadow to
try for a jump, too outnumbered to fight free.
Surrender was the only sane option, but it still was
not believable.
[Conditions accepted,] Vidar reported.
As Rallya watched suspiciously, Keldir lowered
its shields and edged away from the station, tamely
copied by the other three ships.
[Message to Keldir: we will approach you,] she
told Vidar, angling Bhattya‘s vanes to take them
out of formation. The weapons team was still locked
on target. The sensor team fed her a heat scan of
the approaching ship: shields lowered, cannons
cooling, no more activity from the drive than could
be explained by the gradual movement. Nothing
apparently out of place. Even the vanes were…
Space rippled with the stress of a ship jumping
inside a mass-shadow. Rallya grabbed for the drive
controls, slammed Bhattya in Keldir‘s wake. The
web convulsed in a struggle to adjust; dimly she
was aware of Joshim damping the shock waves to
allow her to work. The cannons were still primed
and aimed where their target had been. She
bypassed the weapons team, praying that they had
come out of the jump in the right orientation, that
Keldir was the blurred image in the sensors that
had survived. She fired. The blur scattered into a
sparkle of fragments. As it did, somebody — Vidar?
— took the ship back into jump space, back through
the hole that was closing behind them, back to the
fading echoes of their departure.
There was utter silence in the signal circuits as
the web steadied, as if nobody quite believed what

had happened, neither Keldir‘s insanity, jumping
inside a mass-shadow, nor Rallya‘s, riding the
wake. Gods knew, nobody could expect to survive
such insanity twice in a lifetime, Rallya thought,
pulling herself together. Luckily, once had been
enough. But it had been earned luck, she told
herself exuberantly, the luck of having the right
team in the web and the right kind of suspicious
mind. Although if they drifted much longer in a
battlefield,
half-blind
and
congratulating
themselves, they would deserve something else.
Not that there was a battle still going on. Not that
there had been a battle at all, only a swift but
conclusive skirmish, but the histories would call it a
battle, and the web-rooms of the her fleet would
boast about having taken part in it. Let them, Rallya
thought resignedly. Only two ships lost, and those
both the enemy‘s: it was more to be proud of than a
bloody fight with heavy casualties on both side.
There was still clearing up to do, guilt to determine
in the web-rooms of the ships that had surrendered,
but it was a good beginning.
[Query comms,] she sent crisply to Joshim. First
priority was a situation report, to confirm what she
was getting from the sensors that were left. The
growing activity in the web told her that Vidar was
already busy collating a damage report that he
would hold against her for years. [Casualty report,]
also to Joshim. The damage control teams would
have taken a battering in those two rapid jumps.
[Well done,] to the rest of the web.
[No casualties,] Joshim replied. [Message from
Group One Commander. Situation stable. All
hostile ships being boarded. Fleet moving to
defensive formation.]

Situation stable? Huh. It would be a long time
before the situation in the Guild was stable again.
[Query Central.]
[From Central: sending tug to assist us to dock.
Council waiting for you earliest opportunity.]
[Advise accept assistance,] Vidar added
accusingly. [Eighty percent sensor loss, sixty
percent vane loss, total shield loss. Other minor
damage.]
[Accept,] she sent to Joshim. She could imagine
what the Council — or what was left of it — wanted.
Help to sort out the chaos their incompetence had
brought down on their heads. Well, if that was so,
they would take it on her terms or not at all. She
had not risked the lives of every webber in
Bhattya‘s web-room to see the Council throw away
what they had won.
[Take key,] she told Vidar, relinquishing control
of the web. Carher had lost because she had not
been given enough time to win; the Council were
going to learn the same lesson. Hit them now with
what was required of them, while they were still
reeling from the shock of Carher‘s defection, and
the Guild would come through this a hell‘s length
stronger than it had ever been.

General broadcast from Guild Council
To all ships and stations:
The coup instigated by ex-Councillor Carher has
been decisively suppressed in a brief battle at Central…
Commander Rallya of Bhattya and the Old Empire has
been co-opted onto the Council…
354/5043
IMPERIAL ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

―The work would go faster if you had help.‖
Rafe glanced across the floor at Braniya‘s feet, all
that he could see of her from under the antique
web‘s casing. ―I don‘t need help.‖ He pulled another
circuit out of its mounting and inspected it carefully
for visible signs of damage.
―You don‘t want to endanger anybody,‖ Braniya
corrected him.
―It would be a waste,‖ Rafe agreed. ―Especially
since you won‘t find a tech who knows anything
about this.‖ Not even within the Guild, unless one
of the historians had come across something
similar in the records…
―Not even the little that you know?‖ Braniya
asked. ―Perhaps not, but would an extra pair of
hands not be useful?‖
―This,‖ Rafe said, sliding out from under the
casing and standing up to place the circuit in the
test-rig that he had found with the web, ―was
designed for a single person to maintain and use.
An extra pair of hands would just get in the way.‖
What else it had been designed for, he had been
unable to discover. Self-contained, even to its
power-source, it had no sensors, no control
linkages, only a bank of comms circuits to connect

it to the world outside. There was a single couch
covered by a full-length hood, with web-contacts
that would fit his and provision for a nutrient feed.
For amusement, Julur had said; somebody had had
a damned solitary vice.
―The Emperor is concerned that your web-cramp
is occurring more frequently and with greater
severity.‖
―The Emperor is not the only one.‖
The test-rig displayed the symbol for test-inprogress, then the symbol for test-completewithout-errors. They were the same symbols that
the Guild‘s test-rigs used, produced by equipment
of an age Rafe could not guess. The area where the
web was installed had been vacuum-sealed; when
the guards had unsealed it, it looked as if it had not
been visited for centuries. And the web itself — the
principles of its construction were familiar, if all the
materials were not, but for it to have survived so
long without deteriorating… Unless the test-rig was
faulty — and he had to trust that it was not — every
circuit that Rafe had checked was functioning
perfectly.
―It may be that the equipment will need to be
maintained for some time,‖ Braniya said. ―Any tech
brought in to help you could expect to live for some
years.‖
Rafe raised his eyebrows. Braniya was telling him
that something had changed in the Guild,
something that made it unlikely that Julur would
get any cooperation from them for years. For the
Guild‘s sake, that was good news. For himself? If
Julur wanted to keep him alive, he had to preserve
his skill in the web; otherwise web-cramp would kill
him. The only way to do that was another identitywipe, which was preferable to the personality

disintegration he had been threatened with. Very
marginally.
―I don‘t need any help,‖ he said stubbornly. He
would not jeopardize anybody else‘s life. And he
would not share the excitement of this web with
anybody. Working on it stopped him thinking for
hours at a time about Joshim and Ayvar and what
Julur intended to do with him. And about his webcramp, except when the spasms took him.
―The Emperor wishes your work to be checked, to
be certain that the web is safe to be used.‖
―Only a webber could tell him that.‖ Rafe slid
back under the casing to replace the circuit he had
just tested, to extract the next one. ―He‘ll have to
rely on my judgement. He‘ll be questioning me
under Gadrine; he‘ll know I haven‘t done anything
deliberate to hurt myself. For the rest, he‘ll have to
assume I know what I‘m doing. It‘s my life I‘ll be
risking when I hook in. If I‘m not ecstatic about him
meddling with my sanity, I‘m hardly going to
endanger it by mistake.‖
―Your life belongs to the Emperor,‖ she
contradicted him icily.
―If you bring a tech down here, I shall stop work,‖
Rafe told her equally coldly. ―Maybe the tech could
complete what I‘ve started. Maybe you and enough
guards could get me hooked into the web without
doing permanent damage to my web-contacts. But
you couldn‘t make me use it.‖
When he stood up again, her lips were pressed
into a thin angry line. It must be difficult for her, he
thought without sympathy, to have a prisoner
whose terms of imprisonment were so
contradictory, about whom she was forbidden to
ask questions. Almost as difficult as it was to be

that prisoner, not knowing when Julur‘s indulgence
would end.
―If you want me in this web as soon as possible,‖
he informed her, ―you can stop distracting me. And
you can tell Julur that it will be ready for use first
thing tomorrow. I‘d appreciate it if he‘d schedule
his question session then.‖
He shrank from the thought of more Gadrine, but
if it was the only way to get into this fascinating
web… Not just because of the web-cramp, but
because he itched to explore it from within. He
would never know whose it had been or why it was
here in the Old Imperial Palace. He would never
share what he did learn with anybody else, but just
once while he was still Rafe who had been Lin, he
wanted to web again. He wanted a world where he
was in control, he admitted to himself ruefully,
somewhere where his every breath did not hang on
the whim of an Emperor.

From Central Station News
…The Council will meet in private session in the
Council Chamber at 04:00/355/5043…
355/5043
CENTRAL ZONE

Rallya flung the sheaf of flimsies that she had
accumulated during the Council meeting onto the
desk in the office she had been allocated. Carher‘s
office, and noticeably larger than the other
Councillors‘. The flimsies made a satisfying scatter
on the floor as they slid off the highly polished
surface. If she could have been bothered, she would
have dumped them in the waste disposal.
Gods and Emperors, it was easy to see how
Carher had been able to get away with so much.
Half the Council was incompetent and the other
half was worse. No, that was unfair. There were one
or two brains struggling to remember how to
function, Ferin‘s for one, and the woman with one
arm, Rhonya. The rest of them… If she had needed
proof that democracy was no way to choose a
governing body, the Council was it, but having been
elected, they could at least have the decency not to
try to unload their responsibilities on the first
saviour that came along. Yes, she was willing to
take them by the hand and drag them in the right
direction until she was sure they could carry on by
themselves. No, she was not going to accept
leadership of the Guild, not even until they could
arrange for fresh elections.
―Excuse me, ma‘am.‖ Fadir hesitated in the
doorway, one foot just inside the office as if he was
testing the temperature before venturing in.

―Message from the Stationmaster. Khetya is coming
into dock and Lord Dhur would like to speak to you
as soon as possible.‖
―Who invited him here?‖ she demanded. ―No,
don‘t try to answer that, Fadir. You might wear
your brain out thinking, and you wouldn‘t want to
be the only one around here with a used brain.
Message to the Stationmaster. I‘ll see Lord Dhur as
soon as Khetya has docked. Let the idiot who calls
himself my secretary know too.‖
―Yes, ma‘am.‖
Lord Dhur obviously thought he did not need an
invitation to Central, Rallya thought darkly as she
dropped into the high-backed seat. That was one
mistake he would not make again. If he thought the
loan of his fleet — which he was not going to get
back — entitled him to special treatment, he was
wrong. And if he thought he could persuade her to
besiege Julur, he was also wrong. Blood and hell,
the man was stubborn. Joshim stood more chance
of changing her mind and at least he knew better
than to try.
―Lord Dhur, ma‘am.‖
―Thank you, Fadir. Find out if the idiot in the
outer office can produce some alcad, and bring it in
yourself.‖ She nodded to Ayvar, gestured at the
empty chair. ―If you were in such a hurry to be here,
you should have stowed away with Fadir.‖
―Fadir didn‘t tell me what he planned.‖ Ayvar
took the seat he had been offered. ―I came to find
out what you plan.‖
―What I plan or what the Guild plans?‖
―For current purposes, the two are the same.‖
―No, they aren‘t,‖ Rallya objected sharply.
―The Guild Council is ready to accept any
suggestion you make,‖ Ayvar said smoothly. ―No,‖

he added, holding up a hand to silence Rallya, ―I
don‘t have a spy in the Council. I‘ve seen the same
situation in other places and times — in so many
thousand years, there‘s little new. You‘re strong.
You have strong ideas about the Guild. And you‘re
willing to put them into action. It‘s inevitable they
look to you for a lead.‖
Rallya snorted. ―Well, they are not going to be led
into besieging Julur. Rafe‘s life isn‘t worth what it
would cost. And he would agree with me, no matter
what Julur does to him.‖
―Is that your final word?‖
―If I can win Rafe‘s freedom by negotiation, I will.
But I will not throw away the peace of both Empires
to do it.‖ She studied him suspiciously. It occurred
to her that there was another potential source of a
fleet, the F‘sair who had taken Julur‘s hire in the
past, who might take Ayvar‘s hire in the future. Was
he so intent on Rafe‘s freedom that he would go
that far?
―I think, Lord Dhur,‖ she said slowly, ―that you
had better resign yourself to an indefinite stay at
Central. I want you where I know what you‘re
doing.‖
Ayvar looked at her without expression. ―You
aren‘t worried that holding me will provoke the
same chaos as besieging Julur?‖
―Not if you make no protest,‖ she said calmly,
―and you won‘t, will you?‖
―I‘ll give you two days to try negotiating,‖ Ayvar
conceded. ―But I warn you, Commander Rallya, I
will hold you personally responsible if I lose Lin.‖
Rallya stiffened at the threat in his voice. ―Julur
might release him in exchange for you,‖ she
suggested provocatively. ―One webber — any

webber — is worth more to me than an Emperor.
No doubt the reverse is true for Julur.‖
Ayvar shook his head. ―Even if you offered, he‘d
refuse. I‘ve told you, nothing will make him give Lin
up except fear for his own life.‖ He stood up. ―Two
days, Commander. And for Lin‘s sake, don‘t bring
my name into it.‖
Rallya called the Stationmaster when he had
gone, to warn her not to let him leave on any ship.
Then she sat glaring at her reflection in the glossy
desktop. If Ayvar was convinced that what she had
to bargain with would not gain Rafe‘s freedom, then
it was not enough. Gods, was she going to be forced
to abandon Rafe? She felt sick to her roots at the
thought.
―Alcad, ma‘am.‖ Fadir halted in the doorway,
looking in vain for Ayvar.
―Bring it here,‖ she said irritably. ―He couldn‘t
wait.‖ She took one of the mugs off him. ―Make it
yourself, did you?‖ He nodded. ―Then you may as
well drink the other one. And sit down while you do
it. You make me uncomfortable standing up.‖
―Yes, ma‘am.‖ He sat so close to the edge of the
seat that the weight of the mug should have
unbalanced him.
―Have you been aboard Bhattya today?‖
―Yes, ma‘am.‖
―Good. You can tell me how the repair work is
going.‖ She had not been back aboard since they
docked. She needed something simple to worry
about and damn it, it was still her ship. ―Vidar still
angry with me?‖
―I think so, ma‘am,‖ Fadir said cautiously.
―Although not as angry as he was yesterday.‖
―His temper is directly proportional to the
amount of damage still to be repaired,‖ she said

drily. ―If you ever make it to command rank, Fadir,
remember that all Captains have an unnatural
attachment to the fabric of their ship. If you ever
want to annoy one, bring their ship into dock a
virtual wreck. Even if it is in a good cause, they
won‘t talk to you for days.‖
―Yes, ma‘am.‖ Fadir sounded justifiably
uncertain whether that was the response expected
of him.
―How‘s Joshim?‖ she asked.
―He‘s… working very hard. And not very happy,‖
the apprentice said bravely. ―I think he‘s worried
about…‖
―Rafe. We‘re all worried about Rafe,‖ Rallya said
heavily. So much for something simple to worry
about.

From Central Station News
…The Guild has withdrawn its services in the
Disputed Zone from both Emperors…
355/5043
IMPERIAL ZONE, OLD EMPIRE

―These are where the attachment is made?‖ With
distaste, Julur examined the bunch of web-contacts
lying on the couch. ―Barbaric. It should not have
been allowed.‖
―It was my own choice,‖ Rafe argued, probably
unwisely. ―Are you convinced yet that it‘s safe?‖
He held his fingers rigidly straight, to prevent his
nails from digging into his palms. After the latest
interrogation under Gadrine, there was nothing else
he could do to convince Julur. Was it all a hoax?
Had Julur never intended to allow him in the web?
Had he held out the possibility for the pleasure of
denying it?
―You may use it.‖ Julur dropped the webcontacts. ―I will observe.‖ He crossed the room to
the seat he had had carried in. ―How long a period
will you require for good health?‖
―Initially, two or three hours,‖ Rafe said
cautiously. ―I‘m accustomed to webbing for eight
hours a day. To prevent the web-cramp recurring, I
should maintain that level of activity.‖
―It will be permitted.‖ Julur sat down. He had
dispensed with his guards again, brought only
Braniya with him. ―You may begin.‖
Rafe stretched out on the couch, removed his
web-bands. His web-contacts would need cleaning
— vividly he remembered Joshim doing just that —
he would not ask Braniya or Julur to do it for him.

He strapped the signal-contacts onto his wrists;
they were warm, already active. There was no
monitor for him to check their placing, only
experience to tell him that they felt right. He
strapped the control-contact to his neck, hardly
aware of his audience in his eagerness.
At the instant of engagement, there was a
disconcerting impression of size from the web,
larger than it should be within the confines of the
casing. He fought that down; it was the strange
configuration disorienting him. He wanted to
stretch out to the edge of the available space, to give
his nerves the freedom they had lacked for so long.
He fought that down too. In a web as strange as
this, he had to be cautious. At least while there were
still things to learn about the web.
The strangest thing was being alone, the
knowledge that there was no one on the end of his
signal circuits. It made the web cold, less inviting
than the Guild‘s webs. Or was that just his
imagination? Whichever it was, he was not
comfortable, did not feel safe, felt like a child
tiptoeing through a deserted building.
Tentatively, he sent a signal, expecting it to
vanish into nothing or to be reflected back to him.
What came back was neither silence nor an echo.
Intrigued, he repeated the experiment on a
different set of circuits with the same result. The
response was nothing he could understand, but it
was not the signal he had sent.
Slowly, he extended along a single circuit,
looking for the terminus. He found nothing, even
stretched so far that he would have reached the
edge of Bhattya‘s web. He withdrew, sent the same
probe down other circuits. All of them seemed
endless, reinforcing his initial impression of size.

There were no external sensors, but were there
status banks, information banks from which he
could read a matrix? Nobody built a web as
complex as this for amusement, whatever Julur
claimed. It had to have another purpose. Station
webs held information about arrival and departure
schedules; he remembered hearing the suggestion
that all the Guild‘s records should be held in the
same way. There were no circuits in this web whose
function he had not understood, no excess storage
that he had noticed. The only anomaly was the large
bank of comms circuits, approaching the
complexity of a ship‘s comms circuits. Were they a
link to storage elsewhere? Was he misinterpreting
his signal circuits? Direct comms circuits would be
open-ended, he thought excitedly. If he could just
master the signal system…
Doggedly, he ran through every signalling system
he knew, starting with the training signals that were
the first that a junior learnt, working through the
standard fives used upon the cargoships, the eights
of a surveyship, the extended tens of a patrolship.
When he ran out of options, he repeated himself,
varying the patterns across the array of signal
circuits in case the connections were made
differently than they were in the webs he was used
to. If nothing else, the exercise was driving the webcramp away.
Just when he had given up hope, was repeating
the sequence out of stubbornness, not conviction,
he got an answer that he could interpret. Extended
tens, but with the connections made in reverse
order. He sent [Query status,] received [Acting.] An
instant later he felt the unmistakable tingle in his
input circuits that was a matrix forming. He opened
to it.

It was a visual analog. It took him several
seconds to build the picture in his mind. The first
try made no sense, but when he inverted it along
both axes, it was a text bank, written in almost
recognizable symbols, symbols that could be the
precursors of the alphabet he knew, symbols that
could be as old as the web he was in. The web lost
the fragile veneer of familiarity that the signalling
exercise had given it.
Struggling to hold the image clearly, he tried to
understand it. There were several lines of text, each
with a corresponding signal glyph. The top line
might be "web." The rest… possibly "complex" and
"surface" and others he could not interpret. He sent
[Query web] and the matrix reformed.
A mixed text and diagram bank, less difficult to
visualize because the adjustments he needed to
make were becoming familiar. "Power" and a figure
were easy to recognize, but harder to interpret
without knowing the scale; he assumed it referred
to the web‘s internal power source. "Lock" and the
symbol for "off" implied that something could be
locked but was not. The diagram could be
interpreted as meaning the web was fully
functional, or it could mean something else
entirely.
He sent [Magnify] with a pointer to the area of
the diagram and watched it reform on a larger
scale, spanning four of his input matrices. He
thought he would go crazy, shifting them from their
old relationship to the new upside-down back-tofront world, but he got them there in the end,
concentrating so fiercely that he knew he would
have a headache when he came out of the web.
Now he was seeing a schematic of the web‘s
circuits, dotted and continuous lines. Assume one

set was signal, one set was control. Which was
which? Concentrations of both kinds led to a cluster
of arrows pointing out of the web. The comms
circuits? Did he have control over something
outside the body of the web? Outside the casing
that he knew about, he corrected himself. How far
did this web extend? And most importantly, what
could he do from it?
There were control circuits terminating within
the casing, if his interpretation was correct. "Lock,"
he remembered from the previous matrix. Lock the
hood? It was sturdy enough to be worth locking, if
he had remembered to slide it over him. Could he
manage the mixture of body and web control that
would take, if he had a good enough reason for
doing it? And would locking the hood also lock
access to the circuits? Surely yes, if it was intended
as protection for the person in the web.
[Query,] he sent, wondering what further
information the web would supply about itself. One
of the circuits on the schematic doubled in intensity
and a description appeared; as it did, he felt an itch
in his own — corresponding? — circuit. Gods, he
thought, this was how juniors learnt their way
around a web. The teaching was done by a
Webmaster, not the web itself, but if the web was
designed only to hold one person… The description
was incomprehensible. He sent [Acknowledge] and
another circuit was identified for him, also leading
off the edge of the diagram.
It could take days to learn his way around by this
method. How long had he been in the web? He had
lost track of elapsed time, but it must be close to
two hours. When would Julur expect him to
emerge? And would he be questioned about what
he had done? If Julur learned that this web was not

the limited thing he had believed, he would not
allow Rafe to use it again. Was it worth taking the
risk — if he could learn how to do it — to lock
himself in and anger Julur in return for… Gods
knew what possibilities. Yes, it was, when he
already had nothing to look forward to except a
short lifetime of dancing around the Old Emperor‘s
moods.
[Query web,] he sent, for a repeat of the previous
bank. When he had it, he sent [Magnify] with a
pointer to the "lock" section. He was rewarded with
another circuit diagram, simpler, with labels
already attached. "Hood," "web," and "room": three
circuits, all controlling a different level of locking.
"Hood" and "web" were definitely what he wanted.
"Room"? The room that the web was in? The room
that Braniya and Julur were also in? That was
distinctly tempting.
He sent [Query] and the circuits identified
themselves in turn. He checked several times, to be
sure he had memorized them; Julur was unlikely to
be forgiving of any mistake he made. Then he
carefully lightened his web control, mixing it with
body control until he could hear the noises in the
room around him, the rustle of armour-cloth, two
people breathing and with nothing to say to each
other. He dared not open his eyes, but the hood slid
over from right to left; if he raised his right arm he
would touch it. From then it would take a second to
close the hood, a fraction of a second to operate all
three locks. Then — he hoped — he would be safe
from Julur and Braniya and they would be trapped
until he decided to free them. Unless there was an
override that could be operated from outside the
web…

Hell, Julur could do nothing worse than he had
already threatened. He raised his arm, closed the
hood, triggered the locks. He had enough body
control to hear Julur exclaim, Braniya run across
the floor to find out what he had done. Through the
darkly transparent hood, he could see her
struggling to open it. When she dropped out of
sight, he assumed she was trying to open the circuit
access she had seen him open before.
Julur was asking sharp questions; there must be
a sound pickup somewhere in the room that was
relayed inside the web, Rafe decided. There would
be even more questions asked when they realized
that they were locked in. How long would it take to
cut through the door, as sturdily built as the walls
in this underground warren? Several hours at least.
He had wondered about the thickness of that door
when he first saw it; now he understood.
He let his body control fade. The web status bank
now showed "Lock" was on, and there was a pulsing
alarm signal. To tell him that somebody was trying
to tamper with the web, he decided. Now to find out
what the other status banks would tell him.
"Complex" gave him a map. Working on the
assumption that it was a map of the deep levels, he
sent [Locate] and was shown a section of the map
with one room highlighted, a figure two inside the
room and a figure ten outside. Julur and Braniya
and a squad of guards. [Query] gave him another
circuit diagram. He ran through the identification
sequence, finding "Lighting," "Temperature" and —
most interesting — "Atmosphere." The presence or
absence
of
atmosphere,
he
concluded,
remembering the vacuum seal.
So. He had Julur locked in a room from which he
could withdraw the air. Incidentally killing himself,

since there was no independent air supply to the
web, but it should be possible to convince Julur that
he would commit suicide rather than remain a
prisoner; the Emperor had been concerned enough
that he would deliberately damage himself in the
web. None of it would help him if he could not find
a way off the planet.
"Surface" gave him a picture, several pictures
that he could flick between. Most of them were
blank; the others might be views of the surface of
Old Imperial. The blank pictures worried him.
Damaged sensors, or damage to the web itself?
He went back to the first status bank, puzzling
over the lines he could not interpret. What he
needed was a way to communicate, not only with
Julur to put his demands — when he had decided
what they were — but off-world as well. With
Central. Whoever was in control — Rallya, or he did
not know the woman — must have learned by now
that he had not been Carher‘s prisoner. If he told
the Guild where he was, made it possible for them
to get in to collect him and out again safely…
The first line he tried gave him a diagram of his
own web. Fascinated, he spared a few seconds to
study it, defeated by the text but guessing that the
highlighted section was a diagnosis of web-cramp.
Or else the residual damage from the overload. The
web must be probing his nervous system without
him being aware of such an analysis. His mind
balked at the level of sophistication that needed.
This web was old, but it was not antiquated.
Another choice gave him a view of the room
around him, of Braniya and Julur talking
animatedly. There was extra data that might be
sound, but he had never dealt with a sound input,
could not begin to understand it. He watched them

talk for a while; for once, Braniya seemed to be
contradicting Julur. Regretfully, he filed the sound
input among the things he would never have time
to explore. If he needed to hear them, he could
regain some body control.
His third blind choice brought him the comms
circuits. Within the room, within the palace, system
space, deep space. Rapid exploration of the deep
space circuits taught him that they at least were
familiar enough for him to use untutored. First, he
had to target the message on Central. He knew the
station‘s location to several decimal places; every
Guild-member did. He specified it. Immediately the
web questioned it, offering an alternative that was
different in the last decimal place on one axis. His
mistake? No. He knew his coordinates were right.
He overrode the alteration and the web gave in.
Next, before he brought anybody else into
danger, he should be sure that he could control
Julur and Braniya. He went through the sequence
that identified atmosphere control. Demonstration
first, demands afterwards? He was entitled to
revenge for what Julur had done to him. This might
be his only chance. For a long moment, he
wondered if there was a way to take permanent
revenge. To make Julur undergo an identity-wipe
or a personality disintegration. Except that his
personality was already less than intact. And the
repercussions of any act of aggression against an
Emperor were unthinkable, unless it was never
became known beyond the walls of this room. He
would have to be content with teaching Julur what
it was to be terrified and to have no means of
escape.
He returned to the view of the room. Julur and
Braniya were using the intercomm, arguing

alternately with each other and with the comm.
Rafe signalled for the atmosphere to be reduced.
His captives were slow to notice the effects, but it
was pleasant to see Julur‘s face when he finally
realized what was happening. He watched until
they had both passed out and he was beginning to
feel the effects himself before he restored the air.
By the time they regained consciousness, he had
withdrawn from the web enough to hear and to
talk.
―I can do that whenever I want,‖ he greeted Julur
as the Emperor stood up unsteadily. He was
obviously audible outside the hood; Julur jerked as
if he had been struck. ―I don‘t have to stop before
you‘re dead.‖
The colour fled from Julur‘s face, leaving him an
unpleasant white. ―You would not kill me,‖ he said.
―Because you‘re immortal?‖ Rafe scoffed. ―It
doesn‘t mean you can‘t die. It means you haven‘t
done it yet.‖
―You would die too.‖
―I have to do it sometime.‖ Braniya was dragging
herself to her feet. ―Welcome back to the world of
the living, Braniya. Temporarily, perhaps.‖
―You do not have to die,‖ Julur said intensely.
―Given the choice between staying your prisoner
and dying, I‘ll choose dying,‖ Rafe said cheerfully.
―You‘ll be pleased to know there‘s a third choice.
You can allow the Guild safe conduct down here to
fetch me. And out again, of course.‖
―No,‖ Julur objected. ―You cannot…‖
―Breathe vacuum.‖ Rafe dropped the air pressure
in the room abruptly, restored it when he had made
his point. ―I shall be calling a Guild ship to fetch
me. They‘ll come out of jump inside your defensive
sphere and they won‘t be fired on. They‘ll send an

armed team down here to collect me and they won‘t
be stopped. They‘ll leave here with me and with you
as a guarantee of safety.‖
―No,‖ Julur insisted. ―I will not leave this world.‖
―You want to die instead?‖
―No.‖ Julur‘s wits seemed to have deserted him,
as if he could not cope with his loss of power. How
long had it been since he had last been helpless?
And how long would it be before he recovered?
Keep him off balance, Rafe warned himself; don‘t
give him time to start thinking again.
―Order it done — and I can see everything that
goes on in this palace,‖ he exaggerated, ―or die now.
That‘s the choice you‘ve got.‖
―We could have the crew of Havedir come down
to fetch him,‖ Braniya suggested calmly. Too calmly
for Rafe to trust her…
―I want somebody I know,‖ he insisted. ―And if
you‘re planning anything except obedience, don‘t.
Any attempt to open that door before the Guild
arrive, any attempt to get into this web, any attempt
to override what I‘m doing and I‘ll kill all of us.
Now, do I send a message to Central, or do I stop
the air?‖
Julur flinched. ―Send the message,‖ he said
hoarsely. ―You‘re mad. You would kill both of us
without understanding what you did.‖
***
Attention Commander Rallya. Urgent. Request
transport for self and Emperor from Old Imperial.
Advise extreme caution. Rafe.
Rallya reread the message flimsy before she
handed it to Joshim. ―That came in fifteen minutes
ago,‖ she said flatly. ―The comms centre have got a

reck of it, if you think you could recognize his
comms-style…‖
Joshim shook his head grimly. ―No.‖ He handed
the message on to Vidar. ―If you want me to tell you
whether it‘s genuine or not, I can‘t.‖ He twisted the
ring around his finger anxiously. ―Even if there was
some kind of proof in there…‖
He did not finish, did not need to. Rallya knew as
well as he did that nothing in the message could
prove that the request was genuine, that Rafe had
not been forced to make it. Julur had had him for
long enough to strip every secret from him, every
freedom of choice… And which was more probable,
Rallya asked herself: that Rafe had somehow gained
the upper hand over Julur, or that Julur was using
him as bait in a trap?
―Bhattya is spaceworthy,‖ Vidar remarked.
―I know that already,‖ Rallya snapped. She also
knew she had no choice. Joshim would never agree
to ignore the request when there was any possibility
that it was genuine. And neither would she, she
admitted. It would be impossible to live with herself
if she let Rafe down needlessly. Or if she sacrificed
Bhattya needlessly. Even if it was not a trap, it was
still dangerous. Advise extreme caution, Rafe had
said, implying that he did not have everything
under control, that something could still go wrong.
Something can always go wrong, she reminded
herself savagely. Gods and Emperors, she had put
her ship at risk enough times before not to funk the
decision now. Just because she could not go with
them…
―What are you waiting for?‖ she demanded.
―You‘d better get moving.‖
―You aren‘t coming?‖ Vidar queried, surprised.

―No,‖ Rallya said shortly. ―Somebody has to stay
here and teach the Council their cursed business.
Again.‖ She saw disbelief on both their faces.
―You‘re big boys now, or you should be,‖ she
pointed out irritably. ―I‘m not a faffing good-luck
charm. You can manage without me for once.‖
And the Gods-be-cursed Council could not, she
added bitterly to herself. Sometimes it seemed as if
she was the only person in the faffing Guild who did
not panic at the thought of rebuilding it from the
inside out. And if that had been clear to Ayvar days
ago — although she would see him in hell before
she admitted to his face that he was right — it must
be clear by now to Julur. Which meant — blood and
hell! — that it was her duty to skulk safely at
Central, out of Julur‘s reach. At least until the Guild
could survive without her.
―You‘d better get moving,‖ she repeated. ―I‘ll have
the comms centre tell Rafe you‘re on the way. And
be damned careful. I don‘t want Bhattya‘s
reputation ruined the first time I let her out of my
sight.‖
***
[Attention Rafe. Advise Bhattya will jump within
one hour. Please confirm that arrival in planetary
orbit has been cleared with the appropriate
authorities.]
The response, half an hour after he had sent his
message, woke Rafe from a dangerous half-doze. It
was hard to fight the ache seeping through him, the
result of nerves stretched with fear, of working too
hard after too long out of the web. Gods, he thought
gratefully as he monitored the repeat of the
message, they are coming, in spite of all the reasons

why they might have decided not to… And only an
hour before they arrived in orbit — the length of
time it took to calculate the jump from Central. Two
hours, maybe three, and he would be on his way out
of here.
―There‘ll be a ship jumping into orbit within the
hour,‖ he announced, startling Julur. ―You‘d better
give the orders to make sure that it arrives safely.
And remember, I‘ll be monitoring them.‖
Bluff, but it was the best weapon he had. He
prayed that nobody on Julur‘s staff had any
misplaced initiative…
―I‘m waiting,‖ he said sharply when neither of his
prisoners spoke. ―All planetary defenses and the
sector defensive sphere deactivated. Now.‖
―Do it,‖ Julur told Braniya abruptly.
Rafe listened to her give the orders. ―Good
enough,‖ he conceded. ―You‘d better hope that
everyone obeys you. Your lives depend on it.‖
―They‘ll obey,‖ Braniya said confidently. She
walked across the room to the locked web and
studied him closely through the semi-transparent
hood. ―I assume we are expecting Bhattya. Shall I
also give orders for a convenient shuttle-landing to
be prepared, and guides to bring your friends down
to us?‖
―And for the crowd outside the door to move
away,‖ Rafe agreed. ―All fifteen of them.‖
―Of course.‖ She did not react to his accurate
knowledge. ―Immediately?‖
―Immediately,‖ Rafe agreed.
He faded out his body control before she spoke
again. There was a message to send to Central,
and…
The cramp hit him without warning, flooding
signal circuits and control circuits, rendering him

blind and deaf and dumb and helpless. As if acid
was running along his nerves and spilling out into
the web. He disengaged from the web before he
could prevent himself, struggled desperately to reengage before Braniya found a way to take
advantage of the spasm. He must have passed out;
when he could think and feel and see again, both
Julur and Braniya were pulling furiously at the
hood of the web, hoping that the lock had failed. It
was a miracle that it had not, he thought shakily.
―Nothing so easy,‖ he lied to them, blinking the
tears out of his eyes and hoping he sounded better
then he felt. ―None of it depends on my even being
alive.‖ He grinned, although he did not feel like
grinning. ―You‘d better hope I don‘t die in here.
You‘d starve to death before anybody worked out
how to free you. Or can‘t immortals starve to
death?‖ he added maliciously. ―You can die from
lack of air — we‘ve already established that. What
other ways are there of killing you? Are you really
immortal, or are you just better than the rest of us
at fighting off disease and old age?‖
He was talking to hide the important things he
was doing: cautiously re-entering the web,
exploring his web-control, checking that the spasm
had not done any damage that needed to be
repaired, had not weakened his hold on Julur and
Braniya. All of the locks had held; he offered a
silent prayer of gratitude to the web‘s long-dead
constructor. The diagram of his own web had
several alarm signals pulsing, but told him nothing
he did not already know. He realized suddenly that
there might be a safety cut-out on the locks; if he
lost consciousness for a prolonged period of time —
or withdrew from the web to conserve his strength

— the locks might open to give access to him. It was
an unpleasant thought…
―You had some more instructions to carry out,‖
he reminded Braniya, determined that they would
not see how weak the spasm had left him. He could
send a message to Central — he did it — and he
could monitor his immediate surroundings, but to
try anything more was to invite another attack. He
had to save his strength until Bhattya arrived, until
he had to assure the safe arrival of those coming
through the palace to fetch him. Two hours, maybe
three…
***
[Outward jump calculated and set in,] Vidar sent.
[Return jump calculated and set in.]
[Acknowledged,] Joshim sent back, suppressing
a wave of undisciplined relief that the interminable
calculations were complete. [All teams report
readiness. Jump in five minutes.]
This was worse than when the fleet jumped to
Central, he reflected as he received the reports from
around the web. The defensive sphere that Julur
had thrown around Old Imperial was reputed to be
impenetrable; two hundred years since the last
attempt was made, and that had been as fatally
unsuccessful as all its predecessors. True, they had
Rafe‘s assurance that Julur had given the right
orders. If it was Rafe on the far end of that comms
channel. And if he was not acting under duress.
And if Julur‘s orders were obeyed.
Joshim could not think of any way in which Rafe
could have freed himself, put himself in a position
to call for help, to propose removing the Old
Emperor from his palace. He had said as much

when he had asked for volunteers to crew Bhattya
on this trip, and the idiots had still volunteered en
masse, not one of the web-room agreeing to stay
behind. He let his renewed gratitude at their
decision seep into the web, wanting them to know
how he felt, reckoning that it would do more good
than harm.
[Four minutes,] Vidar sent. [Quit worrying and
concentrate.] That was on a private channel. [Rallya
will have our hides on her office wall if we foul up.
And so will her successor.]
[Acknowledged.] Obediently, Joshim focussed
tightly on the jump and what they expected to find
when they emerged. [Query status Rafe‘s comms
channel,] he sent to Lilimya.
[Silent.]
[Acknowledged.] It had been silent since the
message about the defensive sphere. But that did
not mean that anything had gone wrong, Joshim
told himself firmly. Only that Rafe had nothing new
to tell them.
[Three minutes.]
If they were fired on, they had the return jump
already set in; they could be safely back at Central
within a few seconds. Rafe would not expect —
would not want anybody‘s life put at risk when
there was visibly no chance of success. If they were
allowed into orbit unopposed… They would have to
play it as they found it. An armed landing party,
Rafe had specified, and again, extreme caution.
[Two minutes.]
Rallya had chosen a good time to send Bhattya
off without her, he thought resentfully. The damned
Council could surely manage without her for a few
hours. Unless she thought this was too dangerous,
that she was now too precious to risk… No, if she

believed that, she would have locked them up
rather than let them try it. Or kept Rafe‘s message
secret; she was perfectly capable of that. What she
was not capable of was giving in against her better
judgement. She had sent Bhattya to fetch Rafe.
Therefore it was possible.
[One minute.]
Rallya‘s successor, Vidar had called Rafe. If he
wanted the berth… Even if he chose to continue
webbing, he might not want to do it in Bhattya‘s
web-room. Not with Joshim, when there was still
the tangle around Ayvar to unravel. Anyway, Rallya
might not agree to step aside, might still find a way
out of the Guild leadership. Although she was no
longer struggling as hard as she might… Gods and
Emperors, just two messages from Rafe —
supposedly from Rafe, he reminded himself sternly
— and he was reviving all the possibilities that he
had promised himself to forget until he knew that
Rafe was safe. And Rafe would never be safe if he
did not concentrate on the web.
[Activating jump.]
***
―Your friends have arrived in orbit,‖ Braniya said
smoothly. ―But you don‘t need me to tell you that,
do you?‖
―You don‘t expect me to answer that, do you?‖
Rafe countered, squirting a hasty query along his
comms channel and receiving a prompt affirmative.
―They‘re waiting for your clearance to land a
shuttle.‖
―I‘ll have it transmitted,‖ Braniya promised.
She walked to the intercomm. Rafe did not watch
her, did not listen to her speak. He would only hear

what she wanted him to hear, not the hidden
messages in her choice of words.
[Trust nobody,] he sent to Bhattya, not caring
that Rallya would laugh at the warning. It was such
a long way through the palace to fetch him and
there were so many traps that Braniya could set…
Odd that Braniya was the one who worried him
most, that Julur seemed to have conceded defeat. If
Ayvar had been in the same situation, he would
have been the one at the intercomm, the one
scheming to regain control. Or would he? Would
the threat of death reduce him to the same mute
acquiescence? Was that the price of being
immortal, the sacrifice of everything that made you
human to a desperate obsession with living forever?
Rafe shuddered uncontrollably. How must it feel,
to live so long that there was nothing new left to
experience? To share that empty existence with just
one other man, until love and hatred were
meaningless words for what you felt about them. To
be caught between the temptation to take the crazy
risks that Rafe had seen Ayvar take and the desire
to shut yourself away from danger in a paranoiac
cocoon. And — surely — always to know the fear
that you were not truly immortal. The possibility
that there was some disease to which you were not
immune, some degree of damage that was too great
to survive, some day on which you would start
growing old. The fear that, in the end, you would
die like everybody else.
[Shuttle on its way down.]
The message from Bhattya dragged Rafe out of
his reverie. It was fatally easy to lose concentration;
to feel the growing sickness in the pit of his
stomach; to give in to the gathering light-

headedness as his blood-sugar dropped and fatigue
claimed him. To lose track of what was going on.
Shuttle on its way down. That meant it would be
thirty minutes before they landed. Another hour
making their way through the labyrinth of the
palace. Could he last that long? He could not ask
them to hurry, could not warn them how shaky his
control of the situation was. Not when Braniya‘s
people must be monitoring his comms. He had to
maintain his bluff. Not only for his own sake now,
but for Bhattya‘s sake too.
***
―In here,‖ the guard said sullenly, unlocking the
riser. ―You‘ll be met at the bottom.‖
―I‘ll bet we will,‖ Vidar said, exchanging a wary
glance with Joshim before stepping into the riser.
Joshim and Ajir followed him, Peri and Caruya
bringing up the rear, all of them careful not to turn
their back on the guard. The further they travelled
from the surface, the harder it was to believe that
they were not walking into a trap. For the
hundredth time, Joshim reviewed the orders he and
Vidar had given to Jualla, looking for any
eventuality they had missed. If Bhattya was fired
upon, if they lost contact with the landing party, if
Rafe alerted them to any danger, she was to retreat
to Central. He prayed that she had the sense to do
as she had been told.
―How much further?‖ Peri asked quietly as the
riser carried them down.
―The gods know,‖ Joshim said frankly. ―Rafe told
Jualla that he was on one of the deepest levels.‖
He did not add what they all knew, that there had
been no word from Rafe since that message. No

word, no indication of why he could not come to
meet them, no explanation for why he was still
relaying his comms through Bhattya instead of
using a direct voice-link. Injured, Joshim‘s
treacherous imagination suggested. Or a prisoner,
doing only what he was told.
―Bottom approaching,‖ Vidar warned, readying
his bolt-beamer to cover the corridor that awaited
them. Joshim copied him, gaining a false sense of
security from his weapon. If it came to shooting,
they could not win but they could refuse to be taken
alive. That would be his choice, guessing how Julur
would react to the face he shared with Ayvar,
knowing how he could be used to torment Rafe,
how Rafe could be used to torment him…
The tunnel they emerged into was vastly different
from the corridors above. Joshim shivered, making
a comparison with the dungeons that he had known
as Salu‘i‘kamai. The walls pressed eagerly in upon
him and their distance from safety seemed to
double abruptly.
There was a single guard waiting for them,
faceless in the same dark visor as their previous
guide, carrying the same holstered weapon.
―That way,‖ he greeted them curtly, pointing to
their left.
―How much further?‖ Vidar asked.
―Round the corner, to the door at the end of the
tunnel.‖ He paused, listening to something inside
his helmet. ―Wait here. Orders are to clear the
tunnel before we send you in.‖
―Why?‖ Joshim asked suspiciously.
―Orders,‖ the guard repeated.
There was the sound of feet approaching from
the direction they were to take. Joshim tensed,
knew that the others with him were equally alert.

Nowhere to hide, nowhere to run. As naked as the
stone walls. From the corner of his eye, he saw
Caruya‘s finger tightening on the trigger of her
beamer, her aim steady in the centre of the tunnel
where it turned the corner. Joshim picked his own
aiming point, ears straining for footsteps from the
other direction, for the sound of more guards
coming down the riser…
He breathed again as a group of maybe fifteen
people came around the corner, both guards and
civilians, their faces grim — the ones that were
visible — but their weapons not in their hands.
They seemed to be arguing among themselves, but
fell silent as they came within earshot of the small
group by the riser. All except one, who said loudly,
―He won‘t get away with this. None of you will.‖
―The Guild looks after its own,‖ Joshim retorted
angrily.
―By threatening the Emperor‘s life?‖ the civilian
demanded.
―If you care about it that much, you‘d better get
out of here,‖ Vidar intervened. He reinforced the
message by gesturing with his beamer.
Joshim watched without speaking as the riser
carried them out of sight. Threatening the
Emperor‘s life? If Rafe had a weapon aimed at the
Old Emperor, that would explain a great deal. And
Rafe — with his knowledge of Ayvar — was possibly
the only person who could threaten to kill an
Emperor and make himself believed. Gods be
thanked, they might yet walk out of this safely…
―Left, around the corner to the door at the end,‖
he repeated impatiently. ―Let‘s go.‖
***

[Message for landing party,] Rafe sent, using the
little strength he had been saving for this moment.
[Maximum thirty seconds from reaching the door
to enter. Expect two enemies inside plus self in
web.]
The danger would come as Joshim and the others
came through that door, when it would no longer be
possible for him to control his hostages by
threatening to suffocate them, when there would be
a chance for Julur and Braniya to escape. He had
done what he could to reduce the risk. He had
forced them to remove their armour-cloth and force
shields, made Braniya drop her weapon, insisted
they had the corridor outside emptied. It would
have been safest to knock them out by withdrawing
the air before unlocking the door but he could no
longer do so, not with any certainty of remaining
conscious himself.
[Landing party acknowledges,] Bhattya relayed.
[Approaching door now.]
Rafe started to call up the schematic of the
corridor outside, gasped as another onslaught of
cramp racked him. Desperately, blindly, he released
all the locks: door, web and hood; he could not
distinguish between them in the surge of pain
before he passed out.
***
As Joshim pushed through the door, he saw
Braniya fumbling inside an ornate metal case, Julur
scrabbling on the floor for a beamer. He kept
moving fast, to allow the others in. Behind him, he
heard Vidar curse and fire. Julur dropped the
beamer, clutching a hand burnt by the suddenly
heated metal. One part of Joshim noted Vidar‘s

marksmanship with approval, even as he took his
own aim at Braniya.
―Leave him!‖ he snapped.
―Freeze or I pull this,‖ Braniya countered. In her
hand, she showed him the unmistakable braided
linkage of a web-contact. ―The shape he‘s in,
yanking this could cripple him,‖ she added, telling
Joshim what he already knew. ―If it didn‘t kill him.‖
―How do we know he‘s still alive?‖ Joshim
demanded, thinking frantically. If he shot her, her
falling weight would still drag the contact away
from Rafe‘s neck. He must be unconscious. Had he
disengaged from the web? If not, could he survive
that degree of disruption so soon after the overload
and whatever Julur had done to him?
―You‘ll have to take my word for it,‖ Braniya was
saying. ―Although I can‘t guarantee that he‘ll
survive long whatever I do. Every attack of cramp
he has is worse than the one before. Would you care
to speculate how long you have to resolve this
stand-off before his death does it for you?‖
Julur was rising to his feet. Joshim spared him
only a glance, confident that Vidar and the others
had him covered. Web-cramp. Of course, after so
long out of the web… How long would Rafe remain
unconscious? It depended on how many previous
episodes he had suffered, on how long it had been
since the first one. If he had not disengaged, if he
had another attack while he was unconscious…
Joshim made himself remain calm, made himself
remember that there were others besides Rafe
whose lives depended on his decisions now.
―If he dies, you die,‖ he said brutally. ―Julur we
need to get us safely out of here. You we don‘t.‖ It
was not an empty promise, he assured the Gods
silently.

―Hardly a satisfactory resolution for anybody.‖
Braniya wound the linkage more tightly around her
hand. ―You and he both seem remarkably careless
with his life.‖
Julur was moving to her side. ―Remarkable
indeed, when he expresses such a deep — if
confused — affection for you under Gadrine.‖
Devoid of recognizable emotion, his voice had none
of Ayvar‘s redeeming humanity. ―I think, however, I
must trust his judgement about you, and believe
that you would allow him to be killed to save your
companions‘ lives. For some curious reason, he
finds that admirable in you. I find it wholly
alarming.‖ He glanced into the web. ―You may wish
to know that he is conscious again.‖
―And in control of the air.‖ The voice was
thready, but recognizably Rafe‘s. ―Don‘t worry,
Braniya. If I shut it off, disconnecting my contacts
won‘t restore it. You could go down in history as the
woman who killed an Emperor.‖
―You‘re bluffing,‖ Braniya snapped.
―Call it,‖ Rafe suggested. ―But oughtn‘t you ask
Julur‘s permission first? He‘s got more to lose than
the rest of us.‖
―Release the linkage,‖ Julur ordered, chopping
his hand viciously down onto Braniya‘s wrist,
pinning it to the edge of the web-casing. ―I have
decided. There will be no deaths. There is more at
issue here than any of you understand.‖
―More than your sweating pink skin?‖ Rafe
mocked. ―Somebody get me out of here. Before I
throw up.‖
He allowed Joshim to remove his web-contacts
and help him off the couch, but pulled determinedly
free of his support when he was standing upright.

―Somebody should shove the point of their
beamer in Julur‘s ribs,‖ he said. ―To make sure he
behaves himself on the way out. And to make sure
that nobody tries to stop us.‖
―I have sworn there will be no trouble,‖ Julur
objected.
―We know how much that‘s worth,‖ Joshim said
grimly, following Rafe‘s advice. ―Vidar, take care of
Braniya. Peri, help Rafe if he needs it.‖ Even if he
did not want Joshim‘s help, he would be grateful for
another shoulder to lean on. And Julur as hostage
was a better guarantee of safety than any number of
ready beamers.
***
―Message from Bhattya, ma‘am.‖ In his
excitement, Fadir forgot to knock. ―They‘re on their
way back. With Rafe and the Old Emperor.‖
―I should hope so,‖ Rallya growled. ―Joshim and
Vidar learned to look after themselves years ago.
Which is probably more than you‘ll ever manage.‖
She looked up at the apprentice, wondering why he
had stayed to plague her instead of stowing away
for the second time. ―Tell me, Fadir, are your pants
too tight, or is there some better reason for you to
be dancing from one foot to the other?‖
―Sorry, ma‘am.‖
―Don‘t apologize. If you don‘t take the Oath, you
could almost make a living as a clown.‖
―Not take the Oath, ma‘am? But…‖
―It was a joke, Fadir. Now, get out of here. And
tell my fool of a secretary to arrange
accommodation for another damned Emperor.‖

From Central Station News
…The Emperors Julur and Ayvar are both currently
visiting Central to discuss the renegotiation of their
Oaths. This historic occasion is the first time the
Emperors have met each other since the Empires were
divided…
356/5043
CENTRAL ZONE

―You‘ve got the gods‘ own luck,‖ Rallya accused
Rafe. ―Or has Joshim finally learned some prayers
that work?‖
―I knew you‘d be pleased to see me.‖ Rafe
slumped into the nearest seat, wearing a hands-off
look that was keeping Joshim at more than arm‘s
length. ―Especially if I brought you an Emperor to
argue with.‖
―Two,‖ Rallya said smugly. ―The other one is here
as well.‖ And neither of them would be leaving
before she had their new Oaths. Oaths so tight it
would slit their own throats if they broke them.
―Ayvar‘s here?‖ Rafe‘s voice was flat with
weariness and something beneath that. ―Does he
know I‘m safe?‖
―If Fadir didn‘t forget the message I gave him.‖
―Then he‘ll be here soon.‖ Rafe glanced at Joshim
and away again guiltily.
―You need some sleep,‖ Joshim said. ―Everything
else can wait.‖
―About a year of sleep,‖ Rafe conceded. ―Is it
Guild Commander Rallya now?‖
―Gods and Emperors, no,‖ Rallya said
vehemently.

―She‘s the only one that doesn‘t admit it,‖ Joshim
contradicted her. ―There‘s still a Council, but she
decides everything important.‖
―Only until they can be trusted to get it right,‖
Rallya insisted.
―A few years then.‖ Rafe closed his eyes, hiding
behind grey lashes. ―Gods help us all.‖
―Huh. Why don‘t you stop making my office look
untidy and let Joshim take you to bed?‖
Rafe shook his head. ―Nobody is taking me to
bed. I can get there by myself, if I‘m pointed in the
right direction.‖
―It looks like it,‖ Rallya said scornfully. It looked
like Rafe was holding himself together by willpower
alone. If he managed to leave that chair, it would
only be because somebody picked him up and
carried him. A pity Joshim showed no sign of doing
it.
―He‘ll be in here, sir.‖ Fadir‘s voice, as proud as if
he had rescued Rafe personally.
―Thank you.‖
Ayvar came straight to Rafe‘s side, knelt beside
him and kissed him on the mouth, long and
lovingly. Rallya looked away, angry — hurt — for
Joshim. Joshim did not move.
―Gods, Lin, I‘ve missed you,‖ Ayvar said
eventually, gripping both Rafe‘s hands. ―To think
you were dead, and then to know that Julur had
you…‖
―I… didn‘t miss you,‖ Rafe said shakily. ―The
identity wipe…‖
―I forgive you,‖ Ayvar said lightly.
―You haven‘t much choice.‖
―I forgive you most things.‖
―Eventually.‖
―You should be in bed.‖

―So I‘ve been told.‖
―The only question is whose,‖ Rallya broke in,
unable to bear Joshim‘s stillness any longer.
Somebody had to make him fight.
―I‘ve told you. Nobody‘s.‖ Rafe pulled his hands
away from Ayvar, stood up, managing not to take
the help Ayvar offered.
―There‘s a spare bed in my suite, Lin.‖
―Please, ―Var… Rafe is easier…‖ He stopped by
the door with his back to all of them. ―I can‘t throw
ten years away. Not any of it.‖ Rallya could not see
his fists but she could hear that they were clenched.
―I‘m not asking you to. I‘m not asking you for
anything, Lin. Rafe.‖
―You are. You will.‖ Rafe turned round with an
effort. ―I know what you‘ll ask me for. You‘ll ask me
to stop webbing. You always do. Every time I‘m in
combat. Every time I get a new assignment to an
active zone. And now you‘ll use what Julur‘s done
to try to persuade me to stay with you. Won‘t you?‖
―It wouldn‘t work. I know that.‖ Ayvar made a
gesture of resignation. ―I‘ll admit, I don‘t want you
in a patrolship. I don‘t think I could bear to mourn
you again.‖
―You‘ll have to do it eventually,‖ Rafe said
harshly.
―You could stay in the Guild — still web —
without being Commander of a patrolship.
Commander Rallya doesn‘t want to stay on the
Council. You could take her place…‖
―Stop planning my future for me!‖ Rafe yelled. ―I
don‘t want to be on the Council any more than
Rallya does.‖
―And I wouldn‘t stand aside for you,‖ Rallya
added drily. ―Having seen the havoc you can wreak
as a First, I dread to think what you‘d achieve as

Guild Commander.‖ She looked across at Joshim,
wondering how much longer he could be so blind.
―There is another option, Rafe. Since I‘m the only
person I can trust to run this damned desk
properly, Bhattya is short of a Commander.
Temporarily. And since she‘s been mine since she
came out of the construction dock, I‘ve the right to
choose my replacement.‖
Ayvar glared at her. Rafe looked past them both
at Joshim. ―Would you…‖
Say yes, you fool, Rallya urged Joshim.
―Yes,‖ Joshim said simply.
―You‘d have to ask Vidar…‖
―I have.‖ Joshim moved, passing Ayvar to go to
Rafe‘s side. ―Even a Commander has to take
Webmaster‘s orders,‖ he said, smiling a little.
―Especially a Webmaster who knows what Hafessya
saw you doing. Bed. Before you fall over.‖ He
slipped an arm around Rafe to support him; Rafe
did not fight it.
―Lin.‖
Rafe paused in the doorway, still holding onto
Joshim.
―You‘ll come to me when you can?‖ Ayvar asked.
―Yes.‖ Very quietly.
Thank the gods that was settled, Rallya thought
as Joshim closed the door. The outcome had been
obvious to anybody with a pair of brain cells, but
like most spectator sports, love was chiefly
enjoyable for the incompetence of its participants.
―Looks like you and Julur both lost him,‖ she said
to Ayvar with satisfaction.
―Temporarily.‖ He sat in the seat that Rafe had
left.
―He won‘t change his mind.‖

―I can afford to wait.‖ Ayvar smiled broadly.
―You‘re a loser too, in your own terms.‖
Rallya scowled around the office. ―Tell me that
when I‘ve written you an Oath so tight even Julur
can‘t break it.‖ She lifted her feet onto the desk.
There were some compensations — the pain-killers
for her hip for one, and the chance to see Rafe make
fools of two Emperors. She frowned, thinking just
what fools he had made of them. They were both so
damned irrational over him, and so determined to
keep him alive…
―Oh gods,‖ she breathed in disbelief. ―You can
afford to wait, can‘t you?‖
Ayvar smiled again. ―A few tens of years,‖ he
confirmed.
―Does he know?‖
―No, and it would be a kindness not to tell him.
He‘ll have to live with it for long enough when he
does realize. I want him to have what mortal life he
can.‖
―Oh gods,‖ Rallya repeated. ―Two of you are
enough trouble. Three of you, including him…‖
Having seen the havoc he can wreak as a First, I
dread to think what he’d achieve… Her own words
came back to her with force. Rafe as an immortal,
as an Emperor… She shivered, for him and for all
the people he would touch. ―Over my dead body he
gets control of the Guild.‖
It was the wrong thing to say about an immortal.

If you enjoyed this book please send your
friends along to get their own copy at
www.arkessian.com
And – no matter how it came into your
hands – please consider making a PayPal
donation to the author at the same place.

