THE LONG, COLD GOODBYE
by Holly Phillips
Holly Phillips is a full-time writer living on an island off the west coast
of Canada. She is the author of the award-winning story collection In the
Palace of Repose and the dark fantasy novel The Engine’s Child,
released late in 2008 by Del Rey. The author tells us that she’s grown tired
of the blank stares people give her when she explains her chosen vocation
as a fantasy writer, so she has recently decided to try calling herself a
“professional fantasist.” People will probably still stare, but the ensuing
conversation might be fun. Her latest story for us explores the coldest
reaches of an alien world and the frozen depths of the human heart.
Berd was late and she knew Sele would not wait for her, not even if it
weren’t cold enough to freeze a standing man’s feet in his shoes. She
hurried anyway, head down, as if she hauled a sled heavy with anxiety. She
did not look up from the icy pavement until she arrived at the esplanade,
and was just in time to see the diver balanced atop the railing. Sele! she
thought, her voice frozen in her throat. The diver was no more than a
silhouette, faceless, anonymous in winter clothes. Stop, she thought. Don’t,
she thought, still unable to speak. He spread his arms. He was an ink
sketch, an albatross, a flying cross. Below him, the ice on the bay shone
with the apricot-gold of the sunset, a gorgeous summer nectar of a color
that lied in the face of the ferocious cold. The light erased the boundary
between frozen sea and icy sky; from where Berd stood across the
boulevard, there was no horizon but the black line of the railing, sky above
and below, the cliff an edge on eternity. And the absence the diver made
when he had flown was as bright as all the rest within the blazing death of
the sun.
Berd crossed the boulevard, huddled deep within the man’s overcoat
she wore over all her winter clothes. Brightness brought tears to her eyes
and the tears froze on her lashes. She was alone on the esplanade now. It
was so quiet she could hear the groan of tide-locked ice floes, the tick and
ping of the iron railing threatening to shatter in the cold. She looked over,
careful not to touch the metal even with her sleeve, and saw the shape the
suicide made against the ice. No longer a cross: an asterisk bent to angles
on the frozen waves and ice-sheeted rocks. He was not alone there. There
was a whole uneven line of corpses lying along the foot of the cliff, like a
line of unreadable type, the final sentence in a historical tome, unburied until
the next storm swept in with its erasure of snow. Berd’s diver steamed,
giving up the last ghost of warmth to the blue shadow of the land. He was
still faceless. He might have been anyone, dead. The shadow grew. The
sun spread itself into a spindle, a line; dwindled to a green spark and was

gone. It was all shadow now, luminous dusk the color of longing, a blue to
break your heart, ice’s consolation for the blazing death of the sky. Berd’s
breath steamed like the broken man, dusting her scarf with frost. She
turned and picked her way across the boulevard, its pavement broken by
frost heaves, her eyes still dazzled by the last of the day. It was spring, the
thirtieth of April, May Day Eve. The end.
Sele. That was not, could never have been him, Berd decided.
Suicide had become a commonplace this spring, this non-spring, but Sele
would never think of it. He was too curious, perhaps too fatalistic, certainly
too engaged in the new scramble for survival and bliss. (But if he did, if he
did, he would call on Berd to witness it. There was no one left but her.) No.
She shook her head to herself in the collar of her coat. Not Sele. She was
late. He had come and gone. The diver had come and gone. Finally she felt
the shock of it, witness to a man’s sudden death, and flinched to a stop in
the empty street. Gaslights stood unlit in the blue dusk, and the windows of
the buildings flanking the street were mostly dark, so that the few cracks of
light struck a note of loneliness. Lonely Berd, witness to too much, standing
with her feet freezing inside her shoes. She leaned forward, her sled of
woe a little heavier now, and started walking. She would not go that way,
not that way, she would not. She would find Sele, who had simply declined
to wait for her in the cold, and get what he had promised her, and then she
would be free.
But where, in all the dying city, would he be?
Sele had never held one address for long. Even when they were
children Berd could never be sure of finding him in the same park or alley
or briefly favored dock for more than a week or two. Then she would have
to hunt him down, her search spirals widening as he grew older and dared
to roam further afield. Sometimes she grew disheartened or angry that he
never sought her out, that she was always the one who had to look for him,
and then she refused. Abstained, as she came to think of it in more recent
years. She had her own friends, her own curiosities, her own pursuits. But
she found that even when she was pursuing them she would run across
Sele following the same trail. Were they so much alike? It came of growing
up together, she supposed. Each had come too much under the other’s
influence. She had not seen him for more than a year when they found each
other again at the lecture on ancient ways.
“Oh, hello,” he said, as if it had been a week.
“Hello.” She bumped shoulders with him, standing at the back of the
crowded room—crowded, it must be said, only because the room was so

small. And she had felt the currents of amusement, impatience, offense,
disdain, running through him, as if together they had closed a circuit,
because she felt the same things herself, listening to the distinguished
professor talk about the “first inhabitants,” the “lost people,” as if there were
not two of them standing in the very room.
“We lost all right,” Sele had said, more rueful than bitter, and Berd
had laughed. So that was where it had begun, with a shrug and a laugh—if it
had not begun in their childhood, growing up poor and invisible in the city
built on their native ground—if it had not begun long before they were born.
Berd trudged on, worried now about the impending darkness. The
spring dusk would linger for a long while, but there were no lamplighters out
to spark the lamps. In this cold, if men didn’t lose fingers to the iron posts,
the brass fittings shattered like rotten ice. So there would be no light but the
stars already piercing the blue. Find Sele, find Sele. It was like spiraling
back into childhood, spiraling through the city in search of him. Every spiral
had a beginning point. Hers would be his apartment, a long way from the
old neighborhood, not so far from the esplanade. He won’t be there, she
warned herself, and as if she were tending a child, she turned her mind
from the sight of the dead man lying with the others on the ice.
****
Dear Berd,
I cannot tell you how happy your news has made me. You are
coming! You are coming at last! It seems as though I have been waiting
for a lifetime, and now that I know I’ll only have to wait a few short weeks
more they stretch out before me like an eternity. Your letters are all my
consolation, and the memory I hold so vividly in my mind is better than
any photograph: your sweet face and your eyes that smile when you look
sad and yet hold such a melancholy when you smile. My heart knows
you so well, and you are still mysterious to me, as if every thought, every
emotion you share (and you are so open you shame me for my reserve)
casts a shadow that keeps the inner Berd safely hidden from prying
eyes. Oh, I won’t pry! But come soon, as soon as you can, because one
lifetime of waiting is long enough for any man...
****
Sele’s apartment was in a tall old wooden house that creaked and
moaned even in lesser colds than this. Wooden houses had once been

grand, back when the lumber was brought north in wooden ships and the
natives lived in squat stone huts like ice-bound caves, and Sele’s building
still showed a ghost of its old beauty in its ornate gables and window
frames. But it had been a long time since it had seen paint, and the
weathered siding looked like driftwood in the dying light. The porch steps
groaned under Berd’s feet as she climbed to the door. An old bell pull hung
there. She pulled it and heard the bell ring as if it were a ship’s bell a
hundred miles out to sea. The house was empty, she needed no other
sign. All the same she tried the handle, fingers wincing from the cold brass
even inside her mitten. The handle fell away from its broken mechanism
with a clunk on the stoop and the door sighed open a crack, as if the house
inhaled. It was dark inside; there was no breath of warmth. All the same,
thought Berd, all the same. She stepped, anxious and hopeful, inside.
Dark, and cold, and for an instant Berd had the illusion that she was
stepping into one of the stone barrow-houses of her ancestors, windowless
and buried deep under the winter’s snow. She wanted immediately to be
out in the blue dusk again, out of this tomb-like confinement. Sele wasn’t
here. And beyond that, with the suicide fresh in her mind and the line of
death scribbled across her inner vision, Berd had the sense of dreadful
discoveries waiting for her, as if the house really were a tomb. Go. Go
before you see ... But suppose she didn’t find Sele elsewhere and hadn’t
checked here? Intuition was not infallible—her many searches for Sele had
not always borne fruit—she had to be sure. Her eyes were adjusting to the
darkness. She found the stairs and began to climb.
There was more light upstairs, filtering down like a fine gray-blue dust
from unshuttered windows. Ghost light. The stairs, the whole building,
creaked and ticked and groaned like every ghost story ever told. Yet she
was not precisely afraid. Desolate, yes, and abandoned, as if she were
haunted by the empty house itself; as if, having entered here, she would
never regain the realm of the living; as if the entire world had become a
tomb. As if.
It was the enthusiasm she remembered, when memory took her like a
sudden faint, a shaft of pain. They had been playing a game of
make-believe, and the game had been all the more fun for being secreted
within the sophisticated city. Like children constructing the elaborate edifice
of Let’s Pretend in the interstices of the adult world, they had played under
the noses of the conquerors who had long since forgotten they had ever
conquered, the foreigners who considered themselves native born. Berd
and Sele, and later Berd’s cousins and Sele’s half-sister, Isse. They had
had everything to hide and had hidden nothing. The forgotten, the ignored,
the perpetually overlooked. Like children, playing. And for a time Sele had

been easy to find, always here, welcoming them in with their bits of
research, their inventions, their portentous dreams. His apartment warm
with lamplight, no modern gaslights for them, and voices weaving a spell in
point and counterpoint. Why don’t we...? Is there any way...? What if...?
What if we could change the world?
The upper landing was empty in the gloom that filtered through the icy
window at the end of the hall. Berd’s boots thumped on the bare boards,
her layered clothes rustled together, the wooden building went on
complaining in the cold, and mysteriously, the tangible emptiness of the
house was transmuted into an ominous kind of inhabitation. It was as if she
had let the cold dusk in behind her, as if she had been followed by the wisp
of steam rising from the suicide’s broken head. She moved in a final rush
down the hall to Sele’s door, knocked inaudibly with her mittened fist, tried
the handle. Unlocked. She pushed open the door.
“Sele?” She might have been asking him to comfort her for some
recent hurt. Her voice broke, her chest ached, hot tears welled into her
eyes. “Sele?”
But he wasn’t there, dead or alive.
Well, at least she was freed from this gruesome place. She made a
fast tour of the three rooms, feeling neurotic for her diligence (but she did
have to make sure all the same), and opened the hall door with all her
momentum carrying her forward to a fast departure.
And cried aloud with the shock of discovering herself no longer alone.
They were oddly placed down the length of the hall, and oddly
immobile, as if she had just yelled Freeze! in a game of statues. Yes, they
stood like a frieze of statues: Three People Walking. Yet they must have
been moving seconds before; she had not spent a full minute in Sele’s
empty rooms. Berd stood in the doorway with her heart knocking against
her breastbone, her eyes watering as she stared without blinking in the
dead light. Soon they would laugh at the joke they had played on her. Soon
they would move.
Berd was all heartbeat and hollow fear as she crept down the hallway,
hugging the wall for fear of brushing a sleeve. Her cousin Wael was first,
one shoulder dropped lower than the other as if he was on the verge of
turning to look back. His head was lowered, his uncut hair fell ragged
across his face, his clothes were far too thin for the cold. The cold. Even

through all her winter layers, Berd could feel the impossible chill emanating
from her cousin’s still form. Cold, so cold. But as she passed she would
have sworn he swayed, ever so slightly, keeping his balance, keeping still
while she passed. Keeping still until her back was turned. Wael. Wael! It
was wrong to be so afraid of him. She breathed his name as she crept by,
and saw her breath as a cloud.
If any of them breathed, their breath was as cold as the outer air.
Behind Wael was Isse, Sele’s beautiful half-sister. Her head was
raised and her white face—was it only the dusk that dusted her skin with
blue?—looked ahead, eyes dark as shadows. She might have been seeing
another place entirely, walking through another landscape, as if this statue
of a woman in a summer dress had been stolen from a garden and put
down all out of its place and time. Where did she walk to so intently? What
landscape did she see with those lightless eyes?
And Baer was behind her, Berd’s other cousin. He had been her
childhood enemy, a plague on her friendship with Sele, and somehow
because of it her most intimate friend, the one who knew her too well. His
name jumped in Berd’s throat. He stood too close to the wall for Berd to
sidle by. She had to cross in front of him to the other wall and he had to see
her, though his head, like Wael’s, was lowered. He might have been walking
alone, brooding a little, perhaps following Isse’s footsteps or looking for
something he had lost. Berd stopped in front of him, trembling, caught
between his cold and Isse’s as if she stood between two impossible fires.
“Baer?” She hugged herself, maybe because that was as close as
she dared come to sharing her warmth with him. “Oh, Baer.”
But grief did not lessen her fear. It only made her fear—made them
—more terrible. She had come too close. Baer could reach out, he only
had to reach out ... She fled, her sleeve scraping the wall, her boots
battering the stairs. Down, down, moving too fast to be stopped by the
terror of what else, what worse, the dark lobby might hold. Berd’s breath
gasped out, white even in the darkest spot by the door. It was very dark,
and the dark was full of reaching hands. The door had no handle. It had
swung closed. She was trapped. No. No. But all she could whisper,
propitiation or farewell, was her cousin’s name. “Baer...” please don’t forget
you loved me. “Baer...” please don’t do me harm. Until in an access of
terror she somehow wrenched open the door and sobbed out, feeling the
cold of them at her back, “I’m sorry!” But even then she could not get away.

There was no street, no building across the way. There was no way,
only a vast field of blue ... blue ... Berd might have been stricken blind for
that long moment it took her mind to make sense of what her eyes saw. It
was ice, the great ocean of ice that encircled the pole, as great an ocean as
any in the world. Ice bluer than any water, as blue as the depthless sky. If
death were a color it might be this blue, oh! exquisite and full of dread. Berd
hung there, hands braced on the doorframe, as though to keep herself from
being forced off the step. She forgot the cold ones upstairs; remembered
them with a new jolt of fear; forgot them again as the bears came into view.
The great white bears, denizens of the frozen sea, exiles on land when the
spring drove the ice away. Exiles no more. They walked, slow and patient
and seeming sad with their long heads nodding above the surface of the
snow; and it seemed to Berd, standing in her impossible doorway—if she
turned would she find the house gone and nothing left but this lintel, this
doorstep, and these two jambs beneath her hands?—it seemed to her,
watching the slow bears walk from horizon to blue horizon, that other figures
walked with them, as white-furred as the bears, but two-legged and slight.
She peered. She leaned out, her arms stretched behind her as she kept
tight hold of her wooden anchors, not knowing anymore if it was fear that
ached within her.
And then she felt on her shoulder the touch of a hand.
She fell back against the left-hand doorjamb, hung there, her feet
clumsy as they found their new position. It was Baer, with Wael and Isse
and others—yes, others!—crowding behind him in the lobby. The house
was not empty and never had been, no more than a tomb is empty after the
mourners have gone.
“Baer...”
Did he see her? He stood as if he would never move again, his hand
outstretched as though to hail the bears, stop them, call them to come. He
did not move, but in the moment that Berd stared at him, her heart failing
and breath gone, the others had come closer. Or were they moved, like
chess pieces by a player’s hand? They were only there, close, close, so
close the cold of them ate into Berd’s flesh, threatening her bones with ice.
Her throat clenched. A breath would have frozen her lungs. A tear would
have frozen her eyes. At least the bears were warm inside their fur. She fell
outside, onto the ice—
—onto the stoop, the first stair, her feet carrying her in an upright fall
to the street. Yes: street, stairs, house. The door was swinging closed on
the dark lobby, and there was nothing to see but the tall, shabby driftwood

house and the brass doorknob rolling slowly, slowly to the edge of the stair.
It did not fall. Shuddering with cold, Berd scoured her mittens across her
ice-streaked face and fled, feeling the weight of the coming dark closing in
behind her.
****
Dear Berd,
I am lonely here. Recent years have robbed me of too many
friends. Do I seem older to you? I feel old sometimes, watching so many
slip away from me, some through travel, some through death, some
through simple, inevitable change. I feel that I have not changed, myself,
yet that does not make me feel young. Older, if anything, as if I have
stopped growing and have nothing left to me but to begin to die. I’m
sorry. I am not morbid, only sad. But your coming is a great consolation
to me. At last! Someone dear to me—someone dearer to me than
anyone in the world—is coming towards me instead of leaving me
behind. You are my cure for sorrow. Come soon...
****
Berd was too cold, she could not bear the prospect of canvassing the
rest of Sele’s old haunts. Old haunts! Her being rebelled. She ran until the
air was like knives in her lungs, walked until the sweat threatened to freeze
against her skin. She looked back as she turned corner after corner—no
one, no one—but the fear and the grief never left her. Oh, Baer! Oh, Wael,
and beautiful Isse! It was worse than being dead. Was it? Was it worse
than being left behind? But Berd had not earned the grief of abandonment,
no matter how close she was to stopping in the street and sobbing,
bird-like, open-mouthed. She had no right. She was the one who was
leaving.
At least, she was if she could find Sele. If she could only find him this
once. This one last time.
She had known early on that it was love, on her part at least, but had
been frequently bewildered as to what kind of love it was. Friendship, yes,
but there was that lightness of heart at the first sight of him, the deep
physical contentment in his rare embrace. She had envied his lovers, but
had not been jealous of them. Had never minded sharing him with others,
but had always been hurt when he vanished and would not be found. Love.
She knew his lovers were often jealous of her. And Baer had often been

jealous of Sele.
That had been love as well, Berd supposed. It was not indifference
that made Berd look up in the midst of their scheming to see Baer watching
her from across the room; but perhaps that was Baer’s love, not hers.
Baer’s jealousy, that was not hers, and that frightened her, and bored her,
and nagged at her until she felt sometimes he could pull her away from
Sele, and from the warm candlelit conspiracy the five of them made, with a
single skeptical glance. He had done it in their childhood, voicing the
doubting realism that spoiled the game of make-believe. “You can’t ride an
ice bear,” he had said—not even crushingly, but as flat and off-hand as a
government form. “It would eat you,” he said, and one of Berd and Isse’s
favorite games died bloody and broken-backed, leaving Baer to wonder in
scowling misery why they never invited him to play.
Yet there he was, curled, it seemed deliberately, in Sele’s most
uncomfortable chair, watching, watching, as Sele, bright and quick by the
fire, said, “Stories never die. You can’t forget a story, not a real story, a
living story. People forget, they die, but stories are always reborn. They’re
real. They’re more real than we are.”
“You can’t live in a story,” Baer said, and it seemed he was talking to
Berd rather than Sele.
Berd said, “You can if you make the story real.”
“That’s right,” Baer said, but as though he disagreed. “The story is
ours. It only becomes real when we make it happen, and there has to be a
way, a practical way—”
“We live in the story,” Sele said. “Don’t you see? This is a story. The
story is.”
“This is real life!” Baer mimed exasperation, but his voice was
strained. “This story of yours is a story, you’re just making it up. It’s pure
invention!”
“So is life,” Sele said patiently. “That doesn’t mean it isn’t real.”
Which was true; was, in fact, something Berd and Sele had argued
into truth together, the two of them, alone. But Berd was dragged aside as
she always was by Baer’s resentful skepticism—resentful because of how
badly he wanted to be convinced—but Berd could never find the words to
include him in their private, perfect world, the world that would be perfect

without him—and so somehow she could not perfectly immerse herself and
was left on the margins, angry and unwilling in her sympathy for Baer. How
many times had Berd lost Sele’s attention, how many times had she lost her
place in their schemes, because Baer was too afraid to commit himself and
too afraid to abstain alone? Poor Baer! Unwilling, grudging, angry, but there
it was: poor Baer.
And there he was, poor Baer, inside a cold, strange story, leaving
Berd, for once, alone on the outside with Sele. With Sele. If only she were.
Oh Sele, where are you now?
It seemed that the whole city, what was left of it, had moved into the
outskirts where the aerodrome sprawled near the snow-blanked hills. There
had been a few weeks last summer when the harbor was clear of ice and a
great convoy of ships had docked all at once, creating a black cloud of
smoke and a frantic holiday as supplies were unloaded and passengers
loaded into the holds where the grain had been—loaded, it must be said,
after the furs and ores that paid for their passage. Since then there had
been nothing but the great silver airships drifting in on the southern wind,
and now, as the cold only deepened with the passage of equinoctial spring,
they would come no more. Until, it was said, the present emergency has
passed. Why are some lies even told? Everyone knew this was the end of
the city, the end of the north, perhaps the beginning of the end of the world.
The last airships were sailing soon, too few to evacuate the city, too
beautiful not to be given a gorgeous goodbye. So the city swelled against
the landlocked shore of the aeroport like the Arctic’s last living tide.
The first Berd knew of it—it had been an endless walk through the
empty streets, the blue dusk hardly seeming to change, as if the whole city
were locked in ice—was the glint and firefly glimmer of yellow light at the
end of the wide suburban street. She had complained, they all had, about
the brilliance of modern times, the constant blaze of gaslight that was
challenged, these last few years, not by darkness but by the soulless glare
of electricity. But now, tonight, Berd might have been an explorer lost for
long months, drawing an empty sled and an empty belly into civilization with
the very last of her strength. How beautiful it was, this yellow light. Alive with
movement and color, it was an anodyne to grief, an antidote to blue. Her
legs aching with her haste, Berd fled toward, yearning, rather than away,
guilty and afraid. And then the light, and the noise, and the quicksilver
movement of the crowd pulled her under.
It was a rare kind of carnival. More than a farewell, it was a hunt, every
citizen a quarry that had turned on its hunter, Death, determined to take Him
down with the hot blood bursting across its tongue. Strange how living and

dying could be so hard to tell apart in the end. Berd entered into it at first
like a swimmer resting on the swells, her relief at the lights that made the
blue sky black, and at the warm-blooded people all around her steaming in
the cold, made her buoyant, as light as an airship with a near approximation
of joy. This was escape, oh yes it was. The big houses on their acre
gardens spilled out into the open, as if the carpets and chandeliers of the
rich had spawned tents and booths and roofless rooms. Lamps burned
everywhere, and so did bonfires in which the shapes of furniture and books
could still be discerned as they were consumed. The smells wafting in
great clouds of steam from food carts and al fresco bistros made the
sweet fluid burst into Berd’s mouth, just as the music beating from all sides
made her feet move to an easier rhythm than fear. They were alive here;
she took warmth from them all. But what storerooms were emptied for this
feast? Whose hands would survive playing an instrument in this cold?
The aerodrome’s lights blazed up into the sky. Entranced, enchanted,
Berd drifted through the crowds, stumbling over the broken walls that had
once divided one mansion from the next. (The native-born foreigners had
made gardens, as if tundra could be forced to become a lawn. No more.
No more.) That glow was always before her, but never within reach. She
stumbled again, and when she had stopped to be sure of her balance, she
felt the weight of her exhaustion dragging her down.
“Don’t stop.” A hand grasped her arm above the elbow. “It’s best to
keep moving here.”
Here? She looked to see what the voice meant before she looked to
see to whom the voice belonged. “Here” was the empty stretch between
the suburb and the aerodrome, still empty even now. Or perhaps even
emptier, for there were men and dogs patrolling, and great lamps magnified
by the lenses that had once equipped the lighthouses guarding the
ice-locked coast. This was the glow of freedom. Berd stared, even as the
hand drew her back into the celebrating, grieving, furious, abandoned,
raucous crowd. She looked around at last, when the perimeter was out of
view.
“Randolph!” she said, astonished at being able to put a name to the
face. She was afraid—for one stopped breath she was helpless with
fear—but he was alive and steaming with warmth, his pale eyes bright and
his long nose scarlet with drink and cold. The combination was deadly, but
Berd could believe he would not care.
“Little Berd,” he said, and tucked her close against his side. With all
their layers of clothing between them it was hardly presumptuous, though

she did not know him well. He was, however, a crony of Sele’s.
“You look like you’ve been through the wars,” he said. “You need a
drink and a bite of food.”
And he needed a companion in his fin de siecle farewell, she
supposed.
“The city’s so empty,” she said, and shuddered. “I’m looking for Sele.
Randolph, do you know where he might be?”
“Not there,” he said with a nod toward the aerodrome lights. “Not our
Sele.”
“No,” Berd said, her eyes downcast. “But he’ll be nearby. Won’t he?
Do you know?”
“Oh, he’s around.” Randolph laughed. “Looking for Sele! If only you
knew how many women have come to me, wondering where he was! But
maybe it’s better you don’t know, eh, little Berd?”
“I know,” said little Berd. “I’ve known him longer that you.”
“That’s true!” Randolph said with huge surprise. He was drunker than
she had realized. “You were pups together, weren’t you, not so long ago.
Funny to think ... Funny to think, no more children, and the docks all empty
where they used to play.”
A maudlin drunk. Berd laughed, to think of the difference between
what she had fled from and what had rescued her. All the differences. Yet
Randolph had been born here, just the same as Wael and Isse and Baer.
“Do you know where I can find him, Randolph?”
“Sele?” He pondered, his narrow face drunken-sad. “Old Sele...”
“Only I need to find him tonight, Randolph. He has something for me,
something I need. So if you can tell me ... or you can help me look...”
“I know he’s around. I know!” This with the tone of a great idea. “I
know! We’ll ask the Painter. Good ol’ Painter! He knows where everyone is.
Anyone who owes him money! And Sele’s on that list, when was he ever
not? We’ll go find Painter, he’ll set us right. Painter’ll set us right.”

So she followed the drunk who seemed to be getting drunker on the
deepening darkness and the sharpening cold. The sky was indigo now,
alight with stars above the field of lamps and fires and human lives. Fear
receded. Anxiety came back all the sharper. Her last search, and she had
only this one night, this one night, even if it had barely begun. And the
thought came to her with a shock as physical as Baer’s touch: it was spring:
the nights were short, regardless of the cold.
She searched faces as they passed through fields of light. Strange
how happy they were. Music everywhere, bottles warming near the fires, a
burst of fireworks like a fiery garden above the tents and shacks and
mansions abandoned to the poor. Carnival time.
Berd had never known this neighborhood, it was too far afield even
for the wandering Sele and her sometimes-faithful self. All she knew of it
was this night, with the gardens invaded and the tents thrown open and
spilling light and music and steam onto the trampled weeds and frozen mud
of the new alleyways. They made small stages, their lamplit interiors as
vivid as scenes from a play. Act IV, scene i: the Carouse. They were all of a
piece, the Flirtation, the Argument, the Philosophical Debate. And yet,
every face was peculiarly distinct, no one could be mistaken for another.
Berd ached for them, these strangers camped at the end of the world. For
that moment she was one of them, belonged to them and with
them—belonged to everything that was not the cold ones left behind in the
empty city beside the frozen sea. Or so she felt, before she saw Isse’s
face, round and cold and beautiful as the moon.
No. Berd’s breath fled, but ... no. There was only the firelit crowd
outside, the lamplit crowd within the tent Randolph led her to, oblivious to
her sudden stillness, the drag she made at the end of his arm. No cold
Isse, no Wael or Baer. No. But the warmth of the tent was stifling, and the
noise of music and voices and the clatter of bottle against glass shivered
the bones of her skull.
The Painter held court, one of a hundred festival kings, in a tent that
sagged like a circus elephant that has gone too long without food. He had
been an artist once, and had earned the irony of his sobriquet by turning
critic and making a fortune writing for twenty journals under six different
names. He had traveled widely, of course—there wasn’t enough art in the
north to keep a man with half his appetites—but Berd didn’t find it strange
that he stayed when all his readers escaped on the last ships that fled
before the ice. He had been a prince here, and some princes did prefer to
die than become paupers in exile. Randolph was hard-pressed to force
himself close enough to bellow in King Painter’s ear, and before he made

it—he was delayed more than once by an offered glass—Berd had freed
her arm and drifted back to the wide-open door.
It seemed very dark outside. Faces passed on another stage, a
promenade of drunks and madmen. A man dressed in the old-fashioned
furs of an explorer passed by, his beard and the fur lining of his hood
matted with vomit. A woman followed him wearing a gorgeous rug like a
poncho, a hole cut in the middle of its flower-garden pattern, and another
followed her with her party clothes torn all down her front, too drunk or mad
to fold the cloth together, so that her breasts flashed in the lamplight from
the tent. She would be dead before morning. So many would be, Berd
thought, and her weariness came down on her with redoubled weight. A
stage before her, a stage behind her, and she—less audience than
stagehand, since these performers in no wise performed for her—stood in
a thin margin of nowhere, a threshold between two dreams. She let her
arms dangle and her head fall back, as if she could give up, not completely,
but just for a heartbeat or two, enough to snatch one moment of rest. The
stars glittered like chips of ice, blue-white, colder than the air. There was
some comfort in the thought that they would still shine long after the human
world was done. There would still be sun and moon, snow and ice, and
perhaps the seals and the whales and the bears. Berd sighed and shifted
her numb feet, thinking she should find something hot to drink, talk to the
Painter herself. She looked down, and yes, there was Isse standing like a
rock in the stream of the passing crowd.
She might have been a statue for all the notice anyone took of her.
Passersby passed by without a glance or a flinch from Isse’s radiating cold.
It made Berd question herself, doubt everything she had seen and felt back
at the house. She lifted her hand in a half-finished wave and felt an ache in
her shoulder where Baer had touched her, the frightening pain of cold that
has penetrated to the bone. Isse did not respond to Berd’s gesture. She
was turned a little from where Berd stood, her feet frozen at the end of a
stride, her body leaning toward the next step that never came. Still walking
in that summer garden, her arms bare and as blue-white as the stars. Berd
rubbed her shoulder, less afraid in the midst of carnival, though the ache of
cold touched her heart. Dear Isse, where do you walk to? Is it beautiful
there?
Something cold touched Berd’s eye. Weeping ice? She blinked, and
discovered a snowflake caught in her eyelashes. She looked up again.
Stars, stars, more stars than she had seen moments ago, more stars than
she thought she would see even if every gaslight and oil lamp and bonfire
in the north were extinguished. Stars so thick there was hardly any black left
in the sky, no matter how many fell. Falling stars, snow from a cloudless

sky. Small flakes prickled against Berd’s face, so much colder than her cold
skin they felt hot. She looked down and saw that Baer and Wael had joined
Isse, motionless, three statues walking down the impromptu street. How
lonely they looked! Berd had been terrified in the house with them. Now she
hurt for their loneliness, and felt an instant’s powerful impulse to go to them,
join them in their pilgrimage in whatever time and place they were. The
impulse frightened her more than their presence did, and yet ... And yet.
She didn’t move from the threshold of the tent, but the impulse still lived in
her body, making her lean even as Isse leaned, on the verge of another
step.
Snow fell more thickly, glittering in the firelight. It was strange that no
one seemed to notice it, even as it dusted their heads and shoulders and
whitened the ground. It fell more thickly, a windless blizzard that drew a
curtain between Berd and the stage of the promenade, and more thickly
still, until it was impossible that so much snow could fall—and from a starlit
sky!—and yet she was still able to see Wael and Baer and Isse. It was as
though they stood not in the street but in her mind. She was shivering, her
mouth was dry. Snow fell and fell, an entire winter of snow pouring into the
street, the soft hiss of the snowflakes deafening Berd to the voices, music,
clatter and bustle of the tent behind her. It was the hiss of silence, no louder
than the sigh of blood in her ears. And Isse, Wael, and Baer walked and
walked, unmoving while the snow piled up in great drifts, filling the street,
burying it, disappearing it from view. There were only the three cold ones
and the snow.
And then the snow began to generate ghosts. Berd knew this trick
from her childhood, when the autumn winds would drive fogbanks and
snowstorms onto the northern shore. The hiss and the monotonous
whiteness gave birth to muttered voices and distant calls, and to the shapes
of things barely visible behind the veil of mist or snow. People, yes, and
animals like white bears and caribou and the musk oxen Berd only knew
from the books they read in school; and sometimes stranger things, ice
gnomes like white foxes walking on hind legs and carrying spears, and
wolves drawing sleds ridden by naked giants, and witches perched
backwards on white caribou made of old bones and snow. Those ghosts
teased Berd’s vision as they passed down the street of snow, a promenade
of the north that came clearer and clearer as she watched, until the
diamond points of the gnomes’ spears glittered in the lamplight pouring out
of the tent and the giants with their eyes as black as the sky stared down at
her as they passed. Cold filled her, the chill of wonder, making her shudder.
And now she saw there were others walking with the snow ghosts, people
as real as the woman who wore the beautiful carpet, as solid as the woman
who bared her breasts to the cold. They walked in their carnival madness,

as if they had stumbled their way through the curtain that had hidden them
from view. Still they paid no notice to the three cold ones, the statues of
Baer and Isse and Wael, but they walked there, fearless, oblivious, keeping
pace with the witches, the oxen, the bears.
And then Randolph grasped Berd’s sore shoulder with his warm hand
and said, “Painter says Sele’s been sleeping with some woman in one of
the empty houses ... Hey, where’d everybody go?”
For at his touch the snow had been wiped away like steam from a
window, and all the ghosts, all the cold ones, and all the passersby were
gone, leaving Berd standing at the edge of an empty stage.
“Hey,” Randolph said softly. “Hey.”
It was perfectly silent for a moment, but only for a moment. A fire
burning up the street sent up a rush of sparks as a new log went on. A
woman in the tent behind them screamed with laughter. A gang of children
ran past, intent in their pursuit of some game. And then the promenade was
full again, as varied and lively as a parade.
Berd could feel Randolph’s shrug and his forgetting through the hand
resting on her shoulder. She could feel his warmth, his gin-soaked breath
past her cheek, his constant swaying as he sought an elusive equilibrium.
She should not feel so alone, so perfectly, utterly, dreadfully alone. They
had gone, leaving her behind.
“No.” No. She was the one who was leaving.
“Eh?” Randolph said.
“Which house?” Berd said, turning at last from the door.
“Eh?” He swayed more violently, his eyes dead, lost in some
alcoholic fugue.
“Sele.” She shook him, and was surprised by the stridency in her
voice. “Sele! You said he was in a house with some woman. Which
house?”
Randolph focused with a tangible effort. “That’s right. Some rich
woman who didn’t want to go with her husband. Took Sele up. Lives
somewhere near here. One of the big houses. Some rich woman. Bitch. If
I’d been her I’d’ve gone. I’d’ve been dead by now. Gone. I’d’ve been gone

by now...”
Berd forced her icy hands to close around both his arms, holding him
against his swaying. “Which house? Randolph! Which house?”
****
My dearest Berd,
I’m embarrassed by the last letter I wrote. It must have given you a
vision of me all alone in a dusty room, growing old before my time. Not
true! Or, if it is, it isn’t the only truth. I should warn you that I have been
extolling your virtues to everyone I know, until all of my acquaintance is
agog to meet the woman, the mysterious northerner, the angel whose
coming has turned me into a boy again. You are my birthday and my
school holiday and my summer all rolled into one, and I cannot wait to
parade you on my arm. Will it embarrass you if I buy you beautiful things
to wear? I hope it won’t. I want shamelessly to show you off. I want you to
become the new star of my almost-respectable circle as you are the star
that lights the dark night of my heart...
****
4198 Goldport Avenue.
There were no avenues, just the haphazard lanes of the carnival town,
but the Painter (Berd had given up on Randolph in the end) had added
directions that took into account new landmarks and gave Berd some hope
of finding her way. Please, oh please, let Sele be there.
“It’s a monstrous place,” the Painter had said. His eyes were greedy,
unsated by the city’s desperation, hungry for hers. “A bloody great
Romantic pile with gargoyles like puking birds and pillars carved like tree
nymphs. You can’t miss it. Last time I was there it was lit up like an opera
house with a red carpet spilling down the stairs. Vulgar! My god, the woman
has no taste at all except for whiskey and men. Your Sele will be lucky if
she’s held onto him this long.”
His eyes had roved all over Berd, but there was nothing to see except
her weary face and frightened eyes. He dismissed her, too lazy to follow
her if she wouldn’t oblige by bringing her drama to him, and Randolph was
so drunk by then that he stared with sober dread into the far distance,
watching the approach of death. Berd went alone into the carnival, feeling

the cold all the more bitterly for the brief warmth of the Painter’s tent. Her
hands and feet felt as if they were being bitten by invisible dogs, her ears
burned with wasp-fire, her shoulder ached with a chill that grew roots down
her arm and into the hollow of her ribs. Cold, cold. Oh, how she longed for
warmth! Warmth and sunshine and smooth pavement that didn’t trip her
hurting feet, and the proper sounds of spring, waves and laughter and
shouting gulls, rather than the shouting crowd, yelping as though laughter
were only a poor disguise for a howl of despair. She stumbled, buffeted by
strangers, and wished she could only see, if she could only see. But Wael
and Isse and Baer were near. She knew that, even in the darkness; heard
their silence in the gaps and blank spaces of the noisy crowd, felt their cold.
And oh, she was frightened. She missed them terribly, grieved for them,
longed for them, and was terrified that longing would bring them back to
her, as cold and strange and wrong as the walking dead.
But she would not go that way, not that way, she would not.
Berd stumbled again. Under her feet, barely visible in the light of a
bonfire ringed by dancers, there lay a street sign that said in ornate script
Goldport Ave. She looked up, past the dancers and their fire—and what
was that in the flames? A chair stood upright in the coals and on the chair
an effigy, please let it be an effigy, burning down to a charcoal grin—she
dragged her gaze up above the fire where the hot air shivered like a watery
veil, and saw the pillared house with all its curtains open to expose the
shapes dancing beneath the blazing chandeliers. Bears and giants and
witches, and air pilots and buccaneers and queens. Fancy dress, as if the
dancers had already died and moved on to a different form. Berd climbed
the stairs, the vulgar carpet more black than red after the passage of many
feet, and passed through the wide-open door.
She gave up on the reception rooms very soon. They were so hot,
and crowded by so many reckless dancing drunks, and the music was a
noisy shambles played by more drunks who seemed to have only a
nodding acquaintance with their instruments. Perhaps the dancers and the
musicians had traded places for a lark. Berd thought that even were she
drunk and in the company of friends it would still seem like a foretaste of
hell, and she could feel a panic coming on before she had forced a way
through a single room. Sele. Sele! Why wouldn’t he come and rescue her?
She fought her way back into the grand foyer and climbed the wide marble
stairs until she was above the heads of the crowd. Hot air mingled with cold.
Lamps dimmed as the oil in the reservoirs ran low, candles guttered in
ornate pools of wax; no one seemed to care. They would all die here, a
mad party frozen in place like a story between the pages of a book. Berd
sat on a step halfway above the first landing and put her head in her hands.

“There you are. Do you know, I thought I’d missed you for good.”
Berd burst into tears. Sele sat down beside her and rocked her,
greatcoat and all, in his arms.
He told her he had waited on the esplanade until his feet went numb.
She told him about the suicide. She wanted to tell him about his sister, Isse,
and her cousins, but could not find the words to begin.
“I saw,” she said, “I saw,” and spilled more tears.
“It isn’t a tragedy,” Sele said, meaning the suicide. “We all die, soon
or late. It’s just an anticipation, that’s all.”
“I know.”
“There are worse things.”
“I know.”
He drew back to look at her. She looked at him, and saw that he knew,
and that he saw that she knew, too.
“Oh, Sele...”
His round brown face was solemn, but also serene. “Are you still
going?”
“Yes!” She shifted so she could grasp him too. “Sele, you have to
come with me. You must, now, you have no choice.”
He laughed at her with surprise. “What do you mean? Why don’t I
have a choice?”
“They—” She stammered, not wanting to know what she was trying to
say. “Th-they have been following me, Wael and Baer and Isse. They’ve
been following. They want—They’ll come for you, too.”
“I know. I’ve seen them. I expect they’ll come soon.”
“I’m sorry. I know it’s wrong, but they frighten me so much. How can
you be so calm?”

“We did this,” he said. “We wanted change, didn’t we? We asked for
it. We should take what we get.”
“Oh, Sele.” Berd hid her face against his shoulder. He was only
wearing a shirt, she realized. She could feel the chill of his flesh against her
cheek. She whispered, “I can’t. It’s too dreadful. I can’t bear to always be
so cold.”
“Oh, little Berd.” He stroked her hair. “You don’t have to. I’ve made my
choice, that’s all, and you’ve made yours. I don’t think, by now, there’s any
right or wrong either way. We’ve gone too far for that.”
She shook her head against him. She wanted very much to plead with
him, to make her case, to spin for him all her dreams of the south, but she
was too ashamed, and knew that it would do no good. They had already
spun their dreams into nothing, into cold and ice, into the land beyond
death. Anyway, Sele had never, ever, in all their lives, followed her lead.
And at the last, she could not follow his.
They pulled apart.
“Come on,” Sele said. “I have your things in my room.”
The gas jet would not light, so Berd stood by the door while Sele
fumbled for candle and match. Two candles burning on a branch meant for
four barely carved the shape of the room out of the darkness. It seemed
very grand to Berd, with heavy curtains round the bed and thick carpets on
the floor.
“A strange place to end up,” she said.
Sele glanced at her, his dark eyes big and bright with candlelight. “It’s
warm,” he said, and then added ruefully, “It was warm. Anyway, I needed to
be around to meet some of the right people. It’s such a good address,
don’t you know.”
“Better than your old one.” Berd couldn’t smile, remembering his old
house, remembering the street sign under her feet and the shape in the
bonfire outside.
“Anyway.” Sele knelt and turned up a corner of the carpet. “My
hostess is nosy but not good at finding things. And she’s been good to me.
I owe her a lot. She helped me get you what you’ll need.”

“The ticket?” Berd did not have enough room for air in her chest.
“Ticket.” Sele handed her the items one at a time. “Travel papers.
Letters.”
“Letters?” She was slow to take the last packet. Whose letters?
Letters from whom?
“From your sponsor. There’s a rumor that even with a ticket and
papers they won’t let you on board unless you can prove you aren’t going
south only to end up a beggar. Your sponsor is supposed to give you a
place to stay, help you find work. He’s my own invention, but he’s a good
one. No,” he said as she turned the packet over in her hands, “don’t read
them now. You’ll have time on the ship.”
It was strange to see her name on the top envelope in Sele’s familiar
hand. He had never written her a letter in her life. She stowed them away in
her pocket with the other papers and then checked, once, twice, that she
had everything secure. I can’t go. The words lodged in her throat. She
looked at Sele, all her despair—at going? at staying?—in her eyes.
“You’re right to go,” Sele said. “Little Berd, flying south away from the
cold.”
“I don’t want to leave you.” Not I can’t, just I don’t want to.
“But you will.”
She shivered, doubting, torn, and yet knowing as well as he that he
was right. She would go, and he would go too, on a different journey with
Isse and Wael and Baer. So cold. She hugged him fiercely, trying to give
him her heat, wanting to borrow his. He kissed her, and then she was going,
going, her hand in her pocket, keeping her ticket safe. Running down the
stairs. Finding the beacon of the aerodrome even before she was out the
door.
Out the door. On the very threshold she looked out and saw what she
had not thought to look for from the window of Sele’s room. Inside the
masquerade party was in full swing, hot and bright and loud with voices and
music and smashing glass. Outside...
Outside the ice had come.
It was as clear as it can be only at the bottom of a glacier, where the

weight of a mile of ice has pressed out all the impurities of water and air. It
was as clear as glass, as clear as the sky, so that the stars shone through
hardly dimmed, though their glittering was stilled. Berd could see
everything, the carnival town frozen with every detail preserved: the tents
still upright, though their canvas sagged; the shanties with the soot still
crusted around their makeshift chimneys. Even the bonfires, with their
half-burnt logs intact, their charcoal facsimiles of chairs and books and
mannequins burned almost to the bone. In the glassy starlight Berd could
even see all the little things strewn across the ground, all the ugly detritus of
the end of the world, the bottles and discarded shoes, the dead cats and
dead dogs and turds. And she could see the people, all the people
abandoned at the last, caught in their celebratory despair. The whole crowd
of them, men and women and children, young and old and ugly and fair,
frozen as they danced, stumbled, fucked, puked, and died. And, yes, there
were her own three, her own dears, the brothers and sister of her heart,
standing at the foot of the steps as if they had been caught, too, captured
by the ice just as they began to climb. Isse, and Wael, and Baer.
The warmth of the house behind Berd could not combat the dreadful
cold of the ice. The music faltered as the cold bit the musicians’ hands.
Laughter died. And yet, and yet, and yet in the distance, beyond the frozen
tents and the frozen people, a light still bloomed. Cold electricity, as cold as
the unrisen moon and as bright, so that it cast the shadows of Baer and
Wael and Isse before them up the stairs. The aerodrome, yes, the
aerodrome, where the silver airships still hung from their tethers like great
whales hanging in the depths of the clear ocean blue. Yes, and there was
room at the right-hand edge of the stairs where Berd could slip between the
balustrade and the still summer statue of Wael, her cousin Wael, with his
hair shaken back and his dark eyes raised to where Berd still stood with her
hand in her pocket, her ticket and travel pass and letters clutched in her
cold but not yet frozen fist. The party was dying. There was a quiet
weeping. The lights were growing dim. Now or never, Berd thought, and
she took all her courage in her hands and stepped through the door.
****
My darling, my beloved Berd,
I wish I had the words to tell you how much I love you. It’s no good
to say “like a sister” or “like a lover” or “like myself.” It’s closer to say like
the sun that warms me, like the earth that supports me, like the air I
breathe. And I have been suffering these past few days with the regret (I
know I swore long ago to regret nothing, even to remember nothing I

might regret, but it finds me all the same) that I have never come to be
with you, your lover or your husband, in your beloved north. It’s as
though I have consigned myself to some sunless, airless world. How
have I let all this time pass without ever coming to you? And now it is too
late, far too late for me. But I am paid with this interminable waiting.
Come to me soon, I beg you. Save me from my folly. Forgive me. Tell
me you love me as much as I love you...

