Prologue
NIGHT’S WHAT HAPPENS WHEN YOUR SIDE OF THE PLANET IS POINTED AT OUTER
SPACE

One
IT WAS A pretty regular early-summer night at 72 Little Lane. The crickets and katydids were making
that soothing racket they do on warm, still, small-town evenings. The back porch light was on, but
otherwise the tidy brown house was happily, sleepily dark.
At least it was until about eleven thirty, when the dark night in Holliswood became a whole lot darker.
It’s hard to exactly translate the command that triggered it—it couldn’t be heard by human ears, and the
language of insects isn’t one that can easily be put into words anyhow—but every six-legged creature in
the area instantly hid under rocks, wedged into tree bark, or dug down into the dirt… and became very,
very quiet.
And then, inside the small brown house, it became very,very loud.
Every speaker—on the computers, on the cell phones, on the iPods, on the radios, on the telephones,
on the brand-new Sony flat screen with THX surround sound and every other TV set in the house, even
on the “intelligent” microwave—began to blast a dance song from a popular old movie.
A song that just happened to be the favorite of a very powerfulalien.

Two
THE BOY FUMBLED for his clock radio. It was blaring some superlame old seventies song by one of
those awful disco bands his mom sometimes played in the car. His sister must have changed the station
and turned the volume up full blast as a prank. He’d get her back—later, in the morning, when he’d had
some sleep.
He punched the snooze button, but it didn’t shut off. He flicked the switch on the side, but it didn’t shut
off. He picked up the clock from his bedside table and saw that it was just past eleven thirty. She was
going to pay for this.
He reached down and pulled the cord out of the socket…but it still didn’t shut off.

“What the—?!” he said, and rubbed his eyes with his free hand.
The clock’s glowing display now read, “DANCE.”
And then the disco song started over, and a voice loud and screechy enough to cut through all the noise
said: “DO THE DANCE!”
“Nowthat’s freaky,” said the boy, and just as he started to getreally scared, a blue spark leaped out of
the alarm clock and up his arm—and he bolted out of his room.
He knew what he had to do.
In the hallway he collided with his father but didn’t say a word. And now his mom and sister were
pushing at him from behind, and the entire family tumbled down the front stairs to the living room.
It was weird, thought the boy, because he was pretty sure he hated dancing.
But now he couldn’t stop himself. He strode to the center of the living room and somehow knew exactly
what moves to make, and—except for the look of terror in his eyes—he boogied his heart out like a
pimply, pajama-wearing John Travolta.
His mom, dad, and sister didn’t look like they were having too much fun, either.
In fact, the only fun in the house was being had by the five grotesque alien beings filming the family from
behind the eerie lights, high-tech microphones, and multilens video cameras set up in the adjoining dining
room.
They were laughing their slimy heads off. Not literally, but if one of these horrific creatures had actually
knocked its own block off, picked it up from the floor, and eaten it, the boy wouldn’t have been
surprised.
“By Antares, they’re good,” one of the monsters said, slapping one of its six scaly knees. “It’s just like
Saturday Night Fever !”
And then the fat one in charge—cradling the bullhorn in his left tentacle, nearly crushing the cheap folding
canvas chair with his weight—replied with a sigh.
“Yes, it’s almost a shame we have toterminate them.”

Three
THE FIVE ALIENS were still hungry even after their fresh kill. They scuttled and hovered out of the
news van they’d swiped from the local TV station and pressed their ugly wet noses against the windows
of the Holliswood Diner. A young waitress with wavy black hair was reading a Sherman Alexie
paperback at the counter.

“Business is about to pick upa lot, ” said the boss alien, who had a thousand-pound intergalactic
champion sumo wrestler’s body and the head of a catfish. No ears, no neck, no legs—and no manners.
He reached out to his personal assistant—a big-nosed space ape—grabbed its cell phone, and punched
in a number. The three other henchbeasts twitched with anticipation. This was looking to turn into a pretty
exciting Saturday night.
When the girl leaned across the counter to pick up the diner’s phone, a little spark leaped out of the
receiver, arcing straight into her ear. Her eyes turned glassy as she put down the phone and went to open
the door for them.
“What did the Zen Buddhist say to the hot-dog vendor?” asked the lead alien as the waitress showed
them to their booths, already chuckling to himself at the coming punch line.
“Make me one with everything” said the girl, robotically.
The creatures burst into laughter.
“Actually, on second thought, sweetie,” he added, “Why don’t you go and make useverything with
everything. Chop-chop!”
“Good one, boss!” said his assistant, stealthily snatching his cell phone back from where his employer
had rested it on the table. He carefully wiped it down with a napkin before putting it back in his purple
fanny pack.
The waitress, in the meantime, had flown into motion as if somebody had hit the ×2 button on her remote
control. She prepared and delivered to the aliens heaping stacks of eggs, bacon, sausage, waffles, coffee,
Cokes, bagels, burgers, turkey platters, meatloaf, mashed potatoes, onion rings, cheesesteaks,
cheesecakes, clam chowder, gravy fries, banana cream pies, root-beer floats, and chicken-fried steaks.
And several mugs of fryer oil.
“Careful or you’ll burn her out, boss,” advised one of the henchbeasts.
“Like I care,” said the boss. “We got about six billion of them to get rid of. And, come to think of it,” he
said with a laugh that sounded like somebody blowing bubbles in turkey gravy, “there are plenty more
whereyou came from too.”
And, with that, he grabbed the henchbeast and pummeled it against the linoleum floor. The sound that
filled the diner was like a roach getting crushed by a hard-soled shoe—only much louder.

Four
“THERE’S YOUR DESSERT.” The lead alien, who happened to be number five on The List of Alien
Outlaws on Terra Firma, gestured at the henchbeast’s remains.
The other aliens shared an uncomfortable silence as they slowly converged on the carcass. Number 5

rolled his gooey eyes and continued shoveling fried food into his extrawide mouth.
“Looks like we got company,” said the personal assistant, nodding at the flashing red and blue lights in
the parking lot. A moment later the front door to the diner flew open, and a sheriff and deputy burst in
with their guns drawn.
“Hands u—” the sheriff started to shout, but Number 5 fired a wide-angle ray gun that instantly turned
both officers into puddles of something resembling swamp mud.
“Clean that up. I’m eating here,” said Number 5.
The two henchbeasts eagerly turned away from the carcass of their fallen comrade and with long,
rubbery tongues devoured the human sludge.
“Speaking of annoying law-enforcement types,” said Number 5, smacking his lips and sipping a scalding
mug of fryer oil, “my spider senses tell me somebody even more pesky is on his way here.”
“Nothim? ” asked his assistant.
“The same,” said Number 5.
A collective, defensive growl rose up from the alien crew.
“That pipsqueak isalmost enough to turn me off my Caesar salad,” the personal assistant complained,
downing an entire bowl of lettuce.
“Let’s just remember what’s most important here,” Number 5 said. “First, keep to the schedule. This is
our biggest production yet, and we can’t miss a beat.
“And second—ugly as he is—little Danny could very well be our lead man. So let’s not kill him…right
away .”

Watch the skies for Daniel X’s next incredible adventure…

Demons & Druids
Turn the page for a sneak preview!

One
I BET I CAN SEE London from here,I thought.

I was, oh, maybe 150 feet in the air, above a grassy field outside a small village called Whaddon. I’d
only been in England a couple of weeks, and I still had a little of that excitement that hits you when you
go to a new place.
Before I had time to take a good look around from this height, though, I started to fall.
Fast.
The first of the evening stars became a blur, and the ground seemed to rush up at me faster and faster.
I could hear shouting voices, but it was impossible to tell what they were saying over the blistering wind
surrounding me.
Maybe I should have been worried, but I’ll admit it—I was enjoying myself. That is, until Willy kicked
me hard in the face.
Willy, Joe, Dana, Emma, and I were playing soccer. Our own version,where I am the ball. That is
correct; I had transformed myself into the soccer ball itself.
Luckily, soccer balls don’t have a lot of nerve endings,I thought as I flew forward into the air.
“And Willy controls the centered ball beautifully, shooting a pass to Joe. He takes it up the line.
But—no! Dana sweeps in with a well-executed slide tackle and steals it!” Joe always liked to deliver the
play-by-play, although talking about himself in the third person usually distracted him from, well,playing.
“Pay attention, Joe,” said Willy, grimacing. “We’re getting creamed bygirls. ”
Even Dana, in the middle of passing me to the other end of the field, cracked up at this.
Then she kicked me pretty hard, and once again I briefly enjoyed the feeling of flying through the evening
sky—until I saw Emma’sface rushing toward me. She caught me easily on her forehead and juggled me
there for a moment as she turned to the “goalposts”—two trees at the end of the field.
Then Emma bent her body back and headed me straight up in the air. Way up. I relaxed, enjoying the
sensation of free fall; it’s not something I get to do that often.
Below me, Dana and Willy were racing toward the goalposts.
Dana got there first, and as I came down she jumped into the air, fell backward, spun, and sent a
scorching scissor kick through the goal.
“GOOOOOAAAAAAL!”screamed Joe from the other end of the field in his best international
announcer voice.
I’d known Dana’s team would win (her team always did), but her powerful kick took me by surprise. I
had already overshot the goalposts by at least a hundred feet. Suddenly I realized I was headed straight
for the tree-lined gorge that bordered the field.
I concentrated for a second, and then I was back to being myself again, no longer a soccer ball. I
grabbed an overhanging tree branch as I flew past. Dangling one-handed over the gorge, I frowned at
Dana, who was trotting over, and gave a dramatic sigh.

“You did that on purpose, didn’t you?” I called to her. “Tried to kick me into the briar patch.”
She laughed. “Daniel, you look like a depressed orangutan. Get down from that branch.”
Before I could come up with a snappy reply, Joe’s voice rang across the field. “Okay, you two,now can
we get going? London’s not going towalk to us! We have monsters to catch.”

Two
I DROPPED DOWN from the tree and dusted myself off. You think playing soccer is dirty?
Try being the ball.
A few minutes later, the five of us were walking along an English country road. Very picturesque, I must
say.
Our pickup soccer match had been a good distraction, but now it was almost eight, and night was
starting to fall.
“Well, let’s hoof it, guys,” I said. “In a couple of hours we can find somewhere safe to camp out.”
We hadn’t gone far when a light from behind made us turn around.
A large vehicle was approaching. I stuck my thumb out while my friends moved back toward the
shadows, ready to disappear if need be.
Fortunately they didn’t have to. As it pulled up alongside me, I saw that the vehicle was a beat-up van,
and probably large enough to hold ten or eleven. A tiny woman with short gray hair was behind the
wheel, wearing a tweed suit that was three sizes too big for her.
She rolled down her window and peered into the darkness behind me. “Are you lost, dearies?”
Her face looked careworn, but she had smile lines around her mouth. I liked the way she looked, and I
liked her spacious van even more.
I put on my best harmless-backpacking-tourist face. “I’m afraid we’re stranded, ma’am. We’re trying to
get to London.”To catch some aliens—Number 3 to be exact.
“Oh… Americans!” She smiled. “Well, I’m heading that way. Hop in.”

Three

IT DIDN’T TAKE much to convince us. We gratefully piled in, Willy and Emma in back, Dana and me
in the middle row, and Joe sprawled out in the passenger seat.
We drove in silence for about ten minutes. Joe had nodded off, and Willy and Emma were chatting in
hushed, lazy voices behind me.
I normally talk with the people who pick me up, but it had been a long day. My eyes were about to
close when Dana’s lips brushed against my ear. Yeah,that woke me up.
“Have you noticed?” she whispered.
“What?” I whispered back.
“The driver’s seat—it’s on the left side.”
“So? That’s where it’s supposed to be.”
“Not really, Daniel. We’re in England, remember? They drive on the other side.”
That’s a little unusual,I thought to myself.Why would the van be American?
And there was something else, something that had been gnawing at me since we got in. Something about
what the driver was wearing. Tweed is a rough woolen fabric. It’s often used for the jackets of college
professors, pipe-smoking stamp collectors, and—I now remembered—outdoorsmen, such ashunters.
I tried to lean forward to get a better view. That’s when I realized I couldn’t move a muscle, couldn’t
even blink.
“So you’ve noticed,dearie. ” The driver’s voice seemed to catch in her throat, then something harsh
came out, not a human sound. Not even close. “I’m a hunter.Just. Like.You. And I do believe I’ve just
caught dinner!”

Four
SUDDENLY WE WERE all wide awake, even Joe, who we always joked didn’t sleep—he
hibernated.
“Uh-oh. I can’t move, guys, not even an eyelid. This could be bad.”
“Since when are you the master of understatement, Joe?” snapped Dana.
“Since when is Daniel the master of getting us caught by the bad guys?” answered Joe.
She frowned. “Touché.”

“Silence!” shouted the driver in an alien rasp. It seemed all wrong: that metallic, scraping voice, coming
out of that kind-looking grandmother’s face.
As she said it, though, a gray, pulsating tentacle descended from the ceiling and wrapped itself around
my mouth. It felt sticky, warm, and alive. Out of the corner of my eye, I could see a dozen more tentacles
gagging my friends.
Dana’s eyes met mine. “Daniel. What’shappening? ”
I had no idea.
I couldn’t really move my head, but as my eyes scanned the walls of the van, I could see them moving,
pulsating,breathing . The walls definitely hadn’t been doingthat before. And the roof—it was a forest of
waving gray tentacles.
Now I understood why we couldn’t move our bodies. The van’s seats had sent out tendrils that were no
thicker than rubber bands, but they were strong and enveloped our arms and legs more effectively than
steel manacles could.
More than anything, the tentacles reminded me of the sea anemones I used to find in the tide pools on
the Oregon coast. Unsuspecting fish that swam too close would be grabbed, stunned by the neurotoxins
in the anemones’ tentacles, and slowly digested.
That’s what this van was, I realized suddenly.A giant anemone.

Five
WITH THIS DISCOMFORTING and demoralizing realization came another totally creepy thought: the
driver wasn’t actually driving, she was part of the alien, one of its organs. She was bait. How many
hitchhikers had been picked up by this kindly looking old lady, only to become her dinner?
She—it, I should say—saw my look of understanding and horror.
“Ah, my tentacles are full of neurotoxins. Thank you for noticing.” It cackled nastily. “All the better to kill
you with, dearie.”
I had to do something; I had to do something right now.But what?
The problem was I couldn’t move, I couldn’t create anything, I couldn’t transform. I couldn’t even talk,
to tell my friends to break out, to run away.
“Yes, indeed. This is when the hunter becomes the hunted and then becomes tonight’s repast. Just be
thankful that you’ll all be dead before you’re digested. I’m told that the process is excruciating.”
Somehow this didn’t come as much consolation to me.
The old woman’s body began to transform now, melting into her seat. Meanwhile, a bulbous tentacle

tightened around my mouth, and the interior of the van seemed to be getting smaller and smaller.That
was just claustrophobia, right? Hey, I had to get a hold of myself.
No, the van was definitely getting smaller. Shrinking! I blinked, desperately trying to clear my mind and
find a quick solution. Being squashed into mush and then digested? Not how I was planning to leave the
Earth.
Up front in the van, Joe’s head was shuddering as he struggled against paralysis. I could hear Emma
gurgling behind me. And Dana’s beautiful eyes—they were huge with fear.
The alien anemone’s voice rasped again. The driver was gone, but mouths had opened upin the walls
around us, hundreds of them. It was like listening to the worst chorus imaginable—in surround sound.
“This is for my beloved brother, Alien Hunter. It’s too bad he couldn’t be here to see it. Do you
remember Number 40? You disintegrated him in Dallas, Texas!”
Of course I remembered, but I couldn’t focus on past victories right now.
The walls and ceiling constricted yet again.Like a giant heart beating , I thought. The roof was
pressing down hard against our heads now. The van’s interior had become smooth and oily; it reminded
me of the inside of a stomach.
“Nice eating you…” The beast’s final message trailed off in a sickening gurgle. “I’m Number 43 by the
way. My brother’s name was Jasper.”
“I remember—may he rest in pieces!” I quipped. What else could I do?
Another powerful contraction came. The walls closed in even tighter, pushing me and Dana
together—something I might have enjoyed, if we weren’t both about to become meat-and-bone Jell-O
pudding.
I’d never felt anything like this before. I was hurting all over, and not just physically. It was like all the
terror my friends were feeling was being transmitted back to me a hundred times over. I had never gotten
them into a situation this bad before; it looked like I wouldn’t have the chance to get them out of it.
The walls kept closing in, bending me double. The tentacle around my throat was twisting too tight for
me to even swallow.It’s over , I thought. Everything was getting dim, and quiet, and distant. My eyes
were finally squeezed shut, and I thought I might suddenly burst like a zit caught in tweezers.
And then behind the pain and the fear, I heard words way in the back of my mind.
“You still have time.… you can take out Number 43. At least I think so.”
I recognized the voice immediately. It was my father.
Mydead father.

THE WORLD ALL AROUND YOU.

LIFE AS YOU KNOW IT.
EVERYTHING YOU LOVE.
IT ALL CHANGES—NOW.
WITCH & WIZARD
This is the story I was born to tell.
Read on, while you still can.
–JAMES PATTERSON
COMING IN DECEMBER 2009

Prologue
WISTY
IT’S OVERWHELMING. A city’s worth of angry faces staring at me like I’m a wicked
criminal—which, I promise you,I’m not. The stadium is filled to capacity—pastcapacity. People are
standing in the aisles, the stairwells, on the concrete ramparts, and a few extra thousand are camped out
on the playing field. There are no football teams here today. They wouldn’t be able to get out of the
locker-room tunnels if they tried.
This total abomination is being broadcast on TV and on the Internet too. All the useless magazines are
here, and the useless newspapers. Yep, I see cameramen in elevated roosts at intervals around the
stadium.
There’s even one of those remote-controlled cameras that runs around on wires above the field. There it
is—hovering just in front of the stage, bobbing slightly in the breeze.
So, there are undoubtedly millions more eyes watching than I can see. But it’s the ones here in the
stadium that are breaking my heart. To be confronted with tens, maybe even hundreds of thousands of
curious, uncaring, or at least indifferent, faces… talk aboutfrightening.
And there are no moist eyes, never mind tears.
No words of protest.
No stomping feet.
No fists raised in solidarity.

No inkling that anybody’s even thinking of surging forward, breaking through the security cordon, and
carrying my family to safety.
Clearly, this is not a good day for us Allgoods.
In fact, as the countdown ticker flashes on the giant video screens at either end of the stadium, it’s
looking like this will be ourlast day.
It’s a point driven home by the very tall, bald man up in the tower they’ve erected midfield—he looks
like a cross between a Supreme Court chief justice and Ming the Merciless. I know who he is. I’ve
actually met him. He’s The One Who Is The One.
Directly behind his Oneness is a huge N.O. banner—the New Order.
And then the crowd begins to chant, almost sing, “The One Who Is The One! The One Who Is The
One!”
Imperiously, The One raises his hand, and his hooded lackeys on the stage push us forward, at least as
far as the ropes around our necks will allow.
I see my brother, Whit, handsome and brave, looking down at the platform mechanism. Calculating if
there’s any way to jam it, some way to keep it from unlatching and dropping us to our neck-snapping
deaths. Wondering if there’s some last-minute way out of this.
I see my mother crying quietly. Not for herself, of course, but for Whit and me.
I see my father, his tall frame stooped with resignation, but smiling at me and my brother—trying to keep
our spirits up, reminding us that there’s no point in being miserable in our last moments on this planet.
But I’m getting ahead of myself. I’m supposed to be providing anintroduction here, not the details of
our publicexecution.
So let’s go back a bit.…

BY ORDER OF THE NEW ORDER,
and the Great Wind—The One Who Is
THE ONE —
let it be known that as of
NOW, THIS MOMENT,or
TWELVE O’CLOCK MIDNIGHT,
whichever shall arrive first, following the

SWIFT TRIUMPHof TheORDER of the
ONES WHO PROTECT,who have obliterated the
BLIND AND DUMB FORCESof passivity and
complacencyPLAGUING This World,
ALL CITIZENSmust, shall,andwill abide by
THESE THREE ORDERS for ORDER:
1. All behaviors NOT in keeping with N.O. law, logic, order, and science (including, but not limited to,
theology, philosophy, the creative and dark arts, et cetera) are hereby ABOLISHED.
2. ALL persons under eighteen years of age will be evaluated for ORDERLINESS and MUST
COMPLY with the prescribed corrective actions.
3. The One Who Is THE ONE grants, appoints, decides, seizes, and executes at will. All NOT
complying shall be SEIZED and/or EXECUTED.
— As declared to the One Who Writes Decrees
by THE ONE WHO IS THE ONE

One
WHIT
SOMETIMES YOU WAKE up and the world is just plain different.
The noise of a circling helicopter is what made me open my eyes. A cold, blue-white light forced its way
through the blinds and flooded the living room. Almost like it was day.
But it wasn’t.
I peered at the clock on the DVD player through blurry eyes: 2:10 a.m.
I became aware of a steadydrub, drub, drub —like the sound of a heavy heartbeat. Throbbing.
Pressing in. Getting closer.
What’s going on?
I staggered to the window, forcing my body back to life after two hours passed out on the sofa, and
peeked through the slats.

And then I stepped back and rubbed my eyes. Hard.
Because there’s no way I had seen what I’d seen. And there was no way I had heard what I’d heard.
Was it really the steady, relentless footfall of hundreds of soldiers? Marching on my street in perfect
unison?
My street wasn’t close enough to the center of town to be on any holiday parade routes, much less to
have armed men in combat fatigues coursing down it in the dead of night.
I shook my head and bounced up and down a few times kind of like I do in my warm-ups.Wake up,
Whit. I slapped myself a couple of times for good measure. And then I looked again.
There they were. Soldiers marching down our street.Hundreds of them as clear as day, made visible
by a half-dozen truck-mounted spotlights.
Just one thought was running laps inside my head:This can’t be happening. This can’t be happening.
This can’t be happening.
Then I remembered the elections, the new government, the ravings of my parents about the trouble the
country was in, the special broadcasts on TV, the political petitions my classmates were circulating
online, the heated debates between teachers at school. None of it meant anything to me until that second.
And before I could piece it all together, the vanguard of the formation stopped in front of my house.
Almost faster than I could comprehend, two armed squads detached themselves from the phalanx and
sprinted across the lawn like commandos, one running around the back of the house, the other taking
position in front.
I jumped back from the window. I could tell they weren’t here to protect me and my family. I had to
warn Mom, Dad, Wisty —
But just as I started to yell, the front door was knocked off its hinges.

Two
WISTY
IT’S QUITE HIDEOUS to get kidnapped in the dead of night, right inside your own home. It went
something like this.
I awoke to the chaotic crashing of overturning furniture, quickly followed by the sounds of shattering
glass, possibly some of Mom’s china.
Oh, God,Whit,I thought, shaking my head sleepily. My older brother had grown four inches and gained
thirty pounds of muscle in the past year. Which made him the biggest and fastest quarterback around,

and, I must say, the most intimidating player on our regional high school’s undefeated football team.
Off the playing field, though, Whit could be about as clumsy as your average bear—if your average bear
were hopped-up on a case of Red Bull and full of himself because he could bench-press 275 and every
girl in school thought he was the hunk of all hunks.
I rolled over and pulled my pillow around my head. Even before the drinking started, Whit couldn’t walk
through our house without knocking something over. Total bull-in-the-china-shop syndrome.
But that wasn’t the real problem tonight, I knew.
Because three months ago, his girlfriend, Celia, had literallyvanished without a trace. And by now
everyone was thinking she probably would never come back. Her parents were totally messed up about
it, and so was Whit. To be honest, so was I. Celia was—is—very pretty, smart, not conceited at all.
She’s this totally cool girl, even though she has money. Celia’s father owns the luxury car dealership in
town, and her mom is a former beauty queen. I couldn’t believe something like that would happen to
someone like Celia.
I heard my parents’ bedroom door open and snuggled back down into my cozy, flannel-sheeted bed.
Next came Dad’s booming voice, and he was as angry as I’ve ever heard him.
“This can’t be happening! You have no right to be here. Leave our housenow! ”
I bolted upright, wide awake. Next came more crashing sounds, and I thought I heard someone moan in
pain. Had Whit fallen and cracked his head? Had my dad been hurt?
Jeez, Louise,I thought, scrambling out of bed. “I’m coming, Dad! Are you all right? Dad?”
And then the nightmare to start a lifetime of nightmares truly began.
I gasped as my bedroom door crashed open. Two hulking men in dark gray uniforms burst into my
room, glaring at me as if I were a fugitive terrorist cell operative.
“It’s her! Wisteria Allgood!” one said, and a light bright enough to illuminate an airplane hangar
obliterated the darkness.
I tried to shield my eyes as my heart kicked into overdrive. “Who areyou?! ” I asked. “What are you
doing inmy freaking bedroom?”
__________________________________
Witch & Wizard.
In stores December 2009.

