Contents
One
AS A SMALL CHILD, Sophie used to tell
herself the…

1

Two
SOPHIE GOT TO ASSEMBLY too late to join
her classmates

12

Three
SOPHIE LET HERSELF in at the front door and crept…

25

Four
AT HALF PAST SEVEN, Sophie changed into a
faded pink…

36

Five
THE WEEKEND PASSED in a blur of homework
and bad…

51

Six
ALL THE GIRLS WERE seated and waiting
attentively the next…

57

Seven
THE GIRLS’ RIFLE CLUB met that Thursday in
the school…

66

Eight
AFTER LUNCH ON SATURDAY Peggy sent
Sophie out with instructions…

81

Nine
THE CLOCK STRUCK FIVE as Sophie let herself in at…

99

Ten
ON THE WAY TO MEET Mikael after a
reassuringly indigestible…

111

Eleven
ON MONDAY NEITHER JEAN nor Sophie mentioned
having seen Sheena,…

121

Twelve
FOR THE SAKE OF THE war-preparedness
effort, Miss Henchman had…

130

Thirteen
“DID MR. PETERSEN REVEAL his dark secrets
while you were…

137

Fourteen
THE POLICE CAR WAITED outside, a
massive black Wolseley. Sophie…

143

Fifteen
AT HERIOT ROW ON Friday evening Sophie
suffered through a…

157

Sixteen
A PRETTY GIRL IN A NURSE’S uniform
escorted them down…

162

Seventeen
SOPHIE LOITERED OUTSIDE the office
under the receptionist’s supervision until…

172

Eighteen
LATER THAT AFTERNOON Peggy knocked
on Sophie’s bedroom door and…

181

Nineteen
ON TUESDAY AFTER LUNCH it was Sophie’s
turn to supervise…

194

Twenty
ON THURSDAY AFTERNOON Sophie went for
tea at the professor’s

201

Twenty-One
SOPHIE WAS NOT INVITED to join that
Friday evening’s séance,…

218

Twenty-Two
WAKING BLEARY-EYED on Saturday morning,
Sophie drank a huge mug…

226

Twenty-Three
BETWEEN WORRYING ABOUT murderers,
IRYLNS, and the everyday threat of…

233

Twenty-Four
"I ASSUME A TEACHER GAVE you permission
to use the…

245

Twenty-Five
SOPHIE DECIDED TO WALK home from
school on Friday afternoon…

254

Twenty-Six
WALKING THROUGH THE streets, Sophie’s
feet felt light, like in…

264

Twenty-Seven
“WE CAN’T DO IT, we simply can’t,” Mikael
said, pacing…

277

Twenty-Eight
OUTSIDE THE PHOTOGRAPHY shop, Mikael paused

290

Twenty-Nine
“WAIT FOR ME!” Sophie called out as Mikael
navigated through…

302

Thirty
MIKAEL INSISTED ON walking Sophie home

314

Thirty-One
ON MONDAY EVENING Sophie resolutely put
everything else out of…

322

Thirty-Two
JUST BEFORE LUNCH Sophie slipped away from
the other girls…

331

Thirty-Three
THAT EVENING SOPHIE plowed steadily
through an enormous pile of…

340

Thirty-Four
WAKING MUCH EARLIER than usual, Sophie
arrived at breakfast in…

352

Thirty-Five
IN THE SCHOOL LIBRARY, Sophie headed
straight for the city…

357

Thirty-Six
IT TOOK HARDLY ANY time at all to get to…

367

Thirty-Seven
SOPHIE’S OBJECTIVE ALL along had been to
get into the…

376

Thirty-Eight
AFTER A HUMILIATING and painful interlude in
which two burly…

385

Thirty-Nine
THE VEHICLE HIRED FOR the expedition was
a bright maroon…

396

Forty
THE GUARD LED THEM around an obstacle course
of hills…

408

Forty-One
WHEN THE FOLDING DOOR closed and she
found herself alone…

416

Forty-Two
THE HISTORY TEACHER’S unexpected
appearance as getaway driver made Sophie…

434

Forty-Three
FOLLOWING A DISCREET interval involving
towels and large quantities of…

443

Author’s Note

449

About the Author
Credits
Cover

Copyright
About the Publisher

viii

a
One

S A SMALL CHILD,

A

Sophie used to tell herself the story of

aher own life, pictures and captions running inside her
a head just like a real book. Even at fifteen, she found

herself now and again transfixed by the sense of her surroundings flattening out into a picture-book illustration: the fairhaired chemistry teacher, beakers and test tubes in racks along
the countertops, rows of pupils at their desks, and near the
back Sophie’s own slight figure, a cone of sunlight conveniently
picking out her head and shoulders (gray eyes, snub nose, sallow skin, straight black hair bobbed short with a fringe to keep
it tidy) so that there was no mistaking the main character.
The warmth of the sun on her face brought Sophie threedimensional again. She blinked and breathed deeply, the

1

pungent smell of fresh-cut grass cutting through the fug of
waterproofed raincoats and formaldehyde.
“Sophie, don’t you know the answer?” whispered Leah
Sinclair, Sophie’s lab partner.
The answer to what?
Sophie stole a quick look at the blackboard, which held
the formula C3H5(ONO2)3. Beside it stood Mr. Petersen
looking even more harried and chalky than usual, so that
Sophie had to fight a ridiculous impulse to get up and brush
the dust off his tweed jacket. His mixture of handsomeness
and haplessness brought out in her a painful tender feeling
which she had entirely failed to keep secret from the other
girls. Sophie hated being teased, really hated it, but she still
couldn’t help gazing at Mr. Petersen with an expression of
sheeplike devotion. It wasn’t surprising the others found it
funny.
“Can none of you name this chemical?” said the teacher.
Sophie was about to put up her hand when she heard Leah
whisper to the girl on the other side of her. Sophie turned and
glared. If Leah had just said something about Sophie being in
love with Mr. Petersen, it was grossly unfair; Sophie would
never have embarrassed Leah by mentioning the well-known
fact of her being in love with the games mistress.
Sophie slouched down in her seat. Through her lashes
she could see Mr. Petersen looking surprised, puzzled, even

2

a little hurt. Something in her usually strained to answer him
as quickly, as fully, as perfectly as possible, but today she kept
her eyes fixed on her hands and fiddled with her mechanical
pencil.
Mr. Petersen gave a defeated-sounding sigh and crossed
his arms.
“I’ll give you three clues,” he said. “It has a sharp, sweet,
aromatic taste.”
The other girls’ faces were so blank, it made Sophie
squirm (oh, why couldn’t she just be like everyone else and not
know the answers?). It was horrible having everyone think of
her as an evil Goody Two-shoes when she really wasn’t like
that at all. She bit her lower lip so hard she tasted blood.
“It is sometimes used to treat a heart disease called
angina.”
A long pause.
“It freezes at thirteen degrees centigrade.”
This one was such a dud of a clue that Sophie couldn’t
stop the answer from bursting out.
“Nitroglycerin,” she said about ten times more loudly
than she meant to.
“Nitroglycerin,” Mr. Petersen repeated. He sounded
pleased (Sophie absolutely hated herself for caring what he
thought of her). “The active ingredient in dynamite, one of the
most powerful explosives known to man.”

3

The other girls perked up. Explosives were good fun.
Sophie had more complicated feelings about dynamite, which
was only to be expected: She had been a very small child when
both her parents died in an accident at the Russian dynamite
factory her father directed.
“Nitroglycerin’s a powerful blessing to mankind,” Mr.
Petersen went on. “Doctors use it to treat heart disease, most
often in the form of a patch stuck to the skin, although one
patient stuck his butter knife into a toaster and received a
modest electric shock that actually caused his patch to
explode.”
Sophie saw a few girls cough so that they would have an
excuse to hide their smiles behind their hands. Was the mind
of the fifteen-year-old girl a closed book to Mr. Petersen?
“Even a tiny trace of nitroglycerin placed upon the tongue
will give you a pulsating, violent headache,” the teacher went
on, his voice soft, even, and rather sleep-inducing. “A dog
given nitroglycerin will foam at the mouth and then vomit;
within seven or eight minutes it will pass out and almost cease
breathing.”
Sophie could hear Priscilla Banks and Jean Roberts almost
choking with laughter behind her. She shrank down lower in
her seat.
Mr. Petersen pretended not to notice the laughter, but
Sophie thought he looked hurt.

4

“Roughly seventy-five years ago, in the eighteen-sixties,”
he continued, “half a dozen terrible factory explosions led the
Federated European States to ban the production of nitroglycerin altogether. Soon afterward, a massive explosion near
the Wells Fargo building in San Francisco led to that city’s
nitroglycerin being seized and destroyed, and before long to a
prohibition on its manufacture in both the Northern Union of
States and the Southern Confederacy. We must be grateful to
Alfred Nobel (the patron saint, so to speak, of the Hanseatic
states) for stabilizing nitroglycerin by mixing it with a porous
earth called kieselguhr. In doing so, he invented the explosive
that would change the world: DYNAMITE.”
He began rooting around in his pockets. “I hadn’t meant
to show you this, but look. . . .”
They craned forward to see the thing in the palm of his
hand: an orange cardboard cartridge that looked like something from a sweetshop window.
“I have enough dynamite here in my hand,” said Mr.
Petersen, “to blow up the entire school.”
The shuffling and whispering stopped. Sophie sucked in
her breath.
“Dynamite,” he repeated, enjoying the girls’ rare attentiveness. “The word comes from the Greek for ‘power.’
Dynamite Number One was Nobel’s name for his first nitroglycerin compound, manufactured by Nobel Explosives,

5

Limited. Engineers use it to mine metals and blast railway tunnels through tons of rock, but dynamite also allows Scotland
and the other members of the New Hanseatic League to retain
independence. By providing the Federated European States
with the best explosives in the world, we secure for ourselves
the power of self-determination.”
It was hard not to feel a little sick, looking at the charge of
dynamite in his hand.
“Dynamite is quite stable at room temperature,” Mr.
Petersen assured them. He tucked the stick back into his
pocket. “Today’s experiment, however, will give you some
sense of the extraordinary power of explosives, even in minute
quantities. We will manufacture nitrogen triiodide, which
belongs to the same chemical family as nitroglycerin. Then we
will blow it up.”
Sophie sat up straighter as Mr. Petersen wrote the equations on the blackboard. The first equation told how the
chemical was formed, the second what happened when it
broke down into smaller parts, releasing a massive quantity of
energy:
3I2 + NH3 —> NI3 + 3HI
2NI3 —> N2 + 3I2
“Unlike dynamite, nitrogen triiodide is so sensitive that it will

6

explode when poked with a stick,” the teacher warned as he
handed around the supplies. “Even the touch of a feather will
produce an explosion.”
Nan Harris was rolling her eyes. The blood rose hot in
Sophie’s cheeks and she put up both hands to cool them, hoping nobody would notice.
“You must wear goggles during the experiment,” Mr.
Petersen continued, “as iodine vapor irritates the eyes and the
respiratory system.”
“What about my asthma, sir?” asked Josie Humphries.
“Any girl with asthma or other respiratory difficulties is
excused from participating,” Mr. Petersen said, frowning. “To
make up the missing work, she will hand in an extra set of
sums on Monday; the first ten problems, let us say, on page
two hundred thirty-five in the textbook.”
Josie subsided, and the girls got down to work. With Leah
watching, Sophie ground the iodine in a mortar and put a few
grams of the dark brown powder in a saucer, then poured in
ammonia water to cover it. After twenty minutes, she poured
off most of the ammonia, the residue going onto two pieces of
filter paper, which were dried with ether.
She looked around and saw that the others were dawdling,
just as they always did in chemistry lab. It was hard to believe
they were the same girls who would race about the tennis
courts later on. She could never explain to them why she felt

7

exactly the opposite: chemistry and physics made Sophie
lively, while sports practice filled her with lethargy.
Fortunately she had an excuse for running slowly: a slight limp
that was the only remaining symptom of the broken femur she
had sustained long ago in the explosion that killed her parents.
Sophie had been thrown clear of the building and found virtually unharmed, except for the injury to her leg and a few
cuts and bruises.
When all of the girls were ready, Mr. Petersen distributed
the feathers for detonating the explosive. Sophie had imagined herself wielding the cast-off plumage of an ostrich or a
peacock whose luxuriant fronds might have decorated a particularly expensive hat. It was a disappointment to be given an
ordinary pigeon feather, she thought, dutifully setting up the
ring stand with its two filter papers covered with dark powdery nitrogen triiodide.
“Class,” said Mr. Petersen, “is everyone ready?”
The girls at the next station quieted down, and they all
took their places, lowering their goggles.
Sophie wanted to be the one to trigger the explosion, but
fair-mindedness compelled her to offer the feather to Leah.
“You do it, Sophie,” Leah said, edging away from the
counter.
“On your mark,” said Mr. Petersen. “Priscilla, stop chattering and put on those goggles. Ready. Steady. Go!”

8

The moment Sophie touched the feather to the bottom
paper, it exploded, detonating the second sample and releasing a violet puff of iodine gas. All around the classroom the
reaction was duplicated in a spectacular demonstration.
They spent ten minutes cleaning up, and then the bell
rang. As the other girls collected their books, Sophie jotted
down a few more notes. The second bell went, and she hurried to put her things together.
Just before she reached the door, Mr. Petersen spoke
behind her.
“Sophie? May I have a word?”
At that exact moment the glass in the classroom windows
shattered inward, and a soft, slow thump shook the lab equipment in its mountings. The shock moved through the air like
a load of cement.
Seconds later Sophie found herself on the floor, Mr.
Petersen crouched over her. The room was strangely quiet,
though she could hear the Klaxons outside. She felt something
wet on her forehead. She raised her hand to her temple, then
looked at her fingers and saw a smear of blood.
Confused and disoriented, she thought for a moment that
the dynamite in Mr. Petersen’s pocket must have blown up,
though if this had been the case, surely neither of them would
have survived the explosion.
The shock wave produced by nitroglycerin—why was she

9

thinking this?—moved at over seventeen thousand miles per
hour.
“Damn, damn, damn,” said Mr. Petersen, so close she
could feel the heat of his body against hers. “Oh, damn and
blast it, Sophie, are you all right?”
“Quite all right,” said Sophie, struggling to her feet.
Mr. Petersen helped her up. Usually Sophie hated being
helped, but now all she could think about was how shaky she
felt and also what a waste it was to find herself so close to Mr.
Petersen under circumstances not at all conducive to the intimate conversations that leavened her daydreams.
He was pressing a handkerchief into her hand; it was none
too clean, but she held it to her head anyway, hoping the blood
wouldn’t stain her uniform. Her great-aunt would never allow
her a new one so close to the end of term.
Afterward she thought his other hand might have rested
on her shoulder for a moment, but she was never sure of it.
“Can you make your own way to the infirmary?” he asked.
“I need to see that nothing’s broken here.”
It was an odd thing to say, given the great shards of window glass covering every surface. The floor was littered with
the wreckage of test tubes, pipettes, and retorts.
He flushed a little at Sophie’s doubtful look, and for the first
time she realized that Mr. Petersen was no less capable of mortification than Sophie herself—a strange and liberating insight.

10

“Go along, then,” he said, smiling awkwardly. “The headmistress will want everybody in the assembly room, but you
must see Matron first.”
As Sophie had her forehead bandaged by Matron, her
mind wandered back to the cartridge in Mr. Petersen’s pocket.
How had an ordinary science teacher gained possession of a
stick of dynamite? It was illegal for private citizens to own
high explosives without a permit.
She collected her thoughts just enough to retrieve the
stained handkerchief from the laundry bin when Matron wasn’t
looking. Mr. Petersen probably wouldn’t think to ask for it,
and there was nothing to stop Sophie from keeping it as a
token of her hopeless and forbidden love. Was there?

11

a
Two

S

OPHIE GOT TO ASSEMBLY

too late to join her classmates.

She stood at the back of the auditorium and braced herself for the headmistress’s speech. Hardly a week of

term had gone by without a bomb going off, and Sophie had
become used to the sick feeling in her stomach and the awfulness of the special assemblies that followed.
Miss Henchman stood on the low stage, her head bowed.
“Girls!” one of the junior staff members called out, to no
effect. “Girls, please, a little quiet!”
As the room fell silent, Miss Henchman raised her head,
cleared her throat loudly, and took a sip from the glass of
water on the lectern.
“Our city has just suffered another outrageous attack at

12

the bloody hands of the Brothers of the Northern Liberties,
those fiends without conscience,” she announced. “The
explosion killed four people in a shopping arcade in the
Canongate and grievously injured a score more.”
A tumult of voices could be heard in response. Miss
Henchman sniffed and pushed the gold pince-nez up her
bony nose. The girls fell silent again.
“Scotland will never give in to the demands of terrorists,”
the headmistress said, her left hand going to her large bosom,
“even if the price is further loss of life. The Secret Service will
not relent until every last one of these ruthless murderers has
been arrested and executed, in the name of justice and as a
deterrent to the entire wicked cohort!”
Cliché and bombast, thought Sophie. Fair enough to use
the word murderers for the suicide bombers who strapped
explosives onto themselves and went out into crowded shopping precincts, trams, and restaurants to blow people up. But
how could killing the terrorists in turn set anything right
again?
Sophie didn’t realize she’d spoken aloud until the girls
nearby turned to stare.
“What is it?” she asked the person next to her, a tall
auburn-haired girl she knew only by sight.
But Miss Henchman had already caught the whiff of
something forbidden at the back of the hall. There was a

13

strong antipathy between Sophie and Miss Henchman, like a
cat and a dog that can’t be in the room together.
“Sophie Hunter,” said Miss Henchman in her starchiest
voice, “have you something to say to us all this morning? I
didn’t quite catch your last remark.”
“Just tell her you’re sorry,” hissed the red-haired girl. “Say
you’ve got a cough and apologize for disrupting assembly.”
“I don’t have a cough, though,” said Sophie. She caught
Miss Henchman’s eye. The headmistress had begun to swell—
literally, her face had gone all red and puffy—with irritation.
“Sophie?” she said in a dangerous voice. “I’m still waiting.”
As soon as Sophie opened her mouth to speak, she knew
it was a mistake, but she couldn’t stop herself. She couldn’t
bear it when people used language to falsify things. Justice,
deterrence—these were the words people used to cover up the
truth.
“It’s wrong when terrorists kill people,” Sophie said,
stumbling a little over the words. “Really wrong, I mean, not
just illegal but immoral as well. But how can it be right for us
to talk about killing them right back? If we justify killing them
in the name of justice, then they can keep on killing us in the
name of liberty. It might be necessary to execute them—I’m
not arguing with that—but how is it any better than what they
do?”

14

Everyone was looking at Sophie and whispering. Would
she be punished for her outburst? But Miss Henchman shook
her head, with a sigh that said louder than any words that
Sophie existed at a level altogether beneath the headmistress’s
contempt.
“I hope you will see fit to join with the rest of us,” she said,
“in praying that the police may apprehend these criminals as
soon as possible, and send them to their just deserts.
Afterward, all girls will have a free period before lunch; you
may spend the time in your rooms, or else in the school library,
but any girl found loitering in the corridors will receive a
demerit.”
Miss Henchman could shift from death to school discipline in a single breath. Sophie said a few private words in her
head for the departed and their families, but nothing about
vengeance or just deserts or an eye for an eye.
Afterward, Sophie saw Matron go up to the headmistress
and speak a few sentences. Both women looked over at
Sophie, and then Miss Henchman shook her head again in a
maddeningly condescending way. As she swept out, the headmistress stopped for a moment and told Sophie that she must
take good care of herself after having had such a nasty shock,
and that she should ask Matron for an aspirin if she didn’t feel
more the thing by lunchtime.
Sophie was dismayed to find herself in the grip of feelings

15

so strong she had to run a finger along her lower eyelid to
catch the tears. Sophie’s friends were nowhere in sight—they
must have gone back to their room already—and her tears
were witnessed only by the awful Harriet Jeffries. Everything
about Harriet drove Sophie wild with irritation, from her pink
hair ribbons and slight lisp to the namby-pamby way she kept
her elbows tucked modestly at her side.
“That’s treason, you know,” Harriet said, sounding
absolutely delighted. “You can’t go around saying things like
that.”
“I can say what I like,” Sophie said. The sight of Harriet’s
smug little face filled her with rage. “It’s a free country, isn’t
it? And if it’s not, maybe the Brothers of the Northern
Liberties are more right than we know.”
Harriet opened her mouth in a comically exaggerated
expression of delighted shock. “My father says that people
who talk like you ought to be put up against a wall and shot,”
she said.
She was gone before Sophie could catch her breath.
In the dormitory upstairs, Sophie found Nan rifling
through the locker beside the corner bed. Nan was a big athletic girl, second captain of the hockey eleven and endlessly
hopeful (despite a vast preponderance of evidence to the contrary) that Sophie would somehow turn out to be good at
sports after all.

16

“Whatever got into you just now, Sophie?” she asked.
Sophie didn’t answer, just threw herself down on the bed
by the window. With four beds, the room was rather cramped,
but the girls had an adjoining study as well. The other three
boarded full-time, as did virtually all the school’s pupils, but
Sophie’s great-aunt had wangled a more frugal arrangement
whereby Sophie spent weekends at her house in Heriot Row.
“You’ll have to make that bed again if you lie on it, you
know,” Nan told Sophie.
Sophie only grunted and rolled over onto her stomach. As
head girl of the form, Nan’s job was to enforce the rules; there
was no point holding it against her.
Sophie couldn’t understand how the others were so little
affected by the morning’s violence. Across the room, Priscilla
was demonstrating a new hairstyle to Jean, whose mop of curls
limited her to admiring rather than emulating Priscilla’s sleek
hairstyles. Priscilla was fair-haired and conceited and
extremely pretty, but Sophie secretly thought Jean’s brown
eyes and pale skin and cloud of dark hair made her more striking than Priscilla, who looked too much like the girl twirling
the umbrella in the chocolate advertisement.
Meanwhile Nan had retrieved a picture postcard, a seaside scene sent by her oldest brother from his posting on the
Caspian, from the locker and propped it up on the mantel
above the fireplace. She took up her brush, slid the elastic

17

band off her chestnut-shiny hair, and gave it a few brisk
strokes, then divided it into three thick strands, which she
plaited into a tight fat braid.
“Seriously, Sophie,” Nan said as she fixed the tail of her
plait with the elastic and tossed the rope of hair back over her
shoulder, “you mustn’t make such a spectacle of yourself! You
were lucky Miss Henchman didn’t send you home just now.”
Why had she been so insubordinate? Sophie couldn’t even
explain it to herself, let alone to the others. She prided herself
on being steady, calm, and rational. If only feelings could be
completely eradicated! For the past few months it seemed as
though the least little thing was enough to set off a cascade of
powerful emotions in Sophie.
“Miss Henchman is a poisonous lunatic,” she said finally.
“I don’t see how you can listen to her without thinking someone should lock her up and throw away the key.”
Nan just rolled her eyes, but Jean and Priscilla looked
quite shocked.
“I thought the Henchman was rather wonderful this
morning,” said Priscilla, her eyes wide.
“You would,” said Sophie, groaning and covering her
head with a pillow. If she was going to cry, she didn’t want to
do it in front of the others.
Priscilla made a huffy noise.
“Don’t mind Sophie,” Jean said to Priscilla. “You know

18

she’s got an irrational hatred for Miss Henchman, just as she
has an irrational passion for Mr. Petersen.”
“I don’t—,” Sophie started to say.
“Sophie,” Nan interrupted to keep the peace. “What did
Mr. Petersen want with you at the end of class this morning?”
“I don’t know,” Sophie muttered from beneath the pillow.
“The bomb went off before he could say anything.”
Nan reached over to Sophie and seized the pillow. Sophie
felt quite naked without it. She blinked a few times and hoped
the puffy redness about her eyes would look more like hay
fever than crying.
“You were still in the classroom when it went off? The rest
of us were all in the corridor by that time. No wonder you’re
in such a state! That wall of windows was directly exposed to
the blast. Are you all right? Is that a cut on your forehead?”
Nan meant well, but Sophie knocked her hand away
before she could touch the sticking plaster on Sophie’s forehead. She thought she would die if she found herself right now
at the receiving end of someone’s affectionate caress. She liked
the other girls, and they had all chosen to live together, but she
felt the pressure of their constant presence like a deep-sea
diver too many fathoms down felt the pressure of the water
above. She scowled and clamped the bridge of her nose
between thumb and forefinger to hold back the tears.
“Anyway,” said Jean, still smarting at Sophie’s having spoken

19

rudely to Priscilla, “blast or no blast, it’s no excuse for making
that sort of reflection on your friends!”
“Sophie can make any reflections she likes,” Priscilla said,
“so long as she helps me write up my chemistry notes before
class on Monday. I simply cannot follow a word that awful
man says.”
“Mr. Petersen isn’t awful,” Sophie said, sitting up. The
others began laughing. Sophie’s fixation on Mr. Petersen
was old news; when he had first arrived in March to replace
their former teacher, who had left to be married, lots of the
girls decided they were in love with him, but they stopped
liking him (all but Sophie) because of chemistry being so
boring.
“Look around you in class on Monday morning,” Priscilla
advised. “Everyone just sits there staring into space. He’s the
most boring man alive! Besides, Sophie, you can’t seriously be
in love with a man whose name’s Arnold. . . .”
“Mr. Petersen’s not awful,” Sophie said again. “He’s a
slightly awful teacher, it’s true, but he’s not an awful person.”
Priscilla didn’t seem to be listening. “There’s something
terribly odd about Mr. Petersen,” she mused, examining her
face in a silver compact and licking one finger to smooth down
an eyebrow.
Something in the sound of Priscilla’s voice made Sophie
suspicious. She tensed up in anticipation of one of the

20

personal digs that were Priscilla’s specialty.
“He’s got a morbid preoccupation with explosives, hasn’t
he?” Priscilla continued.
“Yes,” Jean chimed in, “he’s got a bee in his bonnet about
bombs.”
“It wouldn’t surprise me one bit,” Priscilla drawled, “if he
knew more about the terrorist bombings than he’s letting on!”
“That’s preposterous,” said Sophie. “He was standing right
there in front of me when the bomb went off. He couldn’t have
had anything to do with it!”
“Yes,” Jean said, taking her lead from Priscilla, “but he
could still be the criminal mastermind running the terrorist
cells, couldn’t he? Being in class is an awfully good alibi!”
“In a Sherlock Holmes story,” Priscilla added, turning her
wide blue eyes toward Sophie, “he would have specially timed
it so as to avoid suspicion.”
“Don’t tease Sophie,” Nan begged. “You know she hates
being teased. . . .”
But Nan’s well-meant intervention tipped Sophie over the
precipice into absolute fury. She stood up and shouted, an allout bloodcurdling cry of unhappiness and rage. She didn’t
think she could stand another minute—another second—of
this. Then she dragged the small valise from under her bed
and began to throw things into it, first her toilet bag and bedroom slippers, then her pajamas.

21

“What are you doing?” Priscilla asked, rather apprehensive now.
“Sophie?” said Jean.
“I’m leaving!” Sophie said. She stomped into the study for
the rest of her schoolbooks and a half-written English essay,
which she crammed into her leather satchel. There was something undignified about packing rather than simply storming
out, but she retained just enough self-command to know that
it would be a disaster to leave without her homework.
“You can’t go!” Nan said. “We’ve still got spiritualist
instruction and maths after lunch.”
“I don’t care,” Sophie said. “If anyone asks, tell them I
had a headache and went home early for the weekend.”
Nan looked horrified.
“It’s only the truth, strictly speaking,” Sophie added.
“Matron will back me up.”
“Sophie, are you sure this is a good idea?” asked Jean.
“I don’t give a damn if it’s a good idea or not,” Sophie
said, fastening the clasp on the valise and throwing her satchel
over her shoulder.
Jean groaned and Nan covered her ears. Even Sophie was
a bit shocked at herself for having used a swearword.
“You know I should report you,” Nan said.
“Don’t worry,” Sophie said, relenting at the sight of their
worried faces. “I doubt Miss Henchman will expel me.” As

22

the words left her mouth, she was overcome with panic.
“There’s nothing you can say to make me change my mind
about leaving.”
“If you’re going, then,” Priscilla said, after a long pause,
“best do it now, while the hall monitors are still in their
rooms.”
Avoiding the main hallway, Sophie made it out through
the delivery entrance without a hitch. Closing the door behind
her, she heaved an enormous sigh of relief. She still felt as if
she might burst into tears at any moment, but at least she was
out of range of anyone she actually knew.
The tram stop was almost deserted. Was it because she
was so much earlier than usual? No: surely it was due to the
morning’s attack that the streets were so empty. She shivered
in spite of the warmth of the day.
When something moved suddenly behind her, she whirled
around to face it, clutching her satchel in front of her chest as
if it would shield her from danger. She relaxed when she saw
it was only the old man she privately called the Veteran. He
had lost both legs in one of the colonial wars and wheeled
himself and his belongings around the neighborhood on a little platform on casters. From a distance he could easily have
been mistaken for a bundle of old rags.
“Didn’t mean to frighten ye, miss,” he said, leering at
Sophie. “Have ye a penny for a poor wretched beggar, then?”

23

There was something almost comforting in the familiar
small pressure of his extortion. Sophie dug around in her
pocket for a coin and gave him sixpence.
He winked at her. “Early you are today?” he said, the rise
at the end making it a question.
“That’s right,” said Sophie, though it was strange and a bit
frightening to think of him keeping close enough tabs on her
to notice a departure from the routine.
The tram pulled up and she got on in a rush, showing the
conductor her student identity card and moving to an empty
seat in the middle of the car. She looked back once and saw
the Veteran’s gaze still fixed on her as the vehicle turned the
corner into the next road. Then she scrunched her eyes tightly
shut and buried her face in her hands.

24

a

Three

S

OPHIE LET HERSELF

in at the front door and crept

upstairs to her room on the top floor. Bedroom door
safely closed behind her, she reached up and pulled the

sticking plaster off her forehead, absently rolling it between
her fingers as she put away her school things, kicked off her
shoes, and threw herself down on the bed. After a minute she
crawled under the duvet (Great-aunt Tabitha believed eiderdown quilts made central heating completely unnecessary),
pulling it up around her shoulders and tucking the edges
underneath to seal herself in a tight bundle.
Great-aunt Tabitha served two masters, and neither one
was Sophie. Her deepest affections were reserved for the
Scottish nation and the spirit world, though she had taken

25

Sophie in when she was a baby, which was very good of her, or
so Sophie was informed at regular intervals. Great-aunt
Tabitha’s rare bedtime stories, for instance, concerned
Michael Faraday’s death-bed revelation about the unity of
electromagnetism and spiritualism or the rationalist peer Lord
Kelvin’s conversion, following his daughter’s death, by a spiritualist medium who put him in touch with the little girl.
Sophie woke late in the afternoon with the buttons of her
blouse pressing deep into her skin and the pillow beneath her
face damp where she had dribbled onto it. Only hunger made
her finally drag herself out of bed.
Crossing to the washstand, where her comb and brush sat
beside the porcelain basin, she stumbled and stopped short.
The temperature of the air had dropped twenty degrees or
more.
An icy feeling crept down from her face to her hands and
feet. She clenched her fists, breathing fast. What if she tried to
move and found she was really and truly frozen to the spot?
She took a step forward, and the coldness of the floorboards
almost burned the soles of her feet.
She told herself not to be ridiculous. This couldn’t be a
ghost or anything like that. The newspapers had been saying
it was the coldest summer in Scotland since they began keeping records, that was all.
Something itched in her nose and Sophie sneezed, the

26

sound breaking the spell. The cold melted away and she
moved cautiously to the washstand. But when she leaned up
on the tips of her toes to brush her hair in the small smoky
mirror over the washstand—a mirror placed too high for comfort, so as to promote tidiness without vanity—her own face
was nowhere to be seen. Instead she saw the head and shoulders of a very pretty young lady, her hair up in a style that was
at once flattering and out-of-date, a gaudy necklace clasped
around her neck.
Sophie blinked. It had to be a trick of the light. The mottled surface of the mirror often distorted Sophie’s image in
unexpected ways.
But blinking did nothing to clear her vision, and as she
looked more closely, the smiling eyes in the mirror actually
met her own, and the woman reached her hand out toward
Sophie as if to caress her hair. She looked very much like a
photograph Sophie had of her mother, but the hair and dress
bespoke a far distant time and place.
Sophie shut her eyes, counted to ten, and stamped her
foot. To her great relief, when she opened her eyes and looked
in the mirror, it showed her nothing more unusual than her
own face, red lines still printed across her cheek by the folds
of the duvet, a scratch on her forehead just beneath the hairline.
She let out a breath she hadn’t realized she’d been holding

27

and picked up the brush. Ghosts were stupid; only foolish
people believed in them. If only the woman hadn’t looked so
real! Sophie could almost feel the soft touch of her hand on
her own cheek. She attacked her hair with savage vigor, pressing the prickly bristles of the brush deep into her scalp.
Downstairs in the kitchen Sophie found the housekeeper
Peggy, her faded reddish hair waved in the rigid curls of her
Friday morning wash-and-set, an effect made comical by
her stout figure and the beads of sweat that stood out on her
bright red face as she stirred the saucepan.
Sophie went over to kiss her, trying not to breathe the
fumes from the pan. Peggy was friendly and funny and the
closest thing Sophie had to a mother, but she had a sort of negative instinct for cookery, a lack of ability amounting to a perverse genius. Her poached eggs were like golf balls, her fried
potatoes soggy and undercooked, the nut cutlets which Greataunt Tabitha (a strict vegetarian) insisted on having instead of
meat as tough and tasteless as the soles of Sophie’s school
shoes.
“Well, now, Sophie, I didn’t even hear you come in,” said
Peggy, continuing to stir the sauce as Sophie tucked her feet
up under one of the rush-backed chairs at the table.
Sophie opened her mouth to explain and then realized
she couldn’t face the questions that would follow the admission she’d been home much earlier. She always tried to give

28

confession a chance, but concealment was a practice of long
standing.
“Your great-aunt wants you to join herself and the other
ladies for supper,” Peggy continued. “They’re invited at half
past seven for eight o’clock, and she says you’re to go to that
séance after.”
Peggy said “that séance” as she might have said “that
nasty mess the dog made on the floor.” Peggy thought poorly
of the spirit world; she believed in spirits, of course, but that
didn’t mean she had to like them. Sophie herself found supernatural things intriguing and worrisome in roughly equal
measure.
“Do you think I might have something to eat first,
Peggy?” Sophie asked. “I don’t think I can wait until supper.”
“The poor bairn, famished-like! The dinners at that school
aren’t fit for pigs,” Peggy muttered grandly, slamming around
a pan to show partisan resentment. Considering herself in contention with the Edinburgh Institution for Young Ladies over
Sophie’s heart and stomach, Peggy was liable to single out the
school’s food for special condemnation. “Shall I fry you up a
nice bit of fish, then?”
“No, I don’t want to put you out,” Sophie said hastily.
“You must have plenty to do before supper, with all those
ladies coming,” she added, aware of perhaps not having
sounded very polite.

29

“Aye, that’s so,” Peggy said, though Sophie could see she
had already peeled the huge vat of potatoes. “Those old
witches eat like there’s a famine on. You go on into the larder,
then, and help yourself. Just mind you don’t touch the gooseberry fool; that’s for pudding this evening.”
Sophie averted her eyes from the bowl of fool, which
looked like something a cat might have sicked up. She hacked
a hunk of cheddar off the half wheel on the shelf and put it on
a small blue-and-white plate, along with an apple that she cut
into quarters. Then she helped herself to two gingersnaps and
asked Peggy if she minded whether Sophie ate in the kitchen.
Peggy liked to have her there, on the whole, but it was best to
acknowledge her sovereignty by asking permission.
As Sophie finished her tea, the sitting-room bell rang on
the board above the sink. Peggy cast her eyes up to the heavens and began very, very slowly to take off her apron. The bell
went again, and Peggy plodded up the basement stairs, mumbling under her breath as she went.
Within minutes she was back.
“Herself wants you in the sitting room,” she said.
“Did she say what for?” Sophie asked, hating herself for
being such a coward.
“Those that don’t ask won’t be told no lies,” said Peggy,
clamping her lips shut, though Sophie guessed her to be just
as much in the dark as Sophie herself.

30

Sophie rinsed her plate off under the cold-water tap in the
pantry, the only running water in the house, and wiped it dry.
She folded and refolded the tea towel before bracing herself,
walking up the stairs to the hall, and knocking at the sittingroom door.
“Come in,” a voice called out.
Inside Sophie found her great-aunt standing by the mantel with the mauve-and-gold Louis XVI carriage clock in her
hands.
“Clock’s stopped again,” she said to Sophie.
Great-aunt Tabitha barely topped five feet, but Sophie
had once seen her overpower two enormous Alsatians by the
force of her glance alone. She still dressed in the style she and
her friends had adopted as forward-looking female undergraduates in the 1890s, and today she wore the usual long
serge skirt and crisply ironed white cotton shirt of masculine
cut, its sleeves rather inky. She had a beaky nose that Sophie
was glad not to have inherited and a disorganized wispy bun
of hair whose color had reached the shade known as salt-andpepper (a suitable phrase, Sophie always thought, for someone so very peppery herself).
“Stop gawping like a dullard,” said Great-aunt Tabitha.
“Really, Sophie, with your mouth hanging open like that, you
look almost subnormal.”
Sophie shut her mouth and went to have a look at the

31

clock, a prized family possession bestowed by the second
Marquess of Bute on Sophie’s great-great-grandfather to mark
his thirtieth year of service on the estate. As soon as her hand
made contact with its casing, Sophie felt a kind of hiccup, like
an electric shock. Her hand jerked back, and the clock began
ticking.
“Well!” said Great-aunt Tabitha, looking at Sophie with
surprise. “If worse comes to worst, you can always apprentice
yourself to a clock maker.”
She led Sophie over to the uncomfortable straight-backed
chairs by the window, chairs Sophie had hated for as long as
she could remember.
“One of these days,” she said to Sophie, “you and I must
have a serious talk about your future.”
“I suppose nothing can be decided until after I sit my
exams in August,” Sophie ventured. The exams loomed over
the fifth-form girls; Jean had actually been sick the other
night, she was so worried about calculus.
“Sophie, you must work hard and perform to the utmost
of your abilities on those exams,” her great-aunt said, looking
straight into Sophie’s eyes. “If your marks aren’t high enough,
we won’t be able to keep you at school for your final year, let
alone send you to university.”
Sophie did not need to be told to work. She loved all
things academic; the science subjects were her favorites.

32

“I’ll do everything I can,” she promised, feeling an ache in
her stomach.
“Yes, you’re a good girl, Sophie, and I know you will. But
given the present situation, it’s difficult to persuade the
authorities to spare even a handful of girls for university education, what with the need for Land Girls, Women’s
Auxiliaries, and nurses, not to mention girls for IRYLNS.”
The acronym—pronounced “irons”—had loomed large
over Sophie’s childhood. The mission of this elite governmentsponsored training scheme—in full, the Institute for the
Recruitment of Young Ladies for National Security—was to
supply Scotland’s leaders (members of Parliament, captains of
industry, doctors, ministers, and so on) with the highly competent assistants they needed. Great-aunt Tabitha was one of its
founders, along with several of her university friends, and it
had come to represent almost the most prestigious choice a
girl could make of career, assuming she wanted one; most of
the best Edinburgh families gave up a daughter or two to
IRYLNS, rather in the spirit of their long-ago ancestors’ willingness to dedicate a son to the ministry.
Sophie desperately wanted to study at university, but
hardly any women were accepted to St. Andrews, Aberdeen,
Glasgow, and Edinburgh, and in the last few years, most
of the academic types at Sophie’s school had chosen to go
straight to the training program at IRYLNS (Miss Henchman

33

was on the board of governors).
“I’ll go to IRYLNS instead, if it’s more important,” she
said, wanting to show Great-aunt Tabitha that she was considering not simply her own selfish desires but also the National
Good, a phrase heard frequently in Heriot Row. IRYLNS
wouldn’t be too bad, not so long as she could assist a team of
scientists or engineers or something like that.
“Sophie, you don’t know what you’re talking about,” her
great-aunt snapped.
Sophie was taken aback. Though they hadn’t talked about
it before, she had always imagined her great-aunt would be
pleased to find Sophie willing to consider this alternative to a
university degree. IRYLNS was her pet project—why would
Great-aunt Tabitha jump down Sophie’s throat for suggesting
it? Did she not think Sophie good enough?
“So long as I have any say in the matter—and it may not
be for much longer, not if war’s declared—you’ll go into
IRYLNS over my dead body,” pronounced her great-aunt.
“But—”
“I don’t want to hear another word,” Great-aunt Tabitha
said.
It was one of her favorite phrases.
Sophie felt mortified and hurt, but there was nothing she
could do about it. How she hated being talked to like a child!
At that moment the doorbell rang.

34

“That’ll be Janet,” said Great-aunt Tabitha.
Miss Janet Gillespie was a large, untidy woman, Greataunt Tabitha’s most loyal lieutenant. She idolized Sophie’s
guardian and had a nasty habit of looking at Sophie and shaking her head, as if to say how fortunate Sophie was to have a
relation who didn’t scruple to sacrifice her own comfort and
peace of mind for the sake of a poor wretched orphan.
“Sophie, I expect you to join the ladies for supper—
Peggy’s cleared off the dining-room table and laid places for
ten—as well as the séance afterward. Miss Hodge telephoned
this morning to say she couldn’t be here, so you are needed as
a sitter.”
Dismissed, Sophie slipped upstairs just in time to avoid
the inevitable awkward encounter with Miss Gillespie in the
hall.

35

a
Four

T HALF PAST SEVEN,

A

Sophie changed into a faded pink

acotton frock and a soft gray cardigan she had
a reclaimed from the rubbish after Peggy pro-

nounced a verdict of moth. Sophie hated séances, hated everything about them, but if she had to go to one, she might as well
be comfortable.
Downstairs, the sitting room had filled up with ladies of
different shapes and sizes. None of them noticed Sophie come
in, and she stood by the door and surveyed them in peace. Her
eyes kept drifting to a large woman who wore a black dress
with jet beading and sat by herself in the corner, holding her
heavy body upright like someone not sure of her welcome.
As the mantel clock struck eight and Great-aunt Tabitha

36

began to round up the guests and herd them into the dining
room, the stranger’s eyes met Sophie’s own. Sophie smiled and
gave an awkward half nod—she didn’t want to; she didn’t like
the look of the woman at all—but the woman simply stared at
her, not turning away until Sophie’s great-aunt arrived at her
side to escort her in to supper in the next room (oh, this must
be the medium, to prompt such solicitude).
For pudding, there was a choice between gooseberry fool
or stewed fruit. Sophie asked for the plums, which were bland
and inoffensive. She decided not to take a sponge finger from
the biscuit barrel when it came around. Sophie’s great-aunt
insisted on Peggy making them at home rather than buying
the packets of ready-made ones at the shop, which she said
were low-class.
As the maid came in to clear the table, Great-aunt Tabitha
stood and announced the order of affairs for the rest of the
evening. Sophie’s great-aunt would examine the medium in
private, in the presence of two members of the Caledonian
Guild of Spiritualist Inspectors, who had spent the whole of
supper silently munching their food at the foot of the table
like a malevolent pair of crows. Meanwhile Miss Gillespie
would organize the others into a sitters’ circle in the conservatory at the back of the house.
Sophie had already got up from her chair and folded her
napkin when her great-aunt appeared beside her.

37

“Sophie, this is somewhat irregular,” she said irritably,
“but our guest has asked for you to join us upstairs for the
examination.”
Sophie couldn’t imagine why the woman wanted her
there. Something about the whole business gave her a bad
feeling. She looked over at the medium. Arms folded, expression impassive, the woman’s eyes rested directly on Sophie.
She followed the others up the stairs, Great-aunt Tabitha
leading the procession, like a brisk but demented mother
duck, to the little-used bedroom directly opposite from
Sophie’s on the top floor. It was wretchedly cold and damp;
Sophie pulled the sleeves of her cardigan down over her hands
and then clasped them in her armpits until Great-aunt Tabitha
glared at her, at which point she let them drop back to her
sides.
Though she had read about this kind of inspection,
Sophie had a nasty suspicion it would prove quite different to
see one in person. What happened next was absolutely awful.
Under Great-aunt Tabitha’s penetrating gaze, the two inspectors stripped the medium completely naked. One woman
searched her—Sophie blushed and looked away when the
medium was asked to bend over so that her body cavities
could be checked for the concealed lengths of muslin used to
fake ectoplasm—while the second inspector carefully examined each item of clothing.

38

Sophie had never seen a grown-up person without any
clothes on. She couldn’t take her eyes away from the vast
expanse of flesh: the enormous breasts, yellow and goosepimpled in the cold, the folds of fat over the woman’s hips and
abdomen, the imbalance between her bulky thighs and skinny
calves. Worst were the raw red marks where the woman’s
steel-boned corset had imprinted her body. In places the chafing had actually broken the skin.
Sophie dared not look at the woman’s face until the
inspectors had given her back her undergarments and a cloak
to cover herself. The rest of the medium’s clothes would be
kept from her until afterward, so that she couldn’t use them to
conceal the accessories of fraudulence. When Sophie did look,
the woman’s expression puzzled her. Instead of the humiliation and anger one might have expected, the medium wore a
look of calm satisfaction. As Sophie’s eyes met hers, the
woman’s face broke into a disturbing smile. Why should she
look like someone gloating over a private victory?
Sophie’s unease deepened as they descended the stairs to
the ground floor. In the conservatory, the medium’s wrists
were tied with cloth tape, the knots sealed with wax, and the
ends of the tape tied to the chairs on either side of her. Ten
chairs had been arranged in a circle around a black-and-gold
lacquered table of vaguely Japanese provenance.
As the guests took their seats, Sophie chose one as far

39

from the medium as possible. The maid dimmed the lamps.
“Join hands,” Great-aunt Tabitha intoned, “to promote
the energy flow among the sitters. Spirits of the Great Beyond,
we are gathered this evening in the company of your servant
Mrs. Euphemia Tansy in the hope that we will be honored by
some sign of your presence. We will hear anything you wish to
impart about life on the Other Side. We await your instructions.”
Most of the women had closed their eyes, but Sophie kept
hers open just a crack, enough to sneak a look around the
table. She found séances less frightening when she could see
what was happening. (But she hoped Great-aunt Tabitha
wouldn’t start inviting her often—one every six weeks or so
already seemed more than enough.) The sitters’ hands were
clasped together, each pair of hands resting on the table in
front of them. The medium was absolutely motionless, her
glassy eyes staring off into the middle distance.
When the voice came, Sophie jumped and almost lost her
grip on the hands on either side of her.
“Who calls me here?”
It was a man’s voice, lightly Scandinavian-accented and
seeming to emanate from a point in midair several feet above
the medium’s head.
“I do,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, her voice not faltering at
all.

40

“I cannot tell of life on the other side,” said the voice, “for
I speak to you from limbo. Though my body has long since
fallen to dust, my soul is not yet able to leave its shell. I answer
your call for another reason. I am here to speak to the
youngest one among you, one whose help I require to release
me from my mortal coil.”
Sophie looked quickly around her, but there was no doubt
about it: she was certainly by many years the youngest person
at the table.
Meanwhile the table rocked slightly beneath their hands,
and several women gasped.
To Sophie’s utter dismay, she felt a slight breeze and the
sensation of a hand touching her face. This was too awful, it
couldn’t really be happening—oh god, could this have anything to do with what she’d seen in the mirror upstairs? Only
half aware of what she was doing, Sophie started shaking her
head. A small moan escaped from her mouth and she suddenly had a new appreciation for the cliché paralyzed by fear.
Go away, she said in her head. Leave me alone.
“Sophie, dear child,” said the voice, “do not be afraid. I
come to warn you of great danger, and to bid you follow the
one your heart inclines to. Keep your own counsel, and expect
a journey over water before the summer’s end.”
The hand brushed through her hair and then left in a
whoosh, like air rushing into a jam jar when the lid is first

41

popped open. Sophie wanted to jeer—she didn’t even believe
in spiritualism, not really, not like Great-aunt Tabitha and her
friends. The spirit’s words sounded awfully like the hoary predictions of a fairground fortune-teller. Nonetheless Sophie’s
pulse was racing so fast she thought she might faint.
She clutched the hands of the women on either side of her
and felt a welcome squeeze back from one of them. Most of
the women had opened their eyes now, though the dim light
made it difficult to see much.
The medium groaned. Then her face convulsed into a rictus so horrible it reminded Sophie of a gruesome illustration
in a book she’d once seen, a police photograph of a dead
woman lying on the floor of a grand Paris apartment with her
throat cut. The shadow cast by the fastening on the medium’s
cloak exactly mimicked the gaping hole of that wound.
Another voice began to speak, but this time Sophie
thought she could see a very faint movement of the medium’s
facial muscles. When the new visitor identified herself as
Pocahontas and offered to serve as the spirit control for the
evening, Sophie breathed deeply and tried to un-hunch her
shoulders. It was awful but true to say that clear-cut fraudulence was vastly preferable to something that felt a bit too
much like the real thing. “Pocahontas” transmitted various
messages to the sitters from their dear departed: Miss
Gillespie’s father was glad she had decided to renew her mem-

42

bership at the golf club, Miss Allison’s mother was no longer
in pain now that she’d Crossed Over, Miss McGregor’s fiancé
still cherished her memory as a Precious Jewel of his Former
Life (tiny shriveled-up Miss McGregor actually cried when
she heard the message from her lost love).
Sophie had a terrible itch on her nose, but releasing her
neighbor’s hand prematurely would mean trouble later on
with Great-aunt Tabitha. It was a great relief when
“Pocahontas” departed and the medium came back to herself.
“Lights, please,” Great-aunt Tabitha ordered, the excitement fizzing in her voice.
All around the table, women were flexing their hands and
turning to their neighbors, their voices rising as they began to
dissect what they had just heard.
Peggy brought in a tray and began to hand around tea and
coffee. She served Sophie first, giving her three lumps of sugar
with the tongs and making a funny face that gave Sophie comfort.
“Coffee, cream, and two sugars,” the medium said
hoarsely when Peggy came around to her. She was shivering,
though the room was no colder than usual, and had drawn the
cloak closer around her broad shoulders.
“Mrs. Tansy,” said Great-aunt Tabitha warmly, “you were
simply magnificent. Can Peggy get you anything else to eat or
drink?”

43

“I wouldn’t say no to a wee dram of port,” the medium
said, licking her dry lips and warming her hands on the sides
of the coffee cup.
Great-aunt Tabitha visibly recoiled. Spiritualism, vegetarianism, pacifism, and temperance: these were Sophie’s greataunt’s gods, and all forms of alcohol were banned from the
house except for a rather dusty decanter of whisky kept in
honor of Great-aunt Tabitha’s long-deceased father.
Several other ladies crowded around Mrs. Tansy, wanting
additional details and personal reassurances, but Great-aunt
Tabitha brushed them all away.
“Can’t you see the poor woman’s done in?” she said.
“Peggy will show you out when you’re finished with your coffee (Peggy, will you bring a glass of lemonade for Mrs.
Tansy?), and Mrs. Tansy has thoughtfully provided cards for
anyone who may wish to retain her services on a private basis.
You’ll forgive me if I whisk her away just now for a breath of
fresh air.”
She helped the medium to the door, jerking her head at
Sophie to join them. Sophie followed them to the small study
on the half landing, a room her great-aunt rarely used.
Great-aunt Tabitha put the medium into a heavy upholstered armchair (its ancient springs made it less comfortable
than it looked; nobody ever sat in it twice) and took the chair
behind the desk for herself. Sophie found a seat on the

44

stepladder used for fetching down books from the top shelves.
“Mrs. Tansy, you have greatly exceeded my expectations
this evening,” said Great-aunt Tabitha once the medium had
settled herself and taken a sip of the lemonade. “I had heard
very good things about you and your friend Pocahontas, and
I was not disappointed. Pocahontas brought wonderful news,
and I hope she will pay our little circle many more visits before
she passes further on into the Realms of Light.”
The spiritualist cosmology, an article of faith with Greataunt Tabitha, made Sophie cringe. Her terror had gone; she
felt tired and crotchety, but also intensely curious as to what
had really happened just now. Surely the whole thing had been
faked, but what motive could the medium have had for involving Sophie?
“I’m very pleased to hear it, ma’am,” said the medium, her
voice still hoarse. “I am never aware of anything that passes
while I am in the trance state, so I did not know until you mentioned it that Pocahontas had come.”
A lie, Sophie thought. The corner of the woman’s mouth
had turned up just a little, giving her a look of smug contempt.
She must think Great-aunt Tabitha a complete fool.
“You earned your fee and more,” said Great-aunt Tabitha,
pulling out several drawers in search of a clean envelope. She
gave a happy grunt when she found one and opened the large
handbag sitting on the desk.

45

The medium colored as Great-aunt Tabitha counted out a
small stack of pound notes. The memory of the woman’s raw
scabbed flesh flooded into Sophie’s mind, and she suddenly
felt horribly complicit in the nastiness of the night’s work.
Aside from everything else, it seemed terribly thoughtless of
Great-aunt Tabitha not to have let Mrs. Tansy put on her real
clothes again.
“I said nothing to you before, so as not to disturb you,”
Sophie’s great-aunt continued, oblivious to the medium’s evident embarrassment, “but the conservatory is equipped with
highly sensitive equipment designed to detect the electromagnetic disruptions that attend spirit visitors. A device attached
to my seat allows me to monitor the proceedings.”
“If I’d known,” said the medium, in a stolid way, “I’m sure
I’d have asked you to turn off the devilish contraption. It
might have stopped the spirits from coming at all!”
“On the contrary, my dear Mrs. Tansy,” cried Great-aunt
Tabitha, throwing her hands in the air, “the readings went off
the charts! Particularly during the first part of the conversation, the one with the well-spoken European gentleman who
wanted a word with Sophie.”
Mrs. Tansy looked really surprised.
“I’m sure I don’t know anything about that, ma’am,” she
said.
Sophie thought she might be telling the truth this time;

46

she sounded genuinely unsettled.
“Of course you’ll have no memory of the words he spoke,
or of his very refined aura,” said Great-aunt Tabitha in a manner that reminded Sophie of a cobra poised to strike. “But I’d
like to know why you asked for Sophie to come and watch you
be searched. It struck me at the time as an odd request, and it
was impossible not to wonder afterward about the connection
between that and the most particular attention the visitor paid
to the girl.”
It was a relief to learn that the spirit visit had not erased
all common sense from Great-aunt Tabitha’s mind. The same
question had occurred to Sophie, and she eagerly awaited
Mrs. Tansy’s answer.
“I just had a feeling,” said the medium, her eyes sliding
away from Great-aunt Tabitha’s, “a strong intuition that the
young one needed to see there was no fakery about the business.”
“What kind of a feeling?” Great-aunt Tabitha persisted.
“Was it—?”
As Sophie leaned forward to hear what the medium would
say, though, her arm brushed against a stack of books and
papers. Sophie reached out her hands just too late to prevent
the whole mess from toppling slowly to the floor.
“Sophie—”
“I’m sorry,” Sophie gabbled, falling to her knees on the

47

floor and desperately piling the things together again. What an
idiot she was! Stupid, stupid, stupid. . . . “I didn’t mean to—
I’ll—”
Great-aunt Tabitha cut her off. She looked at the enameled watch she wore pinned to her front.
“Goodness, Sophie, it’s hours past your bedtime. Off you
go! No, not a word—we’ll talk tomorrow evening after you’ve
finished your homework. Say thank you to Mrs. Tansy, please,
and make sure to clean your teeth before you go to bed.”
Sophie’s great-aunt seemed not to know whether to treat
her as a small child or someone quite grown-up. It led to an
odd jumble of different kinds of advice. Sophie reached obediently to shake Mrs. Tansy’s hand, but when the woman
clasped Sophie’s hand in her own, Sophie felt a sharp pain in
her palm, and then a significant pressure.
She looked quickly up into the woman’s face; Mrs. Tansy
pursed her lips and gave an almost imperceptible shake of the
head. She clearly meant Sophie not to attract her great-aunt’s
attention.
Once she reached the upstairs landing, Sophie opened her
hand. She was holding a miniature metal iron, just like one of
the counters on the Capitalism board, and a business card
with Mrs. Tansy’s name and address on it. How very strange!
In her bedroom, she draped her dress over the back of the
chair, pulled on a nightgown, and tucked the card and the

48

metal token into her school satchel for safekeeping.
Mrs. Tansy’s words about the “feeling” that made her ask
Sophie to watch the disrobing had not been uttered with the
same stolid certainty as everything else. Had she been lying? If
only Sophie had been allowed to stay for the rest of the conversation!
Great-aunt Tabitha would almost certainly want to
determine whether Mrs. Tansy’s feeling fell into one of the
categories devised by Arthur Conan Doyle, the great detective novelist and theorist of the occult, who divided psychic
intuitions according to whether they were based on precognition, telepathy, or some other, as-yet-unknown form of
clairvoyance.
Sophie wanted to know something more practical. Who
sent the warning, and what did it mean?
Could Sophie have a secret enemy?
It was easy to imagine how Nan, Jean, and Priscilla would
react to the words secret enemy on Monday back at school.
The thought of her friends consoled Sophie and she rolled
over, trying to find a comfortable position. But though her
body was bone-tired, she had slept too long in the afternoon
to fall asleep now. Despite the house’s heavy walls, the door to
Sophie’s bedroom cleared the sill by almost an inch, and the
parquet floors amplified every footfall. She listened to the
medium getting dressed again in the room across the hall and

49

being shown downstairs by the maid, and the sounds of the
last visitors leaving. She heard Peggy locking the outside door
and putting out the lights. She lay awake in bed long after the
rest of the house had gone quiet, the hall clock striking three
before she finally fell into a restless sleep.

50

a
Five

T

HE WEEKEND PASSED

in a blur of homework and bad

dreams. On Monday morning Sophie was woken
earlier than usual by Annie, the maid whose job it

was to bring up the brass hot-water can for the washstand.
The house had no bathrooms, and Great-aunt Tabitha had
refused to modernize on the grounds that what was good
enough for her father was good enough for her and Sophie.
The maid blethered away self-importantly as she shook
the warm towel off the top of the can and poured the water
into the basin. Sophie felt strangely groggy, almost as though
she were still dreaming.
“A bomb?” she echoed stupidly, sitting up and trying to
collect herself.

51

“Yes, Miss Sophie, didn’t you hear the telephone first
thing this morning? The crack of dawn, it was.”
Now that Sophie thought about it, her morning dreams (a
dark confusing blur of unpleasant emergencies) had included
the buzzing of an egg timer and the beeping of a radio-wave
apparatus for detecting enemy aircraft.
“It was the minister of public safety,” Annie continued,
opening the curtains and picking Sophie’s clothes up from
where they had fallen on the floor. “Calling to tell Miss Hunter
that a bomb’d gone off in St. Giles’ Cathedral.”
“But surely the cathedral must have been quite empty?”
Sophie said, her brain finally starting to work.
“Aye, that’s right,” said Annie, “it went off at the wrong
time, they say, and the only one in the building was the night
watchman, and he was knocked out but said to be doing well
in hospital. Hours ago, it was.”
Though it wasn’t nearly as bad as it might have been, the
thought of another bomb going off made Sophie’s eyes water.
As she washed and dressed and packed her things for school,
she pretended not to have heard anything about the latest
attack, but she felt jumpy and upset.
To get to school she walked through Queen Street
Gardens and down Hanover Street past the George Hotel to
the Princes Street tram stop. The throngs of people passing up
and down the street seemed more subdued than usual, and

52

Sophie had the feeling that any small unexpected noise would
set off a mass panic.
When the tram came, she wedged herself into a seat near
the back as the vehicle began climbing Calton Hill in the
direction of some of her favorite Edinburgh landmarks: the
full-scale replica of the Parthenon built to honor the Scots
who died in the Napoleonic Wars; the column in the shape of
a telescope marking the achievements of Lord Nelson, whose
great victory at Trafalgar had been the last bright spot before
Wellington’s awful defeat at Waterloo. Sophie’s school sat on
the hill’s lower slopes. Modeled on a classical temple, the
Edinburgh Institution for Young Ladies had an enormous
Doric portico with columns in the center of the main building
and walkways along either side leading to the two wings.
Not until after supper did Sophie find herself alone with
Nan, Jean, and Priscilla, and it was a great relief when they
behaved as if nothing out of the ordinary had happened on
Friday morning. Priscilla asked Sophie for help with her sums,
Nan gave a tedious account of the Saturday afternoon lacrosse
scrimmage, and Jean returned Sophie’s buttonhook, borrowed the week before when her own went missing.
Everything felt so familiar and comfortable that the strange
feeling in Sophie’s stomach finally went away.
In English that morning they had written responses to a
famous writer’s assertion that if he had to choose between

53

betraying his country and betraying his friend, he hoped he
would have the guts to betray his country. It was almost bedtime, but the girls were still arguing about whether it made any
sense.
“No true friend would ask such a thing,” Nan said. “A
real friend would help you serve your country, not betray it.”
“But that’s not the point,” Jean argued. “Isn’t there anybody in the world you care about so much that you’d really do
anything for them?”
“I’d give up my life for any one of my brothers,” said Nan,
looking determined. “But my brothers would kill me—literally kill me!—if they thought I was about to betray my country.”
“What if your brothers were all up in front of a firing
squad and you could only save one of them?” Sophie asked.
She liked this kind of conversation. “Which one would you
pick, and why?”
“Oh, I couldn’t possibly choose between them,” said Nan,
her mouth set in a stubborn line.
“But you must have a favorite,” Jean said, pressing for a
better answer. “Everyone has a favorite, if they’re really being
honest.”
“That’s not true,” said Nan.
“Yes, it is,” said Jean. “There are lots of people I love—
my mother and my baby brother, for instance—but my

54

favorite person in the world is Priscilla.”
Priscilla looked entirely unmoved by this tribute. Typical,
thought Sophie, feeling annoyed.
“I’d do anything to make sure Priscilla was safe,” Jean
continued. “Even if it meant betraying my country—which it
probably wouldn’t, of course.”
“I agree with Jean about having a favorite person,”
Priscilla said in a softer voice than usual. Sophie looked at her,
thinking she sounded almost human for once. “My favorite
person’s my father. I couldn’t bear it if anything happened to
him.”
“What about you, Sophie?” Jean asked. “Who’s your
favorite person, the person you’d do anything to protect?”
Sophie couldn’t help it. Mr. Petersen’s face came irresistibly into her mind, and a flood of heat spread up over her
neck and face.
The others began to crow.
“Sophie loves Mr. Petersen,” said Jean through giggles.
“Yes,” said Priscilla, “in the breast of Sophie Hunter lurks
unbridled passion and a love that dare not speak its name.
Love for the most boring man in the world!”
Sophie felt upset and mortified. She took a few deep
lungfuls of air, a breathing technique Great-aunt Tabitha
had learned from a Yogic guru and practiced every day
before breakfast. It was meant to calm people down, but it

55

didn’t seem to work very well.
Just then the housemistress appeared to check that they
were all in bed; Sophie almost felt she should say a prayer of
thanks for the convenient timing. A moment later the second
bell rang for lights-out.

56

a
Six

A

LL THE GIRLS WERE

seated and waiting attentively the

anext morning by the time Miss Chatterjee strode
a into the room and set her books on the table at the

front of the class. Born in Calcutta and educated at Oxford
and the Sorbonne, Miss Chatterjee spoke in a crisp, fancysounding English accent that stood out amid everyone else’s
respectable middle-class Scottish voices. She was hands down
the most exciting teacher in the school.
Modern European history was a subject one couldn’t
not be interested in, at least in Sophie’s opinion. Every one
of the abuses and atrocities that filled the daily papers could
be traced back in one way or another to the fatal day in
1815 when Napoleon defeated Wellington and slaughtered

57

the British forces at Waterloo.
The previous week they had been reading Edmund
Burke’s reflections on the French Revolution.
But Miss Chatterjee stymied them all with her opening
question. “Why was Edmund Burke,” she asked, “so very
angry with the French revolutionaries?”
“Because the leaders of the revolution were wicked,”
Priscilla said flippantly when nobody else spoke up.
Miss Chatterjee sighed. “One may denounce the wrongs
done by people whose political beliefs one does not endorse,”
she observed, “without mounting an impassioned assault on
the very foundations of their philosophy. I ask you again, why
was Burke so angry?”
“Because his whole world was threatened by what was
happening in France,” suggested a small, very serious girl
called Fiona.
“And what features of his world did Burke wish to protect?” Miss Chatterjee asked, perching on the edge of her
desk, stretching out one long nylon-stockinged leg and examining the handmade calfskin shoe on her left foot.
“Kings and queens,” Nan said.
“Inheritance from one generation to the next,” said
Priscilla in a submissive voice.
“Private property,” offered Harriet Jeffries. Something about
the way Harriet talked always reminded one that her top marks

58

were in penmanship and deportment; Sophie still hadn’t forgiven
Harriet for being so horrible on Friday after assembly. But then,
Harriet was always horrible, so there was no point expecting anything different. “Lords and ladies and country estates.”
“The English constitution,” Sophie said firmly. Harriet
sounded much too enthusiastic about the lords and ladies, in
a lending-library-romance sort of way. She really was a most
awful girl.
“And what do you think of those things?” said the teacher.
“Were they worth defending with the vehemence Burke
musters for the occasion?”
“The constitution was worth protecting,” Sophie said, a
little shocked by the question. “Look what happened when
England lost it. . . .”
Along the line of Hadrian’s Wall now stood miles and
miles of concrete bunkers and concertina wire. Many girls had
lost family members when England fell to Europe in the
1920s, and rumor spoke of concentration camps and mass
graves. Ordinary Scottish citizens rarely received permission
now to cross at the official checkpoint at Berwick-uponTweed; most in any case wouldn’t risk passing into what
amounted to enemy territory.
“What about the king and queen?” said Miss Chatterjee.
“Do you believe monarchy is a political good worth hanging
on to?”

59

Several girls shook their heads, and Fiona spoke up.
“All the countries in the Hanseatic League have abolished
their monarchies,” she said. “The Scottish parliament voted
not to restore the Stuart line after we split with England, and
Sweden and Denmark no longer have kings and queens.”
“What about Burke’s defense of property?” said Miss
Chatterjee, her voice rich and smooth, like butter. “How does
that sit with us?”
“The Scottish government has raised taxes and death
duties on the principle that the very wealthy should subsidize
health care and education for the poor,” Nan said slowly.
“And everybody thinks that’s a good thing, even the people
who have less money now they’re being taxed at higher rates.”
“Well, perhaps not quite everybody,” Miss Chatterjee said,
laughing a little, “but certainly most of us do.”
“So the answer would be no,” Nan continued, answering
the teacher’s question. “Burke’s defense of property seems like
almost the opposite of what we would approve of.”
Miss Chatterjee nodded.
“Very good, Nan,” she said. “Now, what would you say if
I told you that most of the models for Scotland’s constitution,
and for the constitutions of the other Hanseatic states, can be
found in the writings of precisely those individuals whom
Burke abhors? That the sympathy with which we have read
Burke is at the very least ironic, and possibly altogether mis-

60

placed? That if Burke represents politics as a matter of ‘us’
against ‘them,’ history would align us not with Burke but with
his mortal enemies, the revolutionaries?”
But it was the political repression and state-sponsored violence of the European Federation that had their roots back
beyond Napoleon in revolutionary France! How did Miss
Chatterjee so reliably manage to turn Sophie’s brain inside out
and make her see things in an entirely new way?
Lunch was much worse than usual: gray meat decorated liberally with gristle; starchy potatoes boiled down almost to mush;
the smelly yellowish-green miniature cabbages that had been
known as Brussels sprouts until Napoleon made that city his
capital; and a disgusting pudding called a “shape,” made from
milk, water, beet sugar, and gelatin substitute. It was a good
thing Sophie was inoculated against disgust by Peggy’s cooking. At least at school she was spared the need to assuage the
cook’s feelings by eating everything on her plate; here one of
the dinner ladies would happily scrape whatever was left into
a tin bucket for pig swill.
The food still sat heavily in Sophie’s stomach as she plodded, lagging behind the other girls, along the strip of land
adjoining the New Burial Ground to the school tennis courts.
Sophie was such a poor athlete that the games mistress turned
a blind eye to her skiving off, so long as she made some

61

pretense of helping to carry the equipment. Sophie had a
funny halfway status that gave her more liberty than the real
boarders, although a bit less than the school’s handful of day
girls, but she was careful not to abuse it.
In tennis season, Sophie served as ball girl, and whenever
too many balls vanished over the stone wall to the gardens of
the houses behind the courts, she would scramble through a
hole to retrieve them. That was how she had befriended the
professor, a Swedish neurologist now retired from the
University of Uppsala and living in one of these houses. After
a serendipitous tennis-ball-related encounter, Sophie developed a habit of visiting him once a week or so for lessons in
everything from entomology to the Russian language. Unlike
most grown-ups, the professor did not tell Sophie that she was
too young to understand the sort of thing she liked talking
about, whether it was the theology of Count Tolstoy, the novels of Richard Wagner, the verse of Albert Einstein, or the
operas of James Joyce.
After they had finished that day’s lesson, the professor’s
housekeeper—a pleasant, somewhat stern woman called
Solvej Lundberg, who had come with him from Sweden—
would bring in a tray of tea.
Today it was Sophie’s favorite, toast with anchovy paste
and a Battenberg cake with its checkerboard of pink and yellow cubes. She had picked up the habit of pulling the cake

62

apart and eating each cube separately, a trick that would have
earned her a scolding in Heriot Row. When she took a bite of
toast, though, she found she wasn’t hungry after all. Her eyes
had a twitchy feeling that might mean she was about to cry.
“We have a surprise for you today, Sophie,” said the professor, cutting into her thoughts.
“Oh?” Sophie said dispiritedly. “What is it?”
Rather than answering, he held a finger over his lips and
cocked his head to listen. The street door opened, then
slammed shut. The loud footsteps in the hall told Sophie
everything she needed to know.
“Mikael!”
Mikael was the housekeeper’s nephew. His mother
shipped him over to Edinburgh every so often from Denmark
when she felt she couldn’t manage him, and Sophie was very
fond of him.
It was as if Sophie’s wish for someone to confide in had
been magically granted—Mikael was the cleverest person
Sophie knew, with the exception of Miss Chatterjee (but
teachers didn’t count).
“I didn’t know you were coming!” she said after Mikael
had helped himself to an enormous hunk of cake.
“Oh, yes. By the way, Aunt Solvej,” said Mikael, giving
Sophie a sly wink, “I wouldn’t say no if you rustled up a new
lot of buttered toast, no anchovies.”

63

Two of Mikael’s most noticeable traits were his bottomless
hunger and his excellent colloquial English, spoken virtually
without an accent.
Mrs. Lundberg returned shortly from the kitchen with
plain buttered toast and several new kinds of biscuit as well,
including chocolate digestives and coconut macaroons with
glacé cherries on top. It was surprising how much hungrier
Sophie felt now.
“Join us for our repast,” the professor urged, but Mrs.
Lundberg would never sit down in the presence of visitors.
Instead she cleared the cups and plates and rumpled Mikael’s
hair as she passed.
It was rather a blow when Sophie looked at her watch and
saw the time.
“Sophie, you wretch, you mustn’t go yet,” said Mikael.
“I’ve only just laid eyes on you!”
But Sophie had to leave if she wanted to reunite with the
tennis players before they all walked back to school. She
kissed the professor on the cheek and said good-bye to Mrs.
Lundberg, who pressed a packet of cake and sandwiches into
Sophie’s hand.
Mikael stepped out into the garden with her. Often these
days Sophie came and went by the front door, but the way
through the garden and over the wall was quicker and less
conspicuous.

64

“It’s good to see you,” she said to Mikael outside in the
garden, feeling shy now they were alone together. “How long
are you here for?”
“Till July,” Mikael said, grinning. “Good, isn’t it? My
mother’s really fed up with me; she told me to stay away till she
cooled down.”
“What did you do this time?” Sophie said.
“Oh, I borrowed someone’s motorcar and had a bit of an
accident.”
“I didn’t know you could drive!”
“My brother gave me a few lessons last summer. To tell the
truth, though, I really don’t know how to drive!”
“Will you have to pay for the repairs?” Sophie asked.
“No, fortunately the car belongs to my mother’s ‘gentleman friend,’ and he’s simply rolling in money,” said Mikael
breezily. Sophie looked at him with envy. In his place, she
would have been dying of mortification. “Anyway, I’ve got all
sorts of things to tell you about. Friday afternoon, the usual
time and place?”
“Perfect,” said Sophie.
They stood smiling at each other for an awkward moment.
Then Sophie clambered over the wall and returned to school.

65

a
Seven

T

HE

GIRLS’ RIFLE CLUB met that Thursday in the

school gymnasium. Standing in a row of girls facing
the targets opposite, Sophie bit the paper off a car-

tridge and poured the powder down the rifle bore, then put
the greased bullet in the bore and rammed it down on top of
the powder.
An hour of shooting left Sophie filthy and exhausted but
much happier than before. (Funny the way firing a gun always
put her in a good mood.) She and Nan walked back to their
room and changed into their dressing gowns before going to
take the extra bath allotted to members of the Rifle Club.
The bathroom had a row of cubicles, each with its own
tub and taps, and the two girls ran hot baths, a luxury

66

unknown at the National High School for Boys down the road
(Sophie was glad of the hot water but sorry boys and girls
should be treated so differently).
“My dad visited on Sunday afternoon,” Nan said as they
soaked in painfully hot water. “He says that this time it really
looks like war.”
Sophie admitted that her great-aunt had been saying
something very similar.
“Sophie, what will you do if war breaks out? How will you
serve, I mean?”
Sophie smiled at Nan’s phrasing, but the question
demanded serious thought.
“Oh, it’s impossible,” she said, feeling the back and shoulder muscles that the hot water had loosened snap back into
tight bands. “It’s easy for you. Your family’s been army as far
back as anyone can remember.”
“Yes,” said Nan, the affirmation echoing off the tiles of
the cavernous bathroom. Sophie envied her certainty. “I know
I’ll join the women’s army auxiliaries—there’s never been any
doubt, and a declaration of war will simply speed things up a
bit. All three of my brothers are in the army already, of course,
and there’s no reason for me not to follow them. But what will
Jean do, and Priscilla? What will you do, Sophie?”
“If it were fifteen years ago, and war not even on the horizon,” Sophie said, thinking out loud, “I suppose it’d be a

67

pretty sure thing that I’d go to university. Miss Chatterjee told
me that when she first began teaching here, almost all the girls
stayed on for sixth-form work, and quite a few of those went
to university as well. Now most of us leave after the fifth
form.”
“That sixth-form group this year is like a ghost ship,” Nan
agreed, splashing for emphasis. “There are so many empty
seats, it must be terribly discouraging. And last year not a single girl went on to university. All the really academic girls go
now to IRYLNS instead. Is that what you’ll do, do you think?”
Sophie sighed. “I don’t know. You’d think Great-aunt
Tabitha would like the idea of me going to IRYLNS, but when
I suggested it this weekend, she practically bit my head off. I
think she’s going to pull strings and try to get me admitted to
university.”
“Do you think she’s got that kind of influence?” Nan
sounded impressed.
“I hope so,” Sophie said, only realizing as she said it how
very much she wanted it to be true. “The auxiliaries would be
absolutely dire! Seriously, can you see me in a khaki uniform
saluting my superior officer?”
“No, it’s true,” Nan said, “I can’t picture that at all.”
“Imagine how poorly I’d do in the PT testing,” Sophie
added. “I couldn’t do a single press-up last time they made us
in gym! They’d probably ship me off to some awful farm in

68

the middle of nowhere. Even a factory job would be better
than having to work as a Land Girl.”
“Oh, I don’t know,” Nan said thoughtfully. Nan liked the
outdoors more than Sophie did. “Farming wouldn’t be so bad.
But I think you should hold out for university.”
“The horrible thing,” Sophie said to Nan as they hurriedly
dried themselves and put on their pajamas, “is that we’re
being forced to choose now about things that really should be
able to wait till we’re older. It’s hard to say what’s worse, the
suddenness of having to choose or the chance that if we don’t
make up our minds soon, the choice will be taken away from
us altogether.”
In spite of this disturbing conversation, the evening’s exercise and the warm bath had relaxed Sophie, and she lay in bed
in a pleasant haze, looking forward to double-period chemistry the next morning. She was asleep before she knew it, a
rare thing this far into the summer term, when dusk fell long
after even the oldest girls’ bedtime.
A few hours later, though, she found herself standing
spread-eagled, back against the bedroom door, her throat raw
from the shout she’d just unleashed.
A light went on by one of the beds. Priscilla’s sleepy face
turned toward her.
“What on earth just happened?” she asked Sophie.
By now Jean and Nan were both sitting up.

69

“Yes, what’s the matter, Sophie?” said Nan.
“I don’t know,” Sophie said, her voice rough. She cleared
her throat and cast her mind back. She couldn’t remember a
thing. Something moved in the shadows, and Sophie thought
her heart might actually explode with terror.
“Sophie screamed,” said Jean. “That was what woke us, I
think.”
Sophie spread her hand flat across her neck and collarbone and took another deep breath. Her hands were freezing,
the skin of her chest hot and feverish, and she could feel her
heart pumping at twice the usual speed.
“You must have had a nightmare,” Nan said. “What was
it, Sophie? My brother Sam always says that when you have a
bad dream, the best thing to do is talk about it.”
“But I can’t remember,” Sophie said, deeply shaken. “I
might have been in a factory. And someone was having an
argument.”
“What kind of a factory? Who was there? What were they
arguing about? What were you doing there?”
But Sophie could answer none of Nan’s questions.
“Go back to bed!” Priscilla finally said. “We’re perfectly
safe here. A bad dream isn’t going to kill you, horrible though
it may be.”
In bed again, Sophie’s feet were freezing cold and she
folded her left foot behind her right knee to warm it up, then

70

switched sides to warm the other foot. It took longer for her
heart to stop hammering in her rib cage. If this was perfectly
safe, what must grave danger feel like?
In the morning Sophie hardly remembered the interruption to the night’s sleep, though she felt irritable and poorly
rested. The others didn’t let her off lightly, though. They
pestered her right up until they got to chemistry and discovered, not Mr. Petersen, but the biology mistress, Miss
Hopkins.
“Mr. Petersen can’t be with you today,” the teacher told
the class. “You may use this time to catch up on work for your
other classes, and lessons will resume on Monday.”
The sound of scratching pens and the rustle of pages soon
filled the classroom. Sophie couldn’t concentrate, which was
most alarming. She was used to being able to work even under
the most adverse conditions. It was a great disappointment
not to see Mr. Petersen, of course, but there was no reason
missing him should make her so uneasy.
At twenty-five past nine, a first-form girl crept into the
room to deliver a note to Miss Hopkins.
“Girls,” said the biology mistress, speaking abruptly
as she ran her eyes over the note, “I must leave you. You
may speak with one another while I am away, so long as
you moderate your voices. I’ll be back in fifteen minutes;
Nan, I authorize you in the meantime to discipline any

71

girl who creates a disturbance.”
After she left, the girls looked at each other. Sophie tried
to get on with her English essay. Many of the others took out
the bundles of knitting that had been all the rage that term
and began to click away with their needles.
The low murmur of conversation couldn’t cover up the
noise of Priscilla poking Jean in the side and snickering.
“Sophie,” Priscilla called out softly.
Sophie looked around.
“Where do you think Mr. Petersen’s gone?” Priscilla said.
Sophie decided to ignore her and turned back to her
work.
“If Miss Hopkins comes back and tells us there’s been
another bombing,” Priscilla persisted, “will you admit the
odds just got much better on Mr. Petersen being one of the
bombers?”
“Yes,” said Jean, whose father gambled, “from ten-to-one
outsider to four-to-six odds-on favorite.”
“Don’t be silly,” said Sophie, glaring at them both. She
went resolutely back to the essay.
Miss Hopkins returned just as Nan threatened to single
out two particularly loud girls for punishment.
“Girls,” Miss Hopkins said, taking her place before the
class, “there’s no need to panic—”
Several girls uttered small screams.

72

“—but I’m sorry to have to tell you that another bomb
went off this morning, this time right in the heart of Princes
Street.”
She looked like someone trying not to weep.
“How many people were killed?” Nan asked, her voice
quite calm.
“More than a hundred,” said Miss Hopkins. She took off
her glasses and wiped them on the cuff of her blouse.
Some of the girls began crying.
Sophie didn’t dare look at Jean and Priscilla.
Of course Mr. Petersen wasn’t the bomber. He couldn’t
be. On the other hand, where was he?
Sophie walked in a daze through the rest of the day’s
classes, earning a reprimand from the maths teacher and an
extra essay assignment from the lady who taught spiritualist
instruction, an old crony of Great-aunt Tabitha’s.
Though she still felt sad and angry and worried and confused—feelings were awful—Sophie’s spirits lifted just a little
when the bell rang to mark the end of the last class. Mikael
would be able to help her, she told herself as she ran upstairs
to pack for the weekend.
She decided to cram everything into her satchel so that she
wouldn’t have to carry more than one bag. It was a tight fit.
She said good-bye to the others and ran downstairs, earning a
reproof from a prefect in the hallway. She would have to hurry

73

if she didn’t want to be late.
Lord Nelson’s Column—shaped like a telescope and visible from almost everywhere in Edinburgh—was surrounded
by a secluded park, an overgrown brick path weaving through
the hilly garden thick with rough grass. The tower had five
stories all together, each with a few narrow windows. After
climbing a hundred and forty-three stairs to reach the small
circular chamber at the top, Sophie passed through the tiny
doorway, barely a foot and a half wide, and out onto the little
balcony, its sturdy low parapet just hip height.
Still panting from the climb, she dumped her satchel on
the flagstones and used it as a seat, then leaned her elbows on
the parapet to look out. It was so clear that she could see all
the way down the coast to North Berwick, where Sophie had
spent many summer afternoons paddling in the rock pools
while Great-aunt Tabitha played eighteen holes on the links.
Where was Mikael? The trouble with waiting for someone
was that it was like not being able to go to sleep, Sophie
thought. It gave one altogether too much time to think about
things.
She couldn’t stop worrying about what it would mean if
Scotland and the Hanseatic League went to war with Europe.
Even worse, what if Scotland lost? Would the streets of
Edinburgh be renamed after French and German war heroes?
Would troops patrol Calton Hill? Would French become

74

Scotland’s official language, and would a permit from the local
prefecture be needed to take the train to North Berwick?
How much longer would the Hanseatic League hold fast?
By the time Mikael got there, Sophie was cold and bored
and more than a little hungry. Her delight at seeing him
warred with her feeling of grievance at his lateness, but when
he smiled, her irritation washed away like a bloodstain under
cold running water.
“So which day did you get to Edinburgh?” she asked as
Mikael took a seat beside her. The satchel was fine for one person to sit on but small for two, and she shivered at the pressure of his leg against hers.
“On Sunday,” Mikael said. “My mum kicked up such a
fuss, I reckoned I’d better stay away for a few weeks.”
“You’d think your mother would be used to you by now!”
Sophie said.
“Yes, it’s strange, isn’t it? I can never see why she’s so
upset. It’s not like I’ve ever actually killed anybody, or even
put anyone in hospital—”
“You sound sorry for that!”
Mikael laughed. “Actually,” he said, “though the car
episode was entirely my fault, it’s not what’s got her so riled
up. For once it’s my brother, not me, who’s in really hot
water.”
“Your brother? But I thought he was a kind of saint.”

75

Mikael’s brother was ten years older and had left home to
go to university when Mikael was still quite young. Sophie had
never met him, but he was by all accounts (and to Mikael’s
chagrin) a complete paragon of all the virtues.
“This time my perfect older brother seems to have done
something heinous beyond belief. I’m not sure what it is
exactly, but he hasn’t written home for months, and I think my
mum’s convinced she’s lost him permanently.”
“How odd,” Sophie said, her own worries receding a little
as the puzzle claimed her attention. It was hard to think what
Mikael’s brother could have done to upset their mother so
much.
“At any rate,” Mikael continued, “when the police telephoned her about my little escapade, she well and truly flew
off the handle.”
“What do you think your brother did, then?” Sophie asked.
“Yes, it’s quite a mystery, isn’t it?” Mikael said blithely,
sounding not at all disturbed by his brother’s departure from
the straight and narrow. “I’ll see if I can winkle the real story
out of Aunt Solvej. It’s probably nothing much, and Mum’s
simply making a mountain out of a molehill.”
They gazed out over the city, Sophie uncomfortably aware
of how close they were sitting to each other.
“Sophie, what about you?” Mikael asked, putting his
hand on her knee in a way that made her jump. “How are

76

you? I have to say, you looked terribly worried the other day.
Everything all right?”
After a pause, a string of incoherent phrases poured out of
Sophie: the horror of the bombings, the sense they all had at
school of waiting passively for their future to be decided, the
impossibility of getting along with the others, her dread of
war.
When Sophie fell quiet, Mikael rooted around in his pockets and dug out a waxed-paper packet of sandwiches.
“Cheese-and-tomato or fish paste?” he asked.
“Cheese-and-tomato, please,” Sophie said.
In silence they ate the sandwiches, which were squashed
and soggy but extremely satisfying.
“Sophie,” Mikael said, when they had folded up the wrappers and tucked them into Sophie’s bag for later disposal,
“you’re obviously leaving something out, something big. All
that stuff you’ve been talking about, none of it’s much good,
but it’s not enough by itself to have put you into such a state.
No, not even the bombings,” he added.
Sophie squirmed on her seat, the words lodged like lumps
of suet in her throat.
“It was a séance,” she said, steeling herself. “There was
this awful medium and she had a peculiar message for me—
for me personally, I mean, a sort of warning—and before that,
I saw something that looked like a ghost in the mirror—”

77

“Hold on a minute,” Mikael said, putting up his hands.
Sophie braced herself for ridicule.
“Slow down, can’t you? I’ve no idea what you’re talking
about. Start from the beginning and tell me the whole story.”
Sophie told him everything that had happened, her voice
growing stronger as she saw his intent expression.
By the time she finished, he looked quite worried.
“Those mediums are really wicked,” he said, “preying on
people’s weak side like that. It should be illegal to pretend to
be able to contact the dead. Outright frauds, the whole lot of
them.”
“It was the creepiest thing you’ve ever seen,” Sophie said.
She would like to have believed the medium was a fraud, but
if Mikael had been there, surely his skepticism would have
been shaken. “Of course it’s ludicrous—great danger and a
voyage over water and all that. But the way the medium asked
for me beforehand so that I’d be sure she didn’t have any
tricks up her sleeve—”
“What was her name again?”
“Mrs. Tansy: Euphemia Tansy, I think it was.”
“All right,” Mikael said. He jumped to his feet and pulled
Sophie up after him. “We’ve got to look into this. It sounds to
me as though someone may have put the wretched woman up
to this business, and if that’s so, we should be able to find out
who it was and what they wanted.”

78

“I’ve got her address,” Sophie said suddenly. She didn’t
know why she hadn’t thought of it sooner. Having an ally must
be good for the brain. She dug through the bits of paper at the
bottom of her satchel until she found the medium’s card, and
handed it over to Mikael. Her hand brushed against that
funny little metal iron in the process, but it seemed hardly
worth mentioning.
“Excellent,” said Mikael, examining the address on the
card. “I’ll go there right now, and you and I can meet on
Sunday afternoon at the library so I can tell you what I’ve
found out.”
He must have been able to tell Sophie was frightened, or
he would have suggested she come with him. Though she supposed it was what she’d hoped for, she wasn’t sure how she
felt about Mikael taking charge like this. What if Sophie lost
all her self-reliance?
“You’ll be careful, won’t you?” she said.
Mikael shrugged away her concern. “I’ll be fine,” he said
in an untroubled way. “It’s good practice in case I turn out to
be a detective when I’m older.”
“Do you want to be a detective?” Sophie asked. In
December, it had been a fighter pilot, and the summer before,
an engineer in the oil fields of Baku.
Mikael blushed and didn’t say anything, which made
Sophie think he might really mean it this time. How interesting!

79

And how convenient for Sophie!
She told Mikael as much more as she could remember
about the medium and what she had said, then noticed it was
almost six o’clock. Peggy would be frantic.
“Oh dear, I must go,” she said, brushing off her skirt and
settling the satchel back over her shoulders.
“I’ll see you on Sunday,” said Mikael.
They made their way down from the tower, then parted,
Sophie hurrying downhill to the closest tram stop. If Mikael
could find out more about the medium, she would be greatly
in his debt.
As soon as she got home, Sophie remembered that Greataunt Tabitha was out for supper, a regular engagement at the
Women’s Spiritualism Club, and in the kitchen she found a
note from Peggy saying she wouldn’t be back from the dentist
until seven. A few months earlier Peggy’s metal fillings had
begun picking up spirit voices, and when a long-dead servant
from the Stevenson house down the road settled in and began
to comment rudely on Peggy’s cooking, Peggy had hauled her
life’s savings out from her mattress and gone to have all the old
fillings replaced with the new plastic emulsion ones, which
couldn’t act as receivers.
In other words, Sophie might have stayed out as long as
she liked. She couldn’t decide whether to be relieved or
offended by this evidence of her own insignificance.

80

a

Eight

A

FTER LUNCH ON

SATURDAY Peggy sent Sophie out

awith instructions to get a bit of sun and fresh air and
a not show her face at home a minute before teatime.

As Sophie was about to let herself out the front door, Peggy
appeared in the hall, marched over, and motioned for Sophie
to hand over her satchel. She opened it up and took out the
detective novel tucked into the front pocket.
“Reading’s all very well in its place,” she said, holding the
book beyond Sophie’s reach, “but it’s out and about I want
you this afternoon, not sitting somewhere cramming your
head full of rubbish. I’ll keep this for you in the kitchen, and
you can have it again after tea.”
Sophie begged shamelessly, but Peggy wouldn’t relent,

81

though she did give Sophie a shilling before shooing her away
from the house.
“And stay out of crowds!” Peggy called after Sophie, who
waved to show she’d heard. Peggy was sure that as long as one
was sensible, one would never find oneself on the spot when a
bomb went off.
Sophie didn’t actively dislike spending time outdoors, but
it was hard to know what to do once she was there. In the end
she wandered along Heriot Row toward Broughton Street
Lane, where she gravitated to the used bookseller in the
appealingly seedy row of shops that included a secondhand
wig retailer and a little photography studio whose windows
advertised the services of Daguerreotype Mediums and
Photographic Sitters. She browsed for a while in the bookshop and finally exchanged her shilling for two novels by
Ibsen and Strindberg.
On her way out, Sophie stopped to give her last penny to
the Veteran, whose injury didn’t stop him from wheeling himself all over town on his little cart. Sophie often saw him away
from his usual post in front of the school, though she didn’t
remember ever seeing him so close to her house before.
With no particular destination in mind, she crossed Leith
Walk into London Road and entered the Terrace Gardens
through the north gate, formerly wrought iron but now naked
wood because the government had stripped the parks of metal

82

for the war-preparedness effort.
Sophie strolled along the yellow gravel path in search of a
suitable bench, one colonized by neither the terrifying uniformed nannies with their grand perambulators nor the
vagrants who slept in the park during the daytime and hung
around the main railway station at night.
A sharp piece of stone lodged between Sophie’s heel and
the inside of her shoe, and at the next bench she propped her
foot on the seat and unbuckled the strap of her sandal. As she
shook it out over the walk, she heard someone calling her
name.
She looked up and saw Jean. It wasn’t surprising that Jean
should be here—the gardens were only ten minutes’ walk
from school, and fifth- and sixth-form girls often spent their
free afternoons in the park when the weather was fine. The
only surprise was to see her without Priscilla. Sophie said as
much, and Jean flushed.
“Priscilla was supposed to come with me,” she admitted,
“but we had a falling-out last night and she’s still furious.”
Though Sophie nodded, Jean seemed to feel further
explanation was needed.
“It was all my fault,” she said, sounding guilty and miserable. “Priscilla had a letter from a boy she met over the Easter
holidays, and I got upset when she said she wouldn’t show it
to me. And then I said lots of awful things, and then she told

83

me I’d better find a new best friend if I couldn’t stop being
such a jealous monster.”
Sophie reached across and patted the other girl’s hand. It
was impossible not to feel for Jean; the unhappiness in her
voice was palpable.
“I expect she didn’t mean it,” she told Jean. Priscilla wasn’t
the type to bear a grudge.
“Yes, I know,” Jean said, gulping and swallowing, “but
meanwhile I’m completely wretched, and the worst is knowing I’ve got no one to blame but myself.”
They sat in silence for a minute, Sophie wishing she were
brave enough to invite Jean to do something with her instead.
Something about the bond between Jean and Priscilla was so
strong as to repel outsiders.
She sneaked a look at Jean and was intimidated afresh by
the scowl on her face. Then she told herself not to be such a
coward.
“What had you planned to do this afternoon?” she asked,
trying to sound noncommittal.
Jean’s face lit up.
“We were going to go and look at the electric kitchen in
Princes Street,” she said.
Sophie felt hopeful. Perhaps Jean would ask her to come
along!
Then Jean slumped back down on the park bench.

84

“It won’t be much fun by myself,” she said, chucking a
pebble at one of the pigeons. The birds flew up and away in a
flurry of cries and feathers.
“I could come with you, if you’d like,” Sophie said, choosing her words carefully so as not to put Jean under any obligation.
Jean took Sophie’s hand in her own and squeezed it gratefully.
“I’d love you to come, Sophie,” she said. “I’ve been wanting to go for ages; it’s supposed to be lovely. I’d have asked
you before, but I didn’t think you’d be interested.”
Even if one didn’t care about kitchens one way or the
other (Sophie didn’t), it was certainly nice to feel wanted.
They left the park by the east gate and walked past the
grand row of embassies along Regent Terrace until they passed
the school, then wound their way through the monuments on
the hill and down by way of Waterloo Place into Princes
Street.
They stopped outside the showroom, Jean gazing into the
windows while Sophie looked up and down the street. This
was where the most recent bomb had gone off, but there were
hardly any signs of damage. All the plate-glass windows had
been replaced, and only the heap of flowers on the pavement
in front of the Army and Navy Store told one that people had
died here. Following some impulse she didn’t understand,

85

Sophie leaned down and picked up one of the flowers, which
she tucked into the pocket of her satchel.
Next to Sophie, Jean’s breath was misting up the shop
window.
“Isn’t it gorgeous?” she said to Sophie.
Sophie reached for her pocket handkerchief to wipe away
the mist.
“I’d like that for my mam,” Jean continued, pointing to an
enormous electric cooker.
Everybody at school knew that Jean’s mother was a slave
to housework as well as to Jean’s father, who was an awful
miser. Jean’s godmother paid her school fees. The really monstrous thing was that Mr. Roberts refused to electrify the flat
despite his being an electrical engineer who dined out every
second

Tuesday

evening

at

the

electricity

lovers’

Dynamicables Club.
Suddenly Sophie thought of how unhappy Peggy would
be to learn that she was right in the middle of the city’s most
crowded shopping district. She shifted nervously from one
foot to the other.
“Come on, then!” Jean cried, grabbing Sophie’s hand.
They pushed open the door and made their way into the
crowded shop. Two girls in black maid’s uniforms and spotless
white caps and aprons walked around the room with trays of
savories cooked in the electric oven, and Jean and Sophie sam-

86

pled prunes wrapped in bacon and pigs-in-blankets before
wandering to the back of the showroom, where an elegant
woman had just taken a beautifully golden sponge cake out of
the oven and was inviting members of the audience to lay their
fingers on the cake’s perfect surface.
There was no doubt it looked a lovely cake, but it soon
became clear that the woman wasn’t going to cut it up and distribute the pieces—perhaps it was needed for another electric
cookery demonstration later that afternoon?—and the girls
drifted to the only part of the showroom they had not yet
explored, the Electric Arbor at the back of the shop. Here
fronds of synthetic greenery had been draped over the really
expensive appliances.
“But you said it could be delivered later this week,” cried
a large lady in a fur jacket that made her look like a walrus.
She didn’t notice Sophie and Jean gazing at her from the other
side of a massive freezer chest.
“That was the ordinary model,” the shop assistant said.
“With the special features you’ve requested, madam, it will be
a month or more before the manufacturer can ship it.”
“I don’t want to wait a month!” the lady snapped. “I want
it right now!”
“Isn’t she awful?” Sophie whispered to Jean. It was curiously enjoyable to see a grown-up person behaving so badly in
public.

87

“Yes,” Jean said, “but Sophie, isn’t there something familiar about her?”
Meanwhile the lady continued to harangue the helpless
assistant. “Without the self-cleaning oven and the automatic
timer with its on-off feature,” she complained, “I really might
as well buy an ordinary model at the Co-Op!”
“I’m very sorry, madam,” said the shop assistant, flustered. “I can promise you—”
“Sophie?” Jean said, her voice wavering between horror
and laughter.
“Yes?”
“I think that woman’s Miss Rawlins!”
Sophie frowned. There had certainly been something
familiar about the shopper’s face and figure. But how could
their old chemistry teacher—the one Mr. Petersen had
replaced in March when she left to be married—have turned
into this fur-clad monstrosity?
“She must have married a millionaire!” Jean exclaimed.
“Let’s wait for her to come back out,” Sophie said, almost
certain that Jean was mistaken. “It might just be, oh, I don’t
know, her evil twin or something like that.”
They hung around looking at the vacuum cleaners and
electric hair dryers until the lady emerged from the manager’s
office, still hanging on his arm but now clutching her checkbook.

88

Then they edged closer to the counter, where the lady, still
oblivious to their surveillance, brandished a massive gold-andonyx reservoir pen over her checkbook. They could see the
gold bangles on her wrists and a pair of diamond earrings
hanging from her ears, earrings that Sophie’s great-aunt would
certainly have called unsuitable.
They saw the name on the checkbook: Miss Ailsa Rawlins.
“It’s her,” Sophie said under her breath.
At that moment their former teacher looked up and saw the
two girls. She drew her coat more tightly around her and sniffed.
“Jean Roberts and Sophie Hunter,” she said repressively.
It wasn’t exactly a warm greeting.
“Good afternoon, Miss Rawlins,” Jean said politely.
“Good afternoon,” Sophie echoed, barely suppressing a
fit of giggles.
“What are the two of you doing inside on such a fine
day?” Miss Rawlins asked them. “Have you already had your
constitutional?”
Jean and Sophie looked at each other, then shook their
heads. Sophie dragged Jean away before they could disgrace
themselves by collapsing into outright laughter. They broke
into a run outside, ending up breathless in the grass below the
monument to Walter Scott.
“Our constitutional!” Sophie said, once they’d caught
their breath.

89

Just the word itself was enough to send them both into fits
of laughter.
“Strange, though,” Sophie added thoughtfully. “What
exactly do you think she was doing in that shop?”
“Well, obviously, buying an electric cooker! It’s natural to
get everything fitted out new when you’re married, isn’t it?”
“She left school to be married, you’re quite right. But why
is she still writing checks in her maiden name?” Sophie sat up
and brushed the grass off her hair. “Don’t most married
women change their names and share a bank account with
their husbands?”
Jean shrugged. “Perhaps she kept the account she had
before they were married,” she said, not very interested in this
line of speculation. Then she perked up. “Perhaps the
cooker’s a wedding present for her new husband!”
Sophie shook her head. “I don’t think she’s married yet,”
she said firmly. Something was nagging at her, but she couldn’t
think what. “She wasn’t wearing a wedding ring just now.
Bangles, yes, and earrings and some sort of necklace, but the
ring finger was bare.”
Jean stared at Sophie.
“It couldn’t—”
“She couldn’t—”
They both spoke at once. Then Sophie succumbed to an
uncontrollable fit of giggles.

90

“I don’t like to say it,” she said, almost choking with
laughter, “but I think Miss Rawlins may have become a kept
woman!”
“No!” said Jean, her eyes going wide with surprise. “How
completely extraordinary . . .”
“Yes, people do the strangest things,” Sophie said, suddenly grave.
“It’s romantic, though, isn’t it?” said Jean, sounding as if
she wanted reassurance.
“Oh, it’s not strange that Miss Rawlins would prefer being
someone’s kept mistress to teaching chemistry,” Sophie said,
fighting another attack of laughter. “But it’s most peculiar that
a millionaire should choose someone like Miss Rawlins to put
in his love nest, isn’t it?”
The two girls shrieked. For an instant Sophie felt that all
was right with the world, what with the warm sun and the
smell of grass and roses and the delicious prospect of spreading such an excellent piece of gossip back at school. Then a
cloud passed over the sun and she shivered.
“We’d best get a move on,” Jean said, struck by the same
solemnity that had just come over Sophie.
Jean had to pick up a few things at the shops for her
mother, who had telephoned school in the morning to say that
she was stuck in the flat with the baby on account of colic.
“Do you want to come with me?” she asked Sophie. “I

91

must be back at school by five o’clock; Miss Bagshawe wouldn’t
give me a longer furlough, but she saw I couldn’t leave my
mother in the lurch.”
Peggy wouldn’t expect Sophie home for another hour. It
was strange how nice it felt to be invited to do something
quite ordinary; the shivery distress of a minute ago was
gone, and she welcomed the prospect of more companionship.
First they picked up a cottage loaf at the bakery, lingering
to peer at the fresh floury baps and iced buns and Sally Lunns
bursting with currants.
“Have you any extra money?” Jean was often hungry, but
she had to pay for the shopping with her own pocket money,
which left nothing over for indulgences.
“No,” Sophie said, not quite sorry enough to regret the
Ibsen and Strindberg in her satchel. If she hadn’t run into
Jean, she could have begun one of them this afternoon. . . . She
cast a guilty look at Jean as if the other girl could read her
mind.
Next they stopped at the Buttercup Dairy.
“Half a pound of butter, please.”
“Sweet or salted?”
“Salted.”
The girl behind the marble counter placed a square of
greaseproof paper on the brass scales and cut a wedge off the

92

slab. Dipping her two wooden paddles into a pretty blue-andwhite porcelain bowl of cold water, she worked the butter into
a perfectly round pat, pressing into it the stamp with its picture of the dairymaid with the cow holding a buttercup to the
girl’s chin.
Both girls averted their eyes when they passed the
butcher’s shop, where several carcasses hung on hooks in the
window next to a tray of jellied meats with the label “Potted
Head.”
“Will you come with me to my mam’s?” Jean asked,
sounding nervous for the first time that afternoon. Then her
voice brightened. “You could meet our new bull mastiff!”
Sophie politely declined, secretly relieved she needed to
be back for tea at Heriot Row.
“Walk with me another few minutes, then,” Jean said.
They lingered on North Bridge, leaning over the edge and
looking out onto the central railway station and the chaotic
spread of the city’s older sections. The bridge spanned the
divide between Edinburgh’s two halves: the New Town,
swept clear of all dirt and inconvenience and irrationality, its
grid of elegant three-story houses characterized by their
orderly insistence on life conducted without mess, and the
Old, a warren of closes and wynds, ancient tenements of
six or seven or eight stories, all bursting at the seams with
people.

93

It was probably a moral failing, but Sophie much preferred the New Town to the Old, because of the way it let one
insulate oneself from the loud and smelly and generally offputting lives of other people.
“Do you like living in the Old Town?” she asked Jean,
choosing the words carefully so as not to sound critical.
“Oh, yes,” Jean said. “When my dad’s out at work, my
mam’s got all the other tenants in the building to be friendly
with. The only reason she had to ask me to get the messages
today was that the neighbor’s children are down with the
chicken pox and she didn’t want to leave the baby. It’s like
having a huge extra family. You can make a new friend whenever you like, and there’s always someone to talk to.”
Sophie tried not to shudder. It sounded like her idea of
hell.
The road along the bridge was fairly empty. A few cars
went by, and then a brewer’s dray drawn by four Clydesdales,
an attractive sight against the hoardings plastered with bright
advertisements for proprietary brands of dynamite like Atlas,
Hercules, and Goliath.
Meanwhile, walking toward them on the pavement was a
girl they both recognized at once.
“Sheena Henshawe!” Jean exclaimed.
Sheena Henshawe had left the Institution for Young
Ladies two years earlier, trailing clouds of glory. She had been

94

captain of the hockey and lacrosse teams as well as the girls’
rifle eight. Sophie still cherished the memory of the evening at
supper when Sheena had casually introduced Sophie as her
shooting protégée.
“Do you think she’ll remember us?” Jean whispered to
Sophie as Sheena came up level with the streetlight.
Sheena had gone on to IRYLNS, like many of her classmates, and Miss Henchman had even mentioned Sheena by
name in a recent assembly meant to spur the girls on to new
heights of patriotic endeavor.
“Of course she will!” Sophie said, outraged at the idea
that Sheena might have forgotten her old friends. “She knows
you and me both; she was head girl in our house that time
when we all had to do detention for booby-trapping the
Faraday house entryway, don’t you remember? And she often
used to give me and Nan tips on marksmanship.”
They watched the young woman walk toward them
against the backdrop. Several inches taller than either Jean or
Sophie, Sheena wore a mint-green linen suit that by some miracle looked neither dirty nor crumpled, despite the warmth of
the day and the grime of the nearby trains. The heels of her
shoes were so high that Sophie wondered how she could walk
in them.
When Sheena came closer, though, Sophie suddenly
doubted her own conviction that the older girl would remember

95

them. Girls who’d left school seemed to become foreign
creatures, inhabitants of a strange new world.
As Sheena came up level with them, her eyes swept over
the two schoolgirls with no sign of recognition.
“Well!” said Jean when Sheena had vanished out of sight
at the other end of the bridge. “She looked as though she
thought we weren’t fit to wipe the bottom of her shoes with!
Sophie, she wasn’t always such a snob, was she?”
“No,” Sophie said, rather more shaken than she wanted
Jean to know. “She was much the nicest of the girls in her year.
She gave me that set of colored bamboo-fiber pens for my
birthday, and she showed me how to work square roots without a slide rule. She can’t have forgotten us, she simply can’t!”
“Could she be terribly shortsighted,” Jean suggested,
“and not able to recognize us without her spectacles?”
But Sheena had had the best eyesight of anyone on the
shooting team.
“Sophie?” Jean said.
“What?” said Sophie.
“Didn’t Sheena look lovely just now?”
Sophie grunted skeptically.
“That’s exactly what I’ve always imagined a first-class secretary looking like,” Jean continued. “Those shoes! Oh,
Sophie, I’d do anything to become like Sheena. . . .”
Sophie was offended as well as surprised.

96

“You can’t mean to say that you look at that—that creature that used to be Sheena and want to be like that yourself?”
she said, almost in tears at the thought of how Sheena’s glossy
new carapace made her indistinguishable from any other
young woman. “It’s horrible! I’d rather die than grow up and
leave school if it means I’ll turn into a complete blank.”
“If I go to IRYLNS and get a real job,” Jean said, her eyes
dreamy and placid, “I’ll be able to live in a flat with an electric
kitchen. My dad would be proud of me then. He often says
how much he wishes he had an IRYLNS-trained secretary to
help him in his office, rather than the useless one he’s got
now.”
There was no point arguing. Sophie felt the gulf between
herself and Jean open up wider than the span of the bridge.
“I must go,” she said abruptly.
“All right,” said Jean, still mesmerized by the vision of
beautiful clothes and a weekly pay packet. “See you in school
on Monday, then.”
It was a nasty end to a nice afternoon, Sophie thought,
walking up Dublin Street to Abercromby Place and from
there along the north edge of Queen Street Gardens toward
Heriot Row. She sped up as she came near to the house, and
the only strange thing was that the Veteran was lurking on his
cart just down the road. He didn’t ask Sophie for money, but
she had an uneasy feeling he was watching her.

97

If only Sheena had seen them and stopped, or even just
smiled to say hello! Was that what growing up meant, abandoning one’s memory and friends and reinventing oneself
without the least shred of connection to one’s former life?

98

a
Nine

T

HE CLOCK STRUCK FIVE

as Sophie let herself in at the

front door and went to the kitchen to find Peggy
amid steam and general flouriness.

“Thank goodness you’re home; your great-aunt’s been
running about the place like a chicken with the head cut off.
You’re not to have tea in the kitchen after all—herself wants
you upstairs for supper with the visitors.”
Sophie sliced herself a thick doorstop of bread and took a
bite, wondering who the visitors might be.
“There you go again, eating your bread without any butter or jam!” Peggy exclaimed, slamming a pot of raspberry
jam down in front of Sophie along with the butter dish and a
knife and plate. “And brought up in the most civilized city in

99

the world! Do put something on that; it gives me the horrors
to watch you swallowing a dry crust.”
Sophie cut her piece of bread into two and spread butter
on one piece, jam on the other. She liked jam and she liked
butter but she didn’t like jam and butter together.
“Who’s coming to supper, then?” she asked.
Peggy made a clucking noise of disapproval.
“There’s three of them,” she said. “A government minister
and her gentleman assistant, and a spiritualist lady, and me
with no time to get any fish into the house!”
Though Sophie’s great-aunt believed it was a very good
idea for women to be vegetarians, whenever a man came to
dinner Peggy was expected to serve fish, which Great-aunt
Tabitha referred to as “brain food.”
“Best go and wash and change into something decent
before they get here,” Peggy added. “Your great-aunt won’t
like to see you in that awful old jumper.”
It was really Peggy who cared about what Sophie wore
rather than Great-aunt Tabitha, but Sophie obliged her by
changing into a newish marigold-colored frock.
After washing her face, Sophie waited in her room until
the doorbell announced the first arrival. She took the stairs
slowly, then smoothed down her hair, which she had forgotten
to brush, and let herself into the sitting room.
There she found two people engaged in a tête-à-tête. The

100

taller was an imposing woman of heavy, almost masculine
build, her ash-colored hair styled into a rigid armature. Her
conversation partner was a young man with thick, wiry, closecropped bronze hair, a prominent nose, and an athletic figure.
Curiously, the minister and her assistant had exactly the same
color eyes, a distinctive pale green, though the man’s were
hooded and deep-set while the minister’s bulged out of the
sockets almost like peeled grapes.
They broke off talking to look at Sophie but turned back
to their conversation without introducing themselves. She was
relieved when Great-aunt Tabitha burst into the room and
swept Sophie over to meet the visitors. The older woman was
Joanna Murchison, the minister of public safety (Great-aunt
Tabitha quite often had members of the cabinet to supper);
the young man was Nicholas Mood, the minister’s devoted
assistant. Great-aunt Tabitha and Joanna Murchison had been
at school together, though Sophie thought the two women
regarded each other with more wariness than affection.
Amid all the introductions the doorbell rang again, and a
moment later Peggy ushered into the room a very attractive
woman, thirty-five years old at the most, her sleek black hair
cropped close to her head to show off the diamond studs in
her ears; she wore a midnight blue silk blouse and a long, narrow black velvet skirt with high heels.
“Miss Grant, how delightful to see you!” said Great-aunt

101

Tabitha. “Let me introduce you—Joanna Murchison, Ruth
Grant, Nicko Mood. Sophie, this is Miss Grant, one of the
most talented spiritualists in the Society.”
The Society was the Scottish Society for Psychical
Research—but Miss Grant couldn’t be a spiritualist, she was
much too nice-looking. . . .
“I’m the kind of spiritualist,” said Miss Grant, smiling at
Sophie’s expression, “who doesn’t have drifty tresses and lots
of scarves and rings with locks of hair in them.”
It was as if she could read Sophie’s mind! Sophie resolved
to keep her face completely expressionless for the rest of the
evening.
The party fell naturally into two groups: a main one composed of Great-aunt Tabitha, the minister, and her assistant,
and an onlooker one made up of Sophie and Miss Grant.
After they had watched the others for a few minutes, Miss
Grant turned to Sophie and began speaking in a quiet voice.
“It’s an interesting dynamic, isn’t it? That young man is in
the agonizing position of being caught between two powerful
women, not quite sure which one it’s more politic for him to
concentrate on pleasing this evening. . . .”
It was true that Nicko Mood’s body language was showing an alarming twisty-turny aspect as he reoriented himself
to whichever woman was speaking. Sophie felt too shy to
say anything in response, but she liked the way Miss Grant

102

spoke to her almost as an equal.
“Your great-aunt invited me here this evening to assess the
minister’s real state of thought on various political affairs,”
Miss Grant confided. “Pay attention to the conversation at
supper, and see what you think—it never hurts to get another
perspective on these things.”
“I don’t think Great-aunt Tabitha would put much weight
on my judgment,” Sophie confessed. “She doesn’t think I’m
old enough to have an opinion.”
“Well, then it’s about time she started paying a bit more
attention, isn’t it?” said Miss Grant. Sophie wished she could
have even one-tenth the woman’s poise and confidence.
“Personally, I’ll be interested to hear what you make of young
Nicko. I find there to be something vaguely sinister about
him, but he likes to pass himself off as something of a lightweight.”
Her voice had returned to full volume by now, and the
word lightweight fell into a moment of silence. The other three
turned toward Miss Grant, who promptly burst out laughing.
“My mother says my brother’s had the most terrible effect
on my language,” she said with disarming breeziness. “He
likes to box, and she’s constantly reproaching me for the awful
slang I’ve absorbed.”
Sophie was horrified and impressed at the cover-up. Did
Miss Grant even have a brother?

103

Over dinner, Sophie learned only that the minister was
overbearingly talkative. The conversation was so boring that
even Nicko looked hard put to maintain his expression of avid
interest. Miss Grant fiddled a lot with her napkin and drank
several tumblers of water, while the thin pinched line of
Great-aunt Tabitha’s lips told Sophie how trying she was finding it to stay quiet as the minister’s words rolled over them in
great waves of bureaucratic bossiness.
After Peggy had brought in the cheese and fruit and
served the coffee, Sophie’s great-aunt rapped her saucer with
a silver teaspoon.
Everyone turned to look at her, the minister stopping in
midsentence and affecting an air more astonished than displeased at the interruption.
“Joanna, you’ve been waffling on all evening like a talking
press release,” said Great-aunt Tabitha. “What I want to know
is what on earth you mean to do about these wretched assassins?”
Trust Great-aunt Tabitha to go directly to the point!
“How would you respond,” said the minister, leaning
back in her chair and taking a sip of coffee, “were you to learn
that the European Federation has been funneling money and
explosives to the Brothers of the Northern Liberties?”
The minister’s question made the other two women in the
room flinch. Nicholas Mood had chosen a pear from the shal-

104

low bowl at the center of the table; his peeling technique was
admirable, and the yellow-gold skin descended to his plate in
a single mesmerizing spiral. Now his knife faltered.
“Surely that’s simply a conspiracy theory,” Miss Grant
interjected, her eyes bright, “a farfetched story meant to damage ordinary people’s confidence in the integrity of the government? The Brothers of the Northern Liberties are
run-of-the-mill separatists. They despise government meddling and the centralized power that Europe exemplifies. It
beggars belief that the Brothers should choose the Europeans
for their allies.”
“My dear Miss Grant,” Mood broke in, “such charming
naïveté! Did the minister say the Brothers supported the
European government? She merely asserted that they have
accepted material aid, in the form of money and ordnance,
from them. Did you never hear the expression, ‘The enemy of
my enemy is my friend’?”
Showing no offense at the young man’s rudeness, Miss
Grant poured herself another cup of coffee. Sophie admired
her calm. The nastiness of Mood’s tone had something to do
with Miss Grant’s being quite young and pretty and not yet
very important. Why couldn’t men talk to women exactly as
they spoke to other men?
“What are you getting at, Nicko?” asked Great-aunt Tabitha,
giving him a hard look. “Rumors about Europe’s supporting

105

the Brothers have been circulating for months. There’s no reason
to think there’s any substance to the stories.”
Mood looked to the minister for permission; receiving a
small nod, he puffed up his chest with consequence.
“We stand poised on the verge,” he said (it was uncanny
how closely his speech patterns followed the minister’s), “of
acquiring hard evidence of their involvement. Irrefutable evidence, and we’ll soon make it public.”
An indrawn breath from Miss Grant, some flinching on
Great-aunt Tabitha’s part: Sophie felt frightened. Great-aunt
Tabitha was impervious to intimidation; if she was afraid . . .
“The next step, of course,” Mood continued with suppressed excitement, “would be to mobilize our own troops in
preparation for declaring war on Europe. If we are able to
offer the Diet at Stockholm decisive proof that the Europeans
have contributed to cause civilian deaths on Scottish soil, the
other nations of the Hanse will be obliged to support us.”
“War between Europe and the Hanseatic states?” said
Great-aunt Tabitha, her voice fainter than usual. “You can’t
mean it. Surely we’ve not forgotten the destruction the last
war wrought. . . .” She trailed off.
“The European Federation threatens our sovereignty by
its very existence,” Joanna Murchison said, then heaved a sigh
that to Sophie’s surprise sounded quite heartfelt. “The last ten
years have seen the slow erosion of civil liberties—”

106

“Yes, and at your own hands, too!” said Great-aunt
Tabitha, giving the rim of her coffee cup a quick rap for
emphasis. “For shame!”
“I don’t deny it,” Joanna Murchison said, looking almost
bowed down with the weight on her shoulders, “but it has
been vital to national security. You know perfectly well that in
times of war, small personal liberties must be suspended for
the greater good. Afterward—ah, then we will be able to
remake the Republic of Scotland as its founders conceived it.”
Sophie was confused. She hated the feeling of not knowing enough to understand, and made a resolution on the spot
to begin reading the newspapers religiously.
“You genuinely believe what you’re saying, don’t you?”
Miss Grant said suddenly, throwing aside her napkin and
pushing her chair back from the table.
“Why do you suspect me of dishonesty?” said the minister. “I only have the country’s best interests at heart.”
The silence that followed felt almost suffocating. Nicko
was eating bites of his pear, licking the juice off his fingers
with disgusting voluptuary greediness.
“Nicko!” said the minister.
“Minister?” he said, setting the last slice of fruit down on
his plate uneaten and turning to her with unctuous readiness.
The minister stood up, her napkin falling to the floor, and
Nicko followed suit.

107

“We must make our farewells. No, Tabitha, we are fully
capable of seeing ourselves out. Good night, Tabitha. Good
night, Miss Grant.”
The minister shook each woman’s hand, ignoring Sophie.
Nicko Mood bowed to them both and nodded at Sophie.
“You meant exactly what you said, didn’t you?” said
Sophie’s great-aunt to Miss Grant as soon as the others had
left.
“I’m sure Murchison wasn’t lying,” said Miss Grant. “She
sincerely believes that only war with Europe will make
Scotland safe. That is not to say, of course, that she doesn’t
have other motives beyond that oh-so-noble desire to protect
the country. She holds half a dozen directorships in munitions
companies, for one thing, and she’ll not turn down the chance
of amassing a small fortune in the event of war. But money’s
far from the primary goal here. No, Tabitha, though I despise
her, I fear there’s no way around it. The Society for Psychical
Research will have to support her, if indeed it comes to that.”
What? Sophie thought she must have misheard.
But Great-aunt Tabitha was nodding her agreement. “It’s
a great tragedy,” she said. “I’m almost certain that any evidence linking the Europeans to the Brothers of the Northern
Liberties will have been cooked up for the occasion. But
whether or not that’s so, the story will be virtually impossible
to refute once it’s made public.”

108

Now Great-aunt Tabitha sat back in her chair and put a
hand over her eyes. Sophie thought she had never looked so
old and tired, as if the surge of energy just now had burned
out her circuits.
“Isn’t there something you can do about Nicko Mood?”
Sophie ventured. “He seemed so—so cunning. . . .”
The two women looked at each other. Then Great-aunt
Tabitha gave a grim laugh. “Don’t worry about him,” she told
Sophie. “Nicko knows I’ve got his number. Unlike Joanna,
who’s dangerously idealistic, Nicko’s in this for the sake of one
thing only, the personal advancement and professional ascendancy of Nicholas Mood. If the minister’s star were no longer
on the rise, Nicko could be easily enough persuaded to make
quite different choices about where to devote his energies.”
Sophie thought there had been something vaguely fanatical about Mood that Great-aunt Tabitha didn’t seem to be taking into account, but there was no point persisting.
“Sophie, I count on you to keep this completely secret,”
Great-aunt Tabitha added. “Not a word to anyone.
Understood?”
“Oh, yes,” said Sophie, rather thrilled to be trusted for
once.
“Off to bed, now. Peggy will give you a cup of warm
milk in the kitchen if you can’t sleep. Try not to think about
what you’ve heard this evening. And remember, things may

109

turn out perfectly all right in the end.”
She didn’t say it as though she meant it.
On an impulse, Sophie crossed over and kissed her greataunt on the cheek before saying good night to the two women.
She went straight upstairs to bed without stopping in the
kitchen; Great-aunt Tabitha never remembered that Sophie
hated milk.
War, she said to herself, lying in bed and trying to fall
asleep. If the minister gets her way, the country will be at war
by the end of the summer. At war not because of justice or the
need to protect national boundaries or save lives, but simply
due to one woman’s desire to force the world into alignment
with her vision.
Sophie distracted herself by translating the sentence into
Latin. The Latin version was different from the English
because you had to put both parts into the future tense: If the
minister will get her way, the country will go to war.
She drifted off to sleep with the grammatical constructions running through her mind like sand through one’s fingers at the beach.

110

a
Ten

O

N THE WAY TO MEET

Mikael after a reassuringly

aindigestible Sunday lunch, Sophie found the
streets almost empty. Her destination was the foyer

of the central branch of the public library, but as she passed
under the Corinthian colonnade through to the grand marble
entrance hall, Sophie got a nasty shock. A loud clatter
sounded just behind her, and she turned and saw the Veteran
on his cart. He leered at Sophie, and she hurried up and made
her way inside without delay.
How unusual—how unpleasant—to see him on Saturday
and Sunday as well as during the week. Usually she only saw
him hanging around school.
She tried to push him out of mind, rubbing her temples

111

with her fingers to dispel a slight headache. She had to stop
being silly and concentrate on the task at hand.
Mikael was waiting in the lobby, lounging in a way that
proclaimed great satisfaction at his having got there before
Sophie.
“Sophie, what kept you?” he said virtuously.
“I’m not late!” Sophie protested.
“No, it’s true,” he said, laughing. “I was here early, but I
knew just what you’d say if I hinted you were late.”
Sophie kept her face still so he wouldn’t know she was
upset, but inwardly she seethed. Why, oh why couldn’t she
have been born with the sort of thick skin and easy temperament that made Nan, say, completely impervious to teasing?
Something else had caught Mikael’s attention.
“What are those things?” he asked, pointing to the row of
booths running all along one side of the lobby.
“Those?” Sophie said, surprised. “Don’t you have them at
home?”
“I can’t tell you if we do until I know what they are!
Seriously, are they for voting in elections, or perhaps for getting your photograph taken automatically?”
Sophie had forgotten the way Mikael’s insatiable curiosity
made her notice things about Edinburgh she normally took
for granted.
“You really don’t know, do you?” she said, still not quite

112

certain he wasn’t pulling her leg. Everybody knew what the
machines were for, though it wasn’t much talked about.
“No, I don’t know, and if you don’t tell me, I’m not going
to help you find this quack medium of yours, either! Only one
person’s gone into a booth while I’ve been here, and he hasn’t
come back out yet, or I’d ask him instead. There was an old
lady who wanted to, but a younger woman—I think it must
have been her daughter—stopped her.”
It was hard to find the right words to explain.
“You said someone did go in?” she asked.
He nodded.
“How long ago?” she said.
“Oh, five or ten minutes,” Mikael said.
“Watch, then.”
They turned to face the machines.
“What am I looking for?” Mikael asked after a bit. He was
still grinning and seemed to suspect Sophie of playing a minor
practical joke.
“You’ll know when you see it.”
A minute later, two ambulance men came in through the
front door, carrying a stretcher and accompanied by a constable in uniform. Clearly they were in no particular hurry; they
stopped to chat with the porter on duty before they sauntered
over to the third machine in the row of eight.
The constable took a key from his belt and inserted it into

113

the lock, then held the door open as the ambulance men
leaned in and pulled out the corpse of the man Mikael had
seen.
The way they handled the body made it quite clear he was
dead.
“What happened to him?” Mikael gasped. “Did he die of
a heart attack? How did they know where to find him?”
“A signal went off at the police station,” Sophie said. Oh
dear, she could see she’d have to say it outright. “Mikael,
they’re suicide machines. Machines for the Voluntary Removal
of Life, that’s the official name. I thought they had them in all
the Hanseatic states. Have you really nothing of the sort in
Denmark?”
“Sophie, in København, they’d throw you into prison just
for suggesting it! Suicide is illegal in all civilized countries. Do
you mean to say that a man can go into one of those things and
kill himself, just like that?”
“Well, you can’t get in without a special token,” Sophie
said. The expression on Mikael’s face made her flush a little,
but there was nothing to be ashamed of, was there? “You can
get one from a member of Parliament, a doctor, a minister, a
licensed spiritualist, or the senior librarian,” she added, hating
how defensive she sounded, “but they’re not supposed to give
you one unless they’re convinced you’re in your right mind.”
“In your right mind, but bent on suicide? Impossible!”

114

Sophie could perfectly well imagine being in her right mind
and yet at the same time wanting to die, but Mikael wasn’t the
kind of person who would understand.
“Once you insert the token and go in,” she continued,
deciding to stick with pragmatic rather than philosophical
considerations, “the machine kills you with an electric shock
and then it summons the police. There’s another lot of
machines at the main post office, and almost every village has
one now too, even the places too small for a Carnegie library.”
“And the government actually lets people commit suicide?”
“How can suicide be prevented?” Sophie countered.
“Even in olden times, people found ways of killing themselves.
It’s much more sensible to make it safe and legal.”
“Safe? Sophie, just listen to yourself!”
“I don’t see why you’re getting so worked up about it,”
Sophie said, uneasily conscious that it had taken Mikael’s reaction to reveal what was troubling in the familiar practice. She
suddenly wondered whether she might be blind to other
things about Scotland as well. But the Scottish government
was the best in the world; that was what Great-aunt Tabitha
said, and Sophie’s great-aunt was always right about politics,
even if she didn’t seem to understand much about Sophie.
“This country’s got an awfully distorted relationship with
death,” Mikael said, gesturing around him in disgust.

115

“Enough of this arguing, Sophie. Let’s go and see what we can
discover about that medium.”
“Did you find her the other day?” Sophie asked.
“It was really strange, Sophie,” Mikael said. “I went to the
address on the card—it was a seedy place in the nastier part of
the Old Town—and knew at once I’d found the right spot.
The lady in the shop next door described Mrs. Tansy perfectly,
and I found a pack of kids who told me she used to be picked
up most evenings in a chauffeured motorcar and taken off to
her appointments. But the flat was completely empty, and the
landlady couldn’t—or wouldn’t—tell me where she’d gone, or
when.”
“I don’t believe it,” said Sophie, puzzled. “Why would she
have given out a card if she didn’t mean to stay at that
address?”
“Fishy, isn’t it? It wasn’t hard to track down the carter
who took her things, but that didn’t get me much further.
He’d taken her goods to a long-term storage warehouse in
Leith, where she paid on the spot for six months’ storage. She
didn’t leave a forwarding address.”
“It’s most suspicious!” Sophie said. “What can she be up
to?”
“It’s possible, of course, that Mrs. Tansy’s left the city, or
even gone out of the country,” Mikael continued. “On the
other hand, the landlady gave me the distinct impression that

116

she was still fairly close at hand.”
“What did she say that made you think that?” Sophie
asked. Though the thought of seeing the medium again made
her skin crawl, Sophie really did want to talk to the woman. It
would be impossible to find out the meaning of her warning if
she had left Edinburgh.
“It wasn’t anything she said, not exactly. Well, I suppose it
was. Oh, it sounds silly now. . . .”
“No, tell me,” Sophie pressed him. “What was it?”
“Well, the landlady had a bird in a cage—a budget, is that
the word?”
“Budgie!” Sophie said, amused by his small mistake.
“Budgie, then. But there was an enormous black cat stalking about the flat. Several times the cat actually made it up
onto the shelf and got his paw through the bars before the
landlady noticed. She saw me looking and said she was only
keeping the cat for a few days. If her friend hadn’t come for it
in a month, she’d throw the wretched animal out into the
street.”
“That’s a real Sherlock Holmes move, isn’t it?” Sophie
said, full of admiration for Mikael’s perspicacity. “It does seem
likely the cat belonged to Mrs. Tansy; you could see her thinking a big black cat would be a good prop for a medium.”
“Afterward I checked with the children outside,” said
Mikael, clearly pleased. “That cat definitely used to live with

117

Mrs. Tansy. She doted on it and paid the kids off to make sure
nobody would hurt it.”
Sophie congratulated Mikael on having found all this out.
“It wasn’t hard,” he said, brushing away the compliment.
“The trick will be to find where she’s gone now. I can’t watch
her old place. I’ve bribed a couple of those kids to get me
word if she shows up, but we can’t count on them.”
“Where do you think she’s gone?”
“Hard to say. If she’s holed up at a friend’s, we may never
find her. On the other hand, she hasn’t taken much with her,
and I think there’s a good chance she’ll have gone to a hotel.
Would that fit with what you saw of her that night at your
great-aunt’s?”
Sophie thought about it.
“Yes, I think so,” she said after a minute.
“So what we must do now is get a list of Edinburgh
hotels,” Mikael said, “and then I can check whether she’s registered at any of them.”
“Surely she won’t have registered under her own name? It
would be pretty idiotic to go to all that trouble not to be found
and then leave your name for anyone who thought to come
looking.”
“No, but the wretched woman cuts such a distinctive figure, she won’t find it easy to conceal herself,” said Mikael.
“Even if I don’t have the right name, I’ll be able to describe

118

her—you know, jet beads, heavy build, that sort of thing, just
like you said—and explain to the people at the front desk why
they should let me up to see her. By pretending she’s the only
person who can help me get in touch with the ghost of my
dead mother, for instance.”
“You’d pretend that?” Sophie said, surprised that the
séance-despising Mikael would even fake a belief in spiritualism.
“All in a day’s work,” Mikael said. “Seriously, if you really
mean to find things out, you can’t stand on principle.”
He seemed to have grown up quite a bit since his last time
in Scotland. He even looked quite handsome, Sophie thought,
if not altogether up to the Mr. Petersen standard.
“Let’s get the list of hotels from the telephone book in the
main reading room,” she said.
“Good idea.”
They left an hour later with a list of thirty hotels.
She felt remorseful that obligations at school would stop
her from being much use, but Mikael waved away her apologies.
“It’s my pleasure, Sophie,” he said. “Things get pretty
quiet at the professor’s, and at least this will keep me out of
trouble.”
A sharp shooting pain made itself felt above Sophie’s left eye.
“What if it gets you into trouble instead?” she asked, feeling

119

slightly sick. For some reason thinking about the medium
made Sophie’s head hurt.
“I’m used to getting in trouble,” Mikael said. “You could
even say I like it.”
“Oh, if this goes wrong, your aunt will never forgive me!”
said Sophie.
“Nonsense. Stop worrying. You’ll see, I’m good at this.”
Just then Sophie’s headache came on so strongly that she
decided not to fuss any more over Mikael, who promised to let
her know as soon as he found anything out. She walked home
in a daze, her head so painful that she hardly noticed the figure on the cart following her back to Heriot Row.
At home, Peggy took one look at Sophie’s face and put her
straight to bed with an aspirin and a mug of hot lemon-barley
water. She wouldn’t even listen to Sophie’s pleas to be allowed
to finish her homework. Secretly this was a relief, though
Sophie would never have admitted it.

120

a

Eleven

O

N

MONDAY

NEITHER

JEAN nor Sophie mentioned

ahaving seen Sheena, in unspoken agreement that
it had been too troubling to turn into a funny story.

It was Priscilla, that evening, who put into words the strangest
thing about their having seen their old chemistry mistress.
“It doesn’t make any sense,” she said. “Miss Rawlins wasn’t
pretty enough to be a kept woman, not the kind of kept
woman who gets given fur coats and electric cookers, at any
rate. I don’t dispute what you say about her not really being
married, but there’s got to be some other explanation.”
“Perhaps her fiancé stood her up and she’s buying furs
and electrical appliances now in order to console herself,”
Sophie suggested, though she could hear how thin it sounded.

121

Really it was what had happened to Sheena that Sophie considered the greater mystery—a mystery she could hardly bear
to contemplate.
“That can’t be it,” said Priscilla. “If you don’t mind my
being blunt, women usually become better off when they
marry. Miss Rawlins didn’t have any money when she was our
teacher, and if she hasn’t married after all, where’s the money
come from?”
“How do you know she didn’t have any money?” Nan
asked.
“Oh, she hadn’t a penny beyond her salary,” Priscilla said,
confident in the way of someone who came from money herself. “Don’t you remember that awful caoutchouc mackintosh
we used to joke about when we had her for first-form science?
No self-respecting woman with a private income would wear
a raincoat like that for a day longer than she absolutely had
to.”
“Yes,” said Sophie, “but couldn’t she have had her mind
on higher things? Some people don’t mind what they wear.”
“Sophie, we all know your mind’s on higher things,”
Priscilla said, laughing in an annoyingly superior way, “but
even that dreadful cardigan of yours must once have been
quite good. At least good clothes age gracefully. Don’t you
remember the revolting carnation scent Miss Rawlins used to
wear, and the amber brooch that looked like something out of

122

the lucky dip at a village fête? I’m not at all surprised to hear
of her wearing a fur jacket in June. She hadn’t good taste, and
yet she hankered after expensive things.”
“Yes,” Jean interjected, “that jacket must have cost fifty
guineas or more!”
“I think Miss Rawlins lied when she said she was leaving
to be married,” Priscilla continued. “And here’s a thought:
what if somebody paid her off to leave her job partway
through the school year?”
“Why would someone pay her to leave her job, though?”
said Nan.
Instead of giving a direct answer, Priscilla asked another
question.
“Who benefited from her leaving like that?” she said.
“Priscilla, you’re not saying—,” said Jean, drawing in a
breath and then falling silent.
“I most certainly am,” said Priscilla, an evil glint in her
eye.
Sophie had a bad feeling about what was coming next.
“Let’s suppose,” Priscilla said, “that Mr. Petersen paid off
Miss Rawlins so that he could take her place. This job gives
him the perfect cover for his secret life! And of course it
explains why she might have come into money—the false marriage story would have simply been a pretext for her change of
fortune.”

123

Sophie groaned. The whole business about Mr. Petersen
leading a double life was absurd. Priscilla was doing this just
to torment her.
“Are you harking back to the notion that Mr. Petersen
might have had something to do with the bombings?” Nan
asked, looking up from her history essay. “I don’t see a school
providing very good cover for a terrorist, if that’s what you’re
getting at. Surely there are other jobs where one might come
and go more freely without anybody noticing?”
“Yes,” said Priscilla, “but this place is so respectable, it
makes up for not allowing you the freedom of movement
you’d have as, say, an insurance salesman. Besides, my father
says the police have tests now to find out whether you’ve
recently handled explosives. Since he’s teaching chemistry,
he’s got a perfectly good excuse for the tests coming back positive if they arrest him and find traces of chemicals on his
hands.”
Sophie stood up. “I’m going to bed,” she said. It would be
too awful if the others could tell how upset she was.
“Sophie, you can’t pretend you don’t suspect him yourself, just a little bit,” Priscilla called after her as she retreated
to the bedroom.
Sophie couldn’t help giving it some serious thought. Was
Priscilla right? Sophie had Mr. Petersen’s handkerchief under
her pillow. Her hand went to it involuntarily now, and she

124

twisted the muslin into a knot around her fingers.
As for suspecting him in the bombings, it was impossible
to see Mr. Petersen either as a political ideologue or as a criminal mastermind. But what if the teacher had some quirk in his
mental makeup that made him know he was doing something
wrong without being able to stop himself?
It took Sophie a long time to fall asleep.
Miss Chatterjee started class the next morning by holding her
left hand up in the air, fist clenched, and asking the girls to
guess what she was holding.
“It has something to do with what we’re learning this
week,” she said when the girls begged for a hint.
“Is it a key?” Jean said doubtfully. “A key to a museum of
historical exhibits?”
Miss Chatterjee shook her head.
“A coin,” Fiona suggested, “a coin with Napoleon’s head
on it!”
“You’ve both come close—it’s certainly a small metal
object—but you haven’t yet fastened on the right thing. . . .”
In fairy tales, two wrong answers always came before the
right one. Sophie closed her eyes for a moment and let her
mind go blank. The picture of a small metal thing swam into
view.
“It’s a bullet,” she said, opening her eyes in time to see

125

Miss Chatterjee smile as if Sophie had said something very
clever. It wasn’t at all clever, of course, just a good guess.
“It is indeed a bullet, and not just an ordinary bullet but
one that was actually fired on the battlefield at Waterloo,” the
teacher said, holding up the slug for them to look at. “It
lodged in the shoulder of our school’s founder and was
removed later on by an army surgeon; if you look closely, you
can actually see the marks of the doctor’s tweezers and the distortion that comes when soft lead meets solid flesh.”
Some of the girls looked sick.
“Yes, stomach-turning, isn’t it?” said Miss Chatterjee.
“But we mustn’t be high-minded about violence. If we woke
up tomorrow and the world had no more use for top-quality
munitions, the days of the Hanseatic League would be numbered. But how does Scotland reconcile its identity as a leading exporter of arms and explosives with its commitment to
peace?”
There was a long silence. It took some nerve for Sophie to
speak up, but she felt she had to.
“Is that a rhetorical question, Miss Chatterjee, or a real
one?” she asked.
“A real one,” said Miss Chatterjee, her voice silkier than
ever.
Sophie took a deep breath and readied herself to talk the
thing through. “Arms are compatible with peace,” she said

126

slowly, “because we’ve adopted a philosophy of deterrence. If
there are two great powers, and each one can release enough
force to destroy the other, it produces a stalemate.”
“If we start bombing each other,” said Priscilla, “people
are going to die. Lots of people.”
Sophie saw Nan’s face go quite pale. She must be thinking
of her brothers.
“When we observe Waterloo Day, let’s say, as we will do
this weekend,” said Miss Chatterjee, tilting her head to one
side as she looked at the class, “how do we orient ourselves
toward the war dead?”
“We celebrate their sacrifice,” said Harriet.
“We mourn their loss,” Fiona added, her fair, freckled
skin flushing with embarrassment at having said something
that might sound pompous.
“How do you think it looked, then, to the Duke of
Wellington that day in June, a hundred and twenty-three years
ago?” Miss Chatterjee said, her voice quiet and passionate.
“Say you’re Wellington, in charge of the Allied Army. You’re
a few days away from what you already suspect will be a decisive engagement, one that will determine whether you crush
Napoleon and preserve Britain’s status as the world’s great
imperial power or instead precipitate the long slow loss of
English sovereignty in years to come.”
“You’d do anything to stop him,” Sophie said, her voice

127

sounding too loud in her ears.
“And what if you were Wellington,” said Miss Chatterjee,
“and a time traveler from the future arrived in your tent the
night before the battle and told you that you could save tens
of thousands of lives by retreating?”
“When it comes to a decision like that,” Nan said, “a
general couldn’t listen even to a very respectable time traveler.
It would be treason. Besides, if history had unfolded differently, Wellington might have actually beaten Napoleon at
Waterloo. Imagine: Scotland and England might still be one
country, and the Austro-Hungarian Empire a major European
power. Why, by now the world might have achieved universal
peace!”
They all sat for a moment contemplating Nan’s vision of
world peace.
“Might one lesson of Waterloo, then,” said the teacher
softly, “be that a heroic but ultimately self-defeating gesture,
though it may guarantee the deaths of many thousands of
men, is sometimes preferable to diplomatic means as a way of
resolving conflicts between nations?”
But Miss Chatterjee was a pacifist! She couldn’t be saying
this.
“It sounds as though you’re suggesting that war is sometimes more effective than peace,” Nan said, her outrage audible. “That’s certainly what I think, Miss Chatterjee, but you’ve

128

always wanted us to believe that peace is better than war!”
Her eyes accused Miss Chatterjee of betrayal.
“It is not my job,” said Miss Chatterjee, raising one eyebrow, “to indoctrinate you in the ideology to which I personally subscribe.”
“But you’re a pacifist! That’s not an ideology, it’s a belief,”
said Fiona, clearly at least as crushed as Sophie and Nan.
“Pacifism is an ideology like any other,” said the teacher,
“and you would do well to remember it. Four sides, please, for
tomorrow, on the lessons of Waterloo for our own time.”

129

a

T w e lv e

F

OR THE SAKE OF THE

war-preparedness effort, Miss

Henchman had recently decreed that all fifth- and
sixth-form girls must have regular driving lessons.

Sophie’s first session fell that Tuesday afternoon. As she and a
handful of other girls waited in front of school, Miss
Chatterjee drew up in her dashing Crossley roadster.
Sophie would have loved to go for a drive with Miss
Chatterjee, but a mantle of shyness held her back. When Miss
Chatterjee patted the seat next to her, a sixth-form girl hopped
in; the teacher tooted the horn at the rest of them and drove
off.
Miss Henchman herself pulled up next in a sedate black
Austin and was joined by Fiona.

130

As the next few cars came by and girls jumped in and
drove off, Sophie’s hands grew clammy. It was a relief not to
have to go with Miss Henchman, but what if they ran out of
teachers?
Sophie and another fifth-form girl called Jenny were the
last ones standing when two cars pulled up in quick succession. Jenny got into the first, a saloon driven by Matron, and
Sophie found herself—oh heavenly good fortune!—climbing
into the passenger seat of Mr. Petersen’s adorable little bottlegreen PG.
“Hello, Sophie,” he said as he pulled back out into the
road. “I thought I’d drive us out toward Arthur’s Seat, and
then we’ll switch places and you can take a turn or two around
the hill. The thing for today is to begin getting a feel for the
machine; it’ll be fairly deserted out there at this time of day, so
you needn’t worry much about other cars.”
It was both thrilling and terrifying, Sophie discovered, to
find herself alone in a car with the object of her affections.
Fortunately she didn’t have to look directly at Mr. Petersen.
He had rolled up his shirtsleeves, and her gaze fell to the veins
and muscles of his forearms. People talked utter rubbish
about the differences between men’s and women’s minds, but
it was hard not to be struck with the difference between their
hands.
She would die if he ever found out about her crush!

131

All too quickly they reached the lower slopes of Arthur’s
Seat. The road up the hill was barely wide enough for two cars
to pass. As Mr. Petersen pulled over in the Cat’s Nick lay-by,
Sophie fervently hoped they wouldn’t meet a car coming in
the opposite direction.
Terror at the idea of operating the motorcar suddenly
pushed everything else out of her head. What if she crashed
it? A small whimper came out of her throat.
Mr. Petersen politely pretended he hadn’t heard.
“You won’t find it difficult, you know, Sophie,” he told
her as they got out of the car and switched seats. “Just remember, left foot on the accelerator, right foot on the brake, right
hand for the manual brake. Your left hand should always rest
on the navigation wheel.”
The car’s electrical system included a dynamo, a starter
motor, and a battery. Sophie put her hand on the plastic knob
of the starter and pulled it out as far as it would go. Then she
took a deep breath, released the knob, and felt the car’s motor
spring to life.
“Harder on the accelerator. That’s right, rev it a bit. Feel
the power?”
Sophie experimented with different levels of acceleration.
It was certainly comforting to think of the hand brake holding
the car in place even if she did something stupid.
“All right, let the hand brake go. Go on. You know, the

132

car’s not going to run away with you, you can take it a bit
faster than that. . . .”
Once she had pulled out of the lay-by and around the first
corner, Sophie relaxed a little. Mr. Petersen continued to talk,
a stream of babble that calmed Sophie down rather than
teaching her anything she didn’t already know.
“Most motorcars in Scotland are powered by fuel cells. A
fuel cell is similar to a battery, except that whereas batteries
run down, you can keep fuel cells going indefinitely by pumping in more chemicals. Thomas Edison invented this particular version in the 1880s; you put in hydrogen and oxygen, and
the cell converts them into electricity, the only by-product
being perfectly pure drinking water.”
Sophie had a moment of panic when she pressed the
accelerator by accident instead of the brake and the car surged
forward, but Mr. Petersen didn’t stop his monologue, and she
soon calmed down again.
“Ironically, given that Edison was an American, his invention never really caught on over there. You’ll find a few fuelcell enthusiasts in the Americas, of course, but most of their
motorcars are powered by a filthy and wasteful method called
internal combustion. All very well if you’re an American sitting on top of huge petroleum reserves, but that kind of reckless consumption doesn’t suggest a very sensible attitude
toward the future!”

133

Mr. Petersen proved better at teaching practical things
than abstract ones. He did not object when Sophie asked him
to draw a diagram to clarify the principle behind the threepoint turn or get angry when she couldn’t make the car go in
reverse.
“It’s an old car, and the transmission’s a bit dodgy,” he
said. “I’ve been meaning to take it in to be serviced. Consider
this a useful reminder.”
After an hour and a half, Mr. Petersen checked his watch.
“Ready to drive us back to school?” he asked.
“No!” Sophie said. Her hands were aching with the strain
of holding the navigation wheel, and the muscles in her legs
felt extremely shaky.
If only she hadn’t had to concentrate so hard on driving!
It certainly wasn’t at all what the phrase romantic tête-à-tête
brought to mind.
“Sophie, I’m disappointed in you! I thought you had a
more adventurous spirit. I’ll take over, shall I?”
“Thank you,” Sophie said.
They switched seats and drove back toward school.
“I hope we’ll have time for another lesson before the end
of term,” Mr. Petersen said.
Oh, he must think Sophie a complete idiot for being so
tongue-tied! She forced out a few words at exactly the same
moment as Mr. Petersen started speaking again.

134

“I’d like that—”
“I’ve been meaning to ask—”
The wheel jerked in the teacher’s hands and they narrowly
missed hitting a lady crossing the road at the corner.
As the lady shook her fist at them, Sophie suddenly realized that Mr. Petersen was at least as nervous as she was.
“Good thing I wasn’t the one driving just now, eh, Mr.
Petersen?” she said, hoping her voice didn’t sound too quavery. “What were you about to ask me?”
“I’m looking for someone to help me for a few hours a
week in the laboratory,” he said hurriedly, his eyes fixed on the
road. “Would you be willing to put in some time reorganizing
the supplies in the balance room?”
This was so much the kind of invitation that Sophie
received in her daydreams, she was afraid at first she must
have misheard him.
“Would I?” she said.
But Mr. Petersen was shaking his head.
“What am I thinking? Of course you wouldn’t. You’re
probably absolutely swamped with work between now and
finals—forget I ever mentioned it; I’m sure I can find someone
else—you must think I’m a thoughtless idiot—”
“No,” said Sophie, finding her voice, “that wasn’t what I
meant at all. Oh, please let me do it!”
“Are you sure, Sophie?” said Mr. Petersen. Sophie

135

thought he sounded both guilty and relieved. “I’m confident
you’re the best one for the job,” he went on, “but the last thing
I want is to put you in a difficult position. I won’t think any
less of you if you say you won’t do it, you know.”
“I really want to do it!” Sophie said. She would simply die
if he refused her services out of misguided scruples.
“Well, if you’re sure, I’m going to accept,” said Mr.
Petersen in an apologetic manner, “but you can always back
out later if you find the arrangement’s more trouble than it’s
worth. When will be the best time for you to fit the work in?
Tuesdays and Thursdays, perhaps?”
Inwardly glowing, Sophie agreed to meet him at half past
two on Thursday afternoon. This must have been what he
meant to ask her the morning the bomb went off. Surely Mr.
Petersen was the kindest and most gentle person imaginable!
By now they were back at school. Mr. Petersen let Sophie
out at the side door and drove off.

136

a

T h i rt e e n

“D

ID

MR. PETERSEN

REVEAL

his dark secrets while

ayou were in the car together, Sophie?” said
Priscilla.

Sophie grunted a denial and kept her head buried in her
history textbook.
“Perhaps Sophie used her feminine wiles to get him to tell
her about the bombings?” Jean added.
“What feminine wiles?” countered Priscilla.
Both girls went into fits of laughter.
While Sophie tried hard to ignore them, a knock came at
the study door. Jean opened it, letting in one of the younger
students.
“I’ve got a message for Sophie,” said the girl, eyes fixed on

137

the floor. Sophie took the folded note from her hand and
began reading.
“Where did you get this?” she asked the little girl.
“From a boy,” the girl said. “He came up to the fence at
the back of the playground and called me over to him. When
I told him we weren’t allowed to receive messages from boys,
he said he was a good friend of yours and that Matters of the
Utmost Importance depended on your getting it.”
“What did he look like?” Sophie asked, ignoring the others’ snickering.
“Tall and fair, I suppose,” said the child doubtfully. “Oh,
and he sounded as if he might be a tiny bit foreign, though he
had very good English.”
“Thank you,” said Sophie. “If you see that boy again
tomorrow, tell him I’ll be there when he says. Not a word to
any of the teachers, mind.”
“Oh, no,” said the little girl, looking absolutely terrified.
As soon as she had gone, the others demanded to know
what was going on.
“It’s a friend of mine,” she said reluctantly. “You know,
that Hanseatic boy I see sometimes at the professor’s house,
the housekeeper’s nephew.”
“Sophie, you never said anything about a boy!” Nan said.
“You were supposed to go to the professor for language lessons, not for secret assignations!”

138

“Don’t be such a bad sport, Nan!” Priscilla said. Priscilla
was often accused of being boy-crazy while Sophie was
famous for not being interested in boys, so it was natural for
her to leap at the possibility of Sophie coming over to the boyliking side of things. “I think it shows real initiative, Sophie,
going off like that to meet a boy. Are you in love with him?”
“Of course not,” Sophie snapped. “Mikael’s my friend.”
She couldn’t stop herself from blushing. “It’s not what you
think,” she added helplessly.
“Sophie’s meeting a boy!” Priscilla crowed. “Sophie, is he
desperately in love with you?”
“No, he’s not,” said Sophie, hating how stiff she sounded.
How nice it would be if someone was desperately in love with
her—but it seemed a wildly unlikely prospect, and Mikael had
certainly never thought of such a thing. “Mikael does want me
to meet him tomorrow at four o’clock in the groundsman’s
shed,” she said. “You’ll help me do it, won’t you?”
In the end, though Sophie waited in the shed for more
than half an hour, Mikael never came. How maddening of
him to be so careless about the time! She would be in hot
water if she didn’t hurry back to the dormitory, and think of
how mortifying to have to explain to the others that she’d
been stood up.
Beneath the irritation, though, Sophie felt a twinge of
worry. What if something had happened to Mikael?

139

***
It was with a horrible sense of inevitability at supper that
Sophie looked up to see a pair of uniformed police constables
enter the refectory.
A teacher pointed toward Sophie, and a moment later
they began to move in her direction. For one frightening
moment she was sure they had come to arrest her for breaking
the out-of-bounds rule, before realizing how preposterous
that was.
Sophie was still chewing a stringy mouthful of gristle
when the constables stopped on the other side of the table.
“Sophie Hunter?”
Sophie nodded.
The other girls at the table stared. Priscilla reached for
Sophie’s hand and squeezed it in reassurance.
“I’m WPC Taylor and this is my colleague PC Martin,”
the woman constable said. “We’ve been sent to fetch you
down to the central police station. We believe you may be in a
position to clear up certain aspects of the story told by a young
man who was apprehended earlier this afternoon at the
Balmoral Hotel.”
Sophie folded her napkin and set it beside her plate, carefully adjusting the knife and fork. Her legs felt trembly when
she pushed the chair back from the long table and stood up.
“My friend’s not a thief,” she said urgently. “He—”

140

“Oh, it’s not a question of burglary,” said the other constable, smacking his lips. “The boy was found standing over a
dead body. He’s a murder suspect.”
Murder!
“Mikael would never—,” Sophie began to protest.
The woman constable laid a hand on her shoulder to
silence her.
“No names, please,” she said, glaring at her partner as if
he’d already given too much away. “The investigation has
been turned over to the antiterror squad, and as far as they’re
concerned, the less said the better.”
Whatever could the antiterror squad want with Mikael?
This was worse than Sophie could possibly have imagined.
“Because you’re a minor,” the constable added, “you’ll
need an adult to come with you to the station.”
Sophie looked helplessly around her. The teachers all
looked as stunned at the girls.
Then Miss Chatterjee stepped forward.
“I will accompany Sophie,” she said. “Miss Hopkins, will
you please tell Miss Henchman where we have gone?”
“When will you be back?” asked the biology mistress.
“We can’t guarantee the girl won’t be needed for a considerable amount of time,” said the constable ominously.
“Nonsense,” Miss Chatterjee said with great firmness.
“Sophie must be back at school by ten o’clock at the very

141

latest. If you need her for longer, it’ll simply have to wait until
tomorrow. You can’t keep the child hanging about the police
station until all hours. In fact, it occurs to me that we might be
well advised to wait until tomorrow in any case, and to telephone the school solicitor in the meantime.”
The woman constable flinched at the word solicitor. “That
won’t be necessary, madam,” she said, her manner more conciliatory than before. “There’s no question of Miss Hunter
being considered a suspect. But this is a matter of national
security, and it’s essential we resolve matters as soon as we
can.”
“Very well, then,” said Miss Chatterjee. “Perhaps I’ll just
mention, though, that our headmistress is quite close to the
advocate general; I hope she will not feel any need to call upon
that friendship.”
Then, as the constables stood speechless, she added,
“Well? What are we hanging about here for? I received a distinct impression of there being no time to waste.”
She turned her head and gave Sophie an almost imperceptible wink, a gesture of solidarity that brought tears to Sophie’s
eyes.

142

a

F o u rt e e n

T

HE POLICE CAR WAITED

outside, a massive black

Wolseley. Sophie and Miss Chatterjee were put in the
backseat behind a metal grille. When Sophie tested

the handle, the door wouldn’t open from the inside.
After they passed the Balmoral Hotel, Sophie knew they
couldn’t be headed to the central police station in Conan
Doyle Close. It would be the Castle, and that meant they really
were serious about this national security business. Beads of
sweat stood out on her forehead, and she was afraid for a
minute that she might actually be sick.
They drove in silence across North Bridge into the Old
Town. Just before Castlehill, the car pulled off the road into a
secure lot, and the woman constable let Sophie and Miss

143

Chatterjee out of the car. They walked together across the
esplanade and right up to the main gate, where four soldiers
with machine guns stood at attention.
After passing through a series of gates and checkpoints,
they came to Crown Square, the most secure section of the
entire complex, where another team of armed guards searched
them for hidden weapons. Even Miss Chatterjee seemed to
quail a little as they followed the circuitous path from the
Great Hall to the Vaults, which had housed prisoners of war
since the eighteenth century and had been lately modernized at great expense as a high-security facility for holding
terrorists.
They passed through a warren of empty graffiti-covered
cells and then a long underground tunnel.
Passing through an austere waiting room, they were ushered into a spacious room decorated disconcertingly like
something out of a luxury ocean liner, including a chrome
drinks cabinet, a set of angular couches covered in red leather
substitute, and a white fur rug.
The man whose office it was saw Sophie scanning the interior and laughed.
“Yes, it’s a distinctly peculiar style, isn’t it?” he said, grinning at her. Sophie sensed him turning on his charm to warm
her up; it made her bristle with irritation and inward resistance. “Particularly in a Gothic hulk like the Castle!”

144

Though his manner annoyed Sophie, the officer was
extremely handsome, with dark hair and a toothbrush mustache exactly like the one worn by the current European
chancellor. Unlike the chancellor, who was never photographed except in military uniform, he wore a casual dark
lounge suit and shiny leather shoes. He missed being dropdead gorgeous only because of legs too short in proportion
to his top half.
If war were to be declared, Sophie thought, he would definitely have to shave the mustache.
“I’m Commander Brown, by the way,” the man added, in
the annoying English drawl lots of Scottish officers still used
as a matter of course. Great-aunt Tabitha said that Scottish
people who spoke with an English accent should be repatriated south of the border and see how they liked it.
The commander reached his hand out, and Sophie
shook it.
“You’re Sophie Hunter, of course, and the lady with
you—”
“Mira Chatterjee,” the teacher said.
He held out his hand again, but Miss Chatterjee did not
reciprocate, and after a moment he pulled his arm back.
“Sophie—do you mind if I call you that?—you’re here
this evening because we need your help. Your friend Mikael
was found this afternoon at the Balmoral Hotel standing

145

over the dead body of a Mrs. Euphemia Tansy, whom I
believe to have been a medium of your acquaintance. I
hasten to say that after a brief initial misunderstanding, we
quickly abandoned any idea of Mikael’s being an active suspect in the medium’s murder. But we’ve got a strong feeling
he hasn’t told us everything, out of some mistaken motive of
chivalry.”
“Mikael’s not chivalrous,” Sophie said, too giddy with
relief to be polite. The constables must have lied about
Mikael’s being a suspect in order to make her more afraid.
“Mikael wouldn’t want to get a friend in trouble, it’s true, but
he gave you my name, didn’t he? He’s not completely lacking
in common sense!”
“Yes, and we’re grateful for it,” the commander said. His
barely concealed impatience made Sophie feel suddenly rather
frightened. “But all the boy would say was that you’d had
some kind of a run-in with the woman, and that he’d promised to find out whether someone had put her up to it.”
“But that’s just right,” Sophie said. She didn’t understand
what else he wanted to know. “It’s exactly what happened.
Mikael wants to be a private investigator when he grows up,
and since he’s here on holiday with nothing much to do, he
said he’d look into it for me.”
The commander exhaled loudly, then pressed his fingers
to the bridge of his nose. Sophie felt an intense surge of dis-

146

like for the man. Surely he did not need to show quite so
clearly that he thought her a troublesome encumbrance to his
inquiry!
“You don’t seem to understand the difficulty, Sophie,” he
said, speaking, Sophie thought, as though to a mentally deficient ten-year-old. “Mrs. Tansy was a distinctly suspicious
character. She happened to be on the government payroll, like
any number of other spiritualists, but we think she may also
have been taking money from several other parties, including
the Nobel Consortium and possibly even the Brothers of the
Northern Liberties. We’ve had her under surveillance for
some time, but she eluded our team several weeks ago in a
department store in Princes Street, and by the time my man
reached her home, she’d absconded—she must have planned
it in advance. We saw neither hide nor hair of her until she
turned up with her throat cut in a suite at the Balmoral. Help
me out, Sophie. What on earth had an ordinary schoolgirl like
yourself to do with that b—”
A look from Miss Chatterjee prevented him from using a
word he would regret, and he ended simply by clearing his
throat.
“Your friend Mikael,” he added, “doesn’t seem to have a
very clear idea of how it came about that you met her.”
“It was at my great-aunt’s house,” Sophie said. “Didn’t
Mikael tell you?”

147

“Sophie’s great-aunt,” interrupted Miss Chatterjee, “is
Miss Tabitha Hunter.”
The commander’s head jerked around.
“Miss Tabitha Hunter,” he said slowly, failing to conceal
his surprise, “president of the Scottish Society for Psychical
Research?”
“Oh, I see,” said Sophie suddenly. “Mikael would only
know her as Great-aunt Tabitha, not as Tabitha Hunter, and
besides, he’s probably never heard of her, not being Scottish.
I mean, she’s quite well known in Edinburgh—”
“Indeed,” the commander muttered under his breath.
“—but not in Denmark, where Mikael’s from.”
“A séance at Miss Tabitha Hunter’s, and Mrs. Tansy no
doubt the distinguished medium,” the commander said meditatively.
Though it did not sound like a question, Sophie answered
as if it had been.
“Yes, that’s right,” she said. “And she said some very odd
things—I can’t really describe it, but there was something off
about the whole business. I couldn’t get it out of my mind. So
when Mikael offered to help me find out more about her, it
seemed like the perfect solution. Was—was her throat really
cut?”
Commander Brown made a graphic sweep with his
hand across his throat, and Sophie thought she had never

148

disliked anyone so much in her life.
Miss Chatterjee frowned. During Sophie’s last words she
had taken a small diary from her handbag and written a few
notes with a silver pencil.
“That gesture was quite inappropriate, Commander,” she
said. “Do you intend to hold the boy overnight, or have you
finished with him? I think Sophie might like to see he’s all
right before we go.”
“And who’s to say we’ve finished with Sophie, let alone
with the boy?” said the commander in a menacing way. “It’s
within my mandate to keep the girl here for seventy-two
hours, so long as I notify her guardian and allow her to speak
to an advocate.”
“An empty threat,” said Miss Chatterjee, rising and tipping her head at Sophie to let her know she should stand.
“Sophie’s told you what she knows. You can find her during
the week at school or at her aunt’s on the weekend. In either
case, I suggest you telephone in advance.”
The commander raised an eyebrow, but said nothing.
“My other suggestion,” the teacher continued, “is that you
release the boy at once. I believe that under the Hamburg
Convention of 1919, you need a judge’s warrant to hold a
Hanseatic national overnight without legal representation.”
The commander’s jaw dropped.
“Ah, I thought you might have forgotten about that

149

provision,” Miss Chatterjee said. “I can assure you, however,
that the other states in the League take it very seriously,
especially in the case of a minor. If necessary, of course, I will
telephone my friend at the Danish embassy first thing tomorrow morning to tell him you are in breach of the agreement.”
The commander’s face suddenly relaxed. He laughed and
stood up.
“Miss Chatterjee, anyone foolish enough to tangle with
you will doubtless find a formidable adversary. Happily in this
case we’re on the same side. All I want is to put a stop to the
bombings, and occasionally this leads me to measures of
which you doubtless disapprove. The boy is being held in a
cell here in the Vaults, but one of the subalterns has already
telephoned his aunt and asked her to come and get him. When
she arrives, he will be released into her custody. You’re welcome to see him now, if you like.”
He picked up the telephone and spoke a few words to the
aide, who appeared a minute later and took them back out
into the waiting room, where he offered them tea or coffee.
When they declined, he vanished.
Sophie turned to Miss Chatterjee as soon as they were
alone, and opened her mouth to speak. Miss Chatterjee
pressed a finger to her lips and rolled her eyes at the ceiling.
“You mean—listening devices?” Sophie said stupidly.
Miss Chatterjee nodded and Sophie fell silent.

150

Fifteen minutes later, the aide reappeared at the head of a
retinue that included Mikael and four armed guards.
“Sophie!” Mikael said. “I had to give them your name,
there was no way around it. I hope you’re not in too much
trouble—I know you’re not much used to it.”
Sophie ignored Miss Chatterjee’s grim amusement. “Don’t
worry about that,” she said, tormented by the idea of what
Mikael had just gone through on her account.
She was afraid to go closer while the guards’ semiautomatic machine guns remained on him. Now, as if reading her
mind, one of the guards used the ring of keys at his waist to
free the boy’s hands from their shackles.
“You’re free to go, sir,” said the aide, “as soon as your
aunt gets here, but the commander thought you might like a
word first with Miss Hunter.”
There was nowhere, really, to have a private conversation,
but after looking at Miss Chatterjee for permission, Sophie led
Mikael to one end of the bench.
Mikael looked pale and exhausted and somehow younger
than the last time she’d seen him. His skin had a whitish green
pallor under the lights of the Vaults, and he looked as diminished as a newly shorn sheep.
“Was it awful?” Sophie whispered, not sure if she was asking about the cells or the dead body.
“Oh, Sophie, I’m so glad you didn’t have to see her,” said

151

Mikael, burying his face in his hands. “She was just lying there
in a pool of blood with her throat gaping open. . . .”
Sophie felt sick. She remembered the shadow like a
wound on Mrs. Tansy’s neck the night of the séance. Greataunt Tabitha would have called it a premonition.
“I don’t blame the first officers on the scene for thinking
I’d done it,” Mikael said, uncovering his face, though he still
wouldn’t catch Sophie’s eye. “It looked awfully bad, but of
course as soon as they saw there wasn’t any blood on me, they
knew I couldn’t have done it.”
“How did it happen that you were there?” Sophie asked.
“Well, I did quite a bit of footwork, and after talking to
what must have been twenty different cabdrivers and visiting
a dozen or more hotels, I finally tracked her down at the
Balmoral. I wangled an appointment—she may have been
staying there under another name, but everyone knew she was
a medium, and she was certainly still receiving clients. That’s
when I sent you the note. I thought I’d be able to tell you all
about the meeting by the time I saw you; I was going to surprise you. You did get my note, didn’t you?”
“Yes, and there I was, cursing you for forgetting about our
appointment! Oh, Mikael, I’m so sorry,” Sophie said, pounding his arm with one fist and wiping the tears from her eyes
with her other hand. “Are you sure you’re all right?” she went
on when he didn’t say anything. “You look awful!”

152

“I think I had a very near miss,” said Mikael slowly. “I
went up to her room at one o’clock, as we’d arranged, and she
actually let me in herself and called room service to order
lunch for the two of us.”
“I don’t understand,” said Sophie. “Wasn’t she dead when
you got there?”
“No,” said Mikael, “it was much worse than that. While
she was on the telephone, a knock came at the door. She
looked rather frightened and motioned at me to hide. I threw
myself into the wardrobe, feeling pretty silly. Once I’d got in,
she actually locked the door from the outside!”
“You were locked in?” Sophie said. “But—”
“I can’t tell you exactly what happened next,” he said. “I
heard her open the door to the room. Before she’d said more
than a few words, though, I heard all sorts of noises: a thud as
she fell to the ground, I expect, and some cries and blows and
then a horrible gurgling sound. I think the intruder must have
cut her throat. Naturally I started pounding on the door of the
wardrobe and calling for someone to let me out, but the murderer had vanished by the time I kicked open the door.”
“You could have been killed!”
“But I wasn’t,” Mikael said somberly. “It was she who was
killed. It was completely vile, Sophie! And then the room service waiter got there, and he telephoned for the police, and it
took a lot of time to clear things up.”

153

“We did right by you, though, didn’t we, sir?” said one of
the guards.
Sophie had forgotten they must be listening in. She looked
up now at the guard, who smiled. Miss Chatterjee was standing in the corner and attending closely to everything that
passed between Sophie and Mikael.
“Yes, certainly, Sergeant Fettes,” said Mikael, standing up
and shaking hands with each guard in turn. “Can I have my
things back again?” he added.
The aide disappeared and came back a few minutes later
with the duty clerk and a medium-sized metal box.
“One key, a ten-shilling note, two shillings and threepence
in coin, one pair of shoelaces, one pocketknife, three safety
pins, a length of fishing line,” the clerk read out from a form.
Mikael signed the form, swept most of the things into the
front pocket of his trousers, then knelt to feed the laces
through the eyes of his boots. His hands were shaking.
Mrs. Lundberg arrived just then, the worried-looking professor in tow, and pounced on Mikael with a little scream.
Minutes later they all found themselves thankfully outside
the Castle walls.
“Mikael, you look done in,” his aunt scolded. “And whatever will your mother say? She’ll be furious with me for not
doing a better job at keeping you out of trouble.”
“Mrs. Lundberg,” said Sophie, feeling quite sick with the

154

need to confess, “you must know that it’s all my fault. It was
because of something I asked Mikael to do that he ended up
in this mess. I am so sorry and I beg your forgiveness, I really
do.”
Miss Chatterjee looked mildly pleased at Sophie’s taking
responsibility for the whole thing, but Mikael’s aunt shook her
head. “I’m sure you’re very sorry, Sophie,” she said, “but I
wish you’d thought of this beforehand and been more careful.”
“Don’t be angry with Sophie!” Mikael said, tugging on his
aunt’s hand.
“I’m fed up with both of you, that’s the long and short of
it,” said his aunt, “and don’t expect me to forgive either of you
before next Thursday at the very earliest.”
She climbed into the front seat of the professor’s car.
“Mikael, get in the back,” said the professor. “Sophie, I
believe that was an invitation. We hope to see you at teatime
on Thursday next week, just as usual. Will you be all right getting home?”
“Yes,” said Sophie. “Miss Chatterjee will take care of me.”
“We’ll drive the girl home,” added the woman constable,
who had reappeared as they passed out through the gate into
the esplanade.
Sophie and Miss Chatterjee were back at school by ten
o’clock, whereupon the teacher sat Sophie in a chair and gave

155

her a thorough dressing-down.
“I hope you know the trouble you’ve caused,” she said. “I
have ahead of me what will no doubt be a long and unpleasant conversation with Miss Henchman, one in which I fear I’ll
be hard put to persuade her not to suspend you. And yet I suspect that Miss Henchman is the least of your worries.”
Sophie didn’t know what to say.
“Thank you,” she finally said. “Thanks for coming with
me tonight, and for knowing how to talk to that awful man.”
“That type,” said Miss Chatterjee disdainfully, “will never
understand why he is not so prepossessing as he thinks.”
“You’re my hero,” said Sophie.
The teacher gave a wry smile, as if it pained her.
“Heroism is a fairy-tale concept, Sophie,” she said, her
voice sharper than before. “The real world corrupts everything it touches. Don’t make me out to be anything more or
less than a real and quite imperfect person.”
Though the others were all agog to hear what had happened, Sophie used the excuse of it being after lights-out to
postpone explanations until the next day. She fell asleep
almost at once, her dreams haunted by the bulky shape of a
female body splayed out in a pool of blood.

156

a

Fifteen

A

T

HERIOT ROW

ON

Friday evening Sophie suffered

athrough a lecture from Great-aunt Tabitha that was
a an almost exact reprise of one she had received from

Miss Henchman the day before, and on Saturday morning she
presented herself in the hallway in the regulation white dress
that all the girls wore to the Waterloo Day celebrations at
school. Great-aunt Tabitha had booked a taxi for nine thirty.
When they got to school, she paid the driver and escorted
Sophie to the playground, rigged up for the occasion as a kind
of amphitheater. There she plowed through the crowd to a
pair of seats in the area cordoned off for Very Important
Visitors, Sophie trailing in her wake. As a member of the
school’s board of governors, Great-aunt Tabitha was entitled

157

to sit here, but Sophie would have preferred to join the other
fifth-form girls and their parents. Jean and Priscilla waved at
her from across the way, but she saw several other girls pointing her out to their families, and the feeling of being stared at
was not at all pleasant.
Once everyone had taken their seats, the school orchestra
fell silent, and Miss Henchman stepped up to the podium.
Seated behind her on the platform were half a dozen visiting
dignitaries, including a figure whom Sophie recognized only
when Great-aunt Tabitha gave a quiet hiccup of indignation.
It was the minister of public safety, their war-loving dinner
guest from the week before. Sophie couldn’t see Nicholas
Mood on the platform but felt sure he must be lurking nearby.
The headmistress gave the same speech every year.
Sophie’s attention began to drift, and Great-aunt Tabitha took
out a tablet and began jotting down notes for a forthcoming
lecture to the Glasgow College of Psychical Science.
Half asleep, Sophie realized that Miss Henchman was
introducing a second speaker. It was the minister herself!
“I am indebted to your headmistress for this wonderful
opportunity,” said Joanna Murchison. “Waterloo . . . we associate the word with the deaths of men who gave up their lives
to keep this country safe. To our neighbors on the Continent,
though, the word’s a synonym for Nemesis, something that
might stop a respected adversary in his tracks. Schoolchildren

158

in France are taught that Wellington ‘met his Waterloo’ on the
eighteenth of June in the year 1815.
“Speaking to you now,” the minister continued, “exactly a
hundred and twenty-three years after that defeat, I say that it
is time for us to reclaim Waterloo for ourselves: to embrace
the idea that we may engage European troops once more on
European soil, and that this time, not we but they will meet
their Waterloo!”
The crowd had begun to mutter, but the minister continued speaking. “Only one thing will let us reclaim the legacy of
Waterloo. We must meet the combined forces of the
European Federation on the battlefield, and we must beat
them!”
The noise in the audience rose. A small disturbance had
broken out in the aisle leading up to the speakers’ platform.
Suddenly something very low to the ground shot out past the
front row, and a small squat figure swung up the metal scaffolding onto the platform itself. It was the Veteran. He had
made his way on his low wheeled cart past the security detail,
and as the audience looked on, he grasped the minister’s legs
and pulled her to the ground, calling out all the while a string
of words that sounded to Sophie like “Where’s my money?”
Within seconds the guards reached the platform and tore
the assailant off the minister, who got to her feet, looking
shaken but not hurt. She was immediately surrounded by four

159

of the bodyguards, and there was Nicko giving his arm to her
and leaning over to whisper something in her ear. They all
began to move at once, and in a flash she had been whisked
away into a bulletproof chauffeured car.
Meanwhile several other security officers had hauled the
Veteran away, and a minute later the only trace of the assailant
was the overturned dolly, its wheels spinning uselessly in the
air.
After a brief consultation behind the podium, Miss
Henchman stepped up to the voice-broadcasting system.
“Ladies and gentlemen, do not be alarmed,” she said,
sounding self-important. “The man who just accosted the
minister is a local vagrant with a grudge against the government. The minister was never in any real danger, but unfortunately the security staff have decided she must leave at once.
Sorry as we are to be deprived of the rest of what promised to
be a remarkably rousing speech, we must put the minister’s
safety before our own enjoyment. A round of applause for the
minister!”
Her request prompted only sporadic clapping, perhaps
due to the suggestion that the minister’s safety mattered more
than everybody else’s.
“I always said Joanna hadn’t any spine,” said Great-aunt
Tabitha after the school song and the moment of silence. They
stood in a pocket of stillness amid a mad rush for refresh-

160

ments. “Sophie, I simply can’t afford to take the time to negotiate that tea tent, and I don’t want to leave you here without
a chaperone, not after what happened the other day. You’re to
come with me now to IRYLNS, and while we’re there, I
expect you to keep your eyes open and your mouth shut.”
IRYLNS? Sophie had always wondered what IRYLNS
was like. It was a pity her curiosity would only be satisfied as
a sort of penalty for misbehavior.
They got into one of the taxis waiting outside the school.
Great-aunt Tabitha asked the driver to stop in front of the
Braid Institute for Neurohypnosis in Buccleugh Place, near
the university. The cabbie had sized up Sophie’s great-aunt as
soon as they got into the cab and shook his head with resignation when she didn’t give him a tip.
As the car pulled away, Great-aunt Tabitha took Sophie’s
hand and virtually dragged her ten yards further along the
pavement to the front door of an ordinary-looking house next
to the Braid Institute, a door whose brass plaque read

ADAM

SMITH COLLEGE.

Great-aunt Tabitha rapped the knocker, which was decorated with a knobbly pair of hemispheres like the meat of a
walnut. Just as Sophie realized they were bronze casts of the
halves of the human brain, the door opened to admit them,
and she had no time to puzzle out the meaning of this sinister
icon.

161

a

Sixteen

PRETTY GIRL IN A NURSE’S

A

uniform escorted them

adown a long corridor to a pair of bolted doors at
a the back of the building.

“Have you permission to bring in the girl, Miss Hunter?”
she asked.
“Not yet,” said Great-aunt Tabitha. “I suppose you’ll have
to telephone Dr. Ferrier and see if it’s all right?”
“I’m sorry, Miss Hunter, but the rules are quite clear
regarding visitors, and I couldn’t—”
“Yes, yes,” said Great-aunt Tabitha. “I wrote the instructions myself, and I’m well aware you could lose your job for
letting anyone in without the proper authorization. Well, get
on with it then, why don’t you? We haven’t got all day.”

162

The girl dithered for a minute, then hurried back the way
they’d come.
Great-aunt Tabitha tapped her foot with irritation, then
turned to Sophie, who tried to erase the puzzlement from her
face. Why were they here, and what was Adam Smith College?
“What are you thinking?” her great-aunt asked her.
“Are—this isn’t IRYLNS, is it?” said Sophie.
“Indeed it is,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, her voice neutral
at first but warming into enthusiasm. “IRYLNS represents the
fulfillment of the vision of humanity sketched out long ago by
Adam Smith in his Theory of Moral Sentiments and brought
up-to-date by modern medicine in light of a twentieth-century
understanding of the social psychology of the Enlightenment.
What a good thing—what a very good thing—that people can
now be made incomparably happier and more productive by
the rationalization of the emotions!”
Just then the breathless young nurse reappeared, full of
apologies, with the doctor’s note and a fistful of forms for
Sophie to sign. Not wanting to annoy her great-aunt by taking
the time to read through them properly, Sophie scrawled her
name at the bottom of each sheet, though it gave her a pain in
the pit of her stomach when she caught a glimpse of the
phrase Official Secrets Act.
The hallway in which they next found themselves was
bright and airy and led to an attractively furnished common

163

room looking out over the garden at the back. Girls not much
older than Sophie occupied themselves here with all kinds of
activity, several of them knitting stockings and scarves, others
winding skeins of wool into balls, and a whole row of girls in
blindfolds practicing touch typing, their machines muffled to
prevent the noise from disturbing the others. Though the
blindfolds added a bizarre touch, the sight of the girls with
their bright-colored dresses and glossy bobs was otherwise a
pretty one.
Great-aunt Tabitha strode through this hive of activity
without stopping, Sophie hurrying to keep up with her, and
turned into another hallway. At last they arrived at an office
into which Great-aunt Tabitha flew like one of the new aerial
assault drones. She barged past the receptionist in the outer
room and straight into the big inner office.
The room suffered from not having any windows, but provided one didn’t mind the bunkerlike feel, it was attractively
furnished, with clusters of delicately wrought chairs arranged
around several small circular tables and a comfortable-looking
chaise longue in the corner beside a long narrow table that evidently served as a desk.
Fearing Great-aunt Tabitha’s speed meant something ominous, Sophie relaxed when the elderly woman seated at the
desk jumped up and flew into Great-aunt Tabitha’s arms.
“Tabitha, what a delightful surprise! I didn’t like to ask

164

you to take the time on a Saturday—a national holiday—”
“Not another word,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, beaming at
her friend. “I’ve brought my niece with me today; Sophie, this
is Dr. Susan Ferrier, one of my oldest friends and a very dear
colleague.”
“Delighted to meet you, Sophie,” the doctor said, wringing Sophie’s hand with bone-cracking enthusiasm. “I’ve heard
so much about you, and it’s a great pleasure to make your
acquaintance in person; I had almost begun to feel you must
be a figment of Tab’s imagination!”
“No, Sophie’s quite real,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, sounding rather sorry that this should be so. “She’s generally a good
girl, but she got into a mess this week and I thought it time for
her to get a good look at what we do here. Show her why she’d
better keep her nose to the grindstone and earn a place at university. . . .”
Was Sophie here to be taught a lesson?
“Tabitha, Tabitha,” said the doctor, shaking her head.
“You know the work we do here has almost invariably positive
results. Most girls who go through the program benefit
immensely.”
Great-aunt Tabitha sniffed. It sounded as though they
must have had this argument before.
The doctor turned to Sophie. “You wouldn’t turn up your
nose at working for a cabinet minister, a brigadier general, a

165

museum director, or the rector of a university, would you?”
Then, when Sophie said nothing: “Would you?”
“I didn’t know it was the kind of question that wanted
answering,” Sophie said, not sure why the doctor sounded so
angry. She was starting to get a bad feeling about IRYLNS.
What weren’t they saying? “Of course I wouldn’t turn up my
nose at a job like that!”
“Almost all the young women in the civil service have
passed through our doors at one time or another,” the doctor
said huffily. “Last year we sent half a dozen girls to the office
of the prime minister himself!”
“Is that the kind of thing most girls do when they leave
IRYLNS?” Sophie asked in her most polite voice, the one she
didn’t usually use because it made her feel so smarmy and
Harriet Jeffries–like.
“Yes, indeed, and it’s very naughty of Tab to suggest you’d
be better off at university.”
“If you or I had been trained somewhere like this rather
than at university,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, not bothering to
hide her impatience, “neither of us would have been able to
contribute an iota to IRYLNS.”
“True, true, but who’s to say that would have been for the
worse?” said Dr. Ferrier, her mood sunny again. “Someone
else would have made the contributions and got the credit—
but they also serve who only stand and wait, as the poet says.

166

Besides, neither one of us was pretty enough to be a top-notch
candidate for IRYLNS!”
Though Great-aunt Tabitha greeted this remark with
hearty laughter, Sophie couldn’t see what the two things had
to do with each other. People said sometimes that someone
wasn’t pretty enough to get married, though one met some
very plain married women and some very pretty unmarried
ones. But what did prettiness have to do with being a good
secretary, which was presumably the main point of the training one received at IRYLNS?
The doctor ushered them over to one of the little tables
and used the speaking panel on the wall to order tea from the
receptionist.
“Sophie, do you know much about the work we do here?”
she asked.
Sophie confessed her ignorance.
“The name Adam Smith College isn’t just a cover story, a
red herring, or a silly joke,” said the doctor. “Adam Smith was
the first person in Scotland to come out and say explicitly that
human emotions and passions—those things that gave the
ancient Greeks so much trouble—should be redirected for the
good of the community. His ideas lie at the heart of the philosophy of the Communitarian Party, which operates on the
belief that individuals have a moral obligation to put aside
selfish desires to promote the good of the group. Thanks to

167

modern medicine, we’ve been able to take the concept several
steps further. The crucial insight—”
“Susan’s crucial insight,” Sophie’s great-aunt interjected.
“Your great-aunt’s name joins mine on most of the patents,”
the doctor told Sophie, affecting a not-very-convincing
modesty. “Tabitha’s downplaying her own role in all of this.”
Patents? What on earth could they be doing here? Feeling
equal parts confusion and alarm, Sophie paid close attention
to the woman’s next words, though they did not much clarify
things.
“It’s long been said,” said Dr. Ferrier, “that behind
every successful man stands a good woman. When people
say that, they’re usually thinking of his wife or his mother,
but in truth it’s more often a secretary or a head nurse or a
really excellent administrator who makes sure everything
runs smoothly in a man’s personal and professional life. The
ideal assistant must be cheerful, flexible, reliable, patient,
and thoughtful of others. She must also be willing to toil
without recognition, often without getting even the most
cursory thanks; Tabitha always jokes that we should institute a supplemental training scheme to teach men how to
treat our young women properly.”
“Important men don’t usually know what to do with their
negative emotions,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, “other than to
bluster at people and browbeat them and generally make

168

everyone miserable, including themselves. They also tend to
be selfish and inattentive to the needs of others. The real problem is that the women who marry them or work for them have
needs too, and when those needs go unsatisfied, everything
stops functioning.”
It sounded like the men were the real problem, not the
women. Why didn’t Dr. Ferrier and Great-aunt Tabitha
develop a scheme to make men less selfish and angry, and
leave the young women alone? Sophie’s stomach growled. It
must be almost lunchtime.
“Fortunately the central procedure we perform here—the
J and H procedure, we call it—makes that fact about human
nature completely irrelevant,” continued the doctor. “After
they undergo a modest amount of surgery and a battery of
hormonal and behavioral therapies, our girls are no longer
capable of having needs. They can’t be offended by some
imagined slight or by a pattern of overwork, neglect, and verbal abuse. They’re happy, well-adjusted workers with all their
intellect intact, and yet with none of the temperamental disadvantages—self-absorption, irritability, laziness, a tendency to
feel hard done by—that limit the utility of the common secretary. Indeed, in the cases where we see the best outcomes,
these young women are even able to become repositories for
the anger and desire of the men they work for, rather like
human lightning rods.”

169

Human lightning rods? It wasn’t a very reassuring comparison. Nicko Mood was very devoted to the minister’s interests, but he didn’t seem to serve as a repository in this way—it
must only work for male employers and female assistants.
Sophie couldn’t quite follow the underlying principles,
although she thought as long as Great-aunt Tabitha was
involved, it couldn’t be too bad. Sophie’s great-aunt might
sanction girls undergoing a rather difficult and painful training scheme, but she wouldn’t put people into actual danger.
Would she?
Suddenly this pleasant room felt almost as dangerous as
the vaults beneath the Castle.
“Do you have any questions?” said the doctor.
“What do the letters J and H stand for?” Sophie asked
almost at random, not daring to ask about anything of substance.
The way they responded told her she’d blundered. The
two women looked at each other, then both spoke at once.
“No, you first,” Dr. Ferrier said.
“The letters J and H,” said Great-aunt Tabitha with a sly
look at her friend, “stand for Joy and Happiness.”
There was an embarrassing sound to the words that made
Sophie feel as she had the year before when Miss Hopkins lectured them on the birds and the bees.
“And how does the procedure work?” she ventured.

170

“Oh, you wouldn’t be interested in the technical details,”
said Dr. Ferrier.
There was something ominous about the doctor’s obvious
reluctance to specify, but they were interrupted at this point
by the receptionist’s arrival with tea and biscuits. Though she
felt like the condemned man eating a hearty meal, Sophie had
three biscuits and a piece of cake.
As they finished their tea, Great-aunt Tabitha looked at
her enameled watch. “We must get down to business, Susan,”
she said. “I’ve worked through the numbers on the last several
rounds of graduates, and a few ideas come to mind for
improving the next set of statistics. Have you got anybody
who can take Sophie around while we work? It’s a pity for her
not to see the rest of the place while she’s here.”
The words sounded almost menacing.
The doctor thought for a minute.
“Yes,” she said, “that won’t be a problem—Alison can
take half an hour to show Sophie the sights, then park her in
the garden until we’ve finished.”
Having disposed of Sophie, they turned to a stack of files
and were at once immersed.

171

a

Seventeen

OPHIE LOITERED OUTSIDE the office under the reception-

S

ist’s supervision until her guide showed up. A short
stocky woman with a lazy eye, Alison Mackay intro-

duced herself and asked Sophie what she would like to see.
“I don’t know,” said Sophie. What she really wanted was
to be allowed to wait for her great-aunt in the street outside.
But she hadn’t any choice in the matter, and she supposed she
might as well get a look at what went on here while she had
the chance. It would be worse not knowing. “That is, I’m
interested in anything—everything.”
“Well, why don’t I show you the treatment rooms and tell
you a bit more about what we do here? Then we’ll look in on
one of the occupational therapy classes, and after that you can

172

play in the garden while you wait for Miss Hunter and Dr.
Ferrier to finish.”
Play! A brief surge of contempt took the edge off Sophie’s
panic, and she mentally labeled Miss Mackay another one of
those grown-ups who couldn’t tell the difference between a
person who was fifteen and one who was five.
But Miss Mackay’s cheerful tones only underlined the horror of what she revealed to Sophie. Spotlessly clean, the first
treatment room held an examining table, a glass drug cabinet,
and an electrical apparatus that looked like a cross between a
medieval torture device and the equipment the comic-book
scientist Dr. Maniac used to convert innocent chimpanzees
into killing machines of preternatural strength and intelligence. Just such an imagination might have conceived the set
of electrodes where the head would go, the metal bands to
hold down the torso, the stainless steel cuffs for wrists and
ankles. Sophie’s own wrists tingled in sympathy.
“I’m afraid I won’t be able to show you the operating theater on the other side of the premises,” said Miss Mackay.
“Visitors aren’t allowed. We have several other rooms like this
one, of course, which we use to administer significant electric
shocks and recondition the synapses of the brain. Dr. Pavlov’s
work in Russia has been most useful here as a precedent, as
well as the contributions of Dr. James in America.”
She held up a chunk of solid rubber.

173

“Each girl has one of these in her mouth to stop her from
biting her tongue off.” She uttered the phrase with relish,
caressing the hideous three-dimensional gag before she
replaced it on a shelf with others graded according to size.
Sophie’s head was pounding now and her stomach
churned. She swallowed a few times in hasty gulps, then took a
deep breath. She had to calm down. Great-aunt Tabitha wasn’t
an angel, but she wouldn’t let people be treated like this if it
were anywhere near as bad as it looked.
“Many different doctors and researchers have contributed
to make the treatment as effective and comfortable as possible,” Miss Mackay continued, oblivious to Sophie’s physical
distress. “Located so near to a university, we are in a wonderful position to incorporate the very latest developments in the
science of the mind.”
They passed by the next few rooms, which Miss Mackay
said were identical to the first, and turned right at the end of
the hallway.
“On our left,” said Miss Mackay, “the pharmacy, where
we keep our hormones, amphetamines, and tranquilizing
agents. Shall we just look in briefly?”
She unlocked the door and showed Sophie: stoppered
glass tubes of tablets in attractive pastels, vials of gleaming
pink and blue capsules, ampoules filled with honey-colored
liquid, and hypodermic needles in all different sizes, sinister

174

and beautiful as a vampire’s fangs.
“The Duke of Wellington himself,” said Miss Mackay,
“once responded to a friend’s suggestion that habit was a second nature by saying, ‘Habit a second nature! Habit is ten
times nature.’ Here we use electrobiology and human chemistry to lay down new patterns in the brain, then confirm and
reinforce those patterns by behavioral conditioning. Why
don’t we pop down the hall to the training center and see if we
might catch the tail end of a therapy session?”
She let them into a private observation area, a small, dark
booth at the back of a bright, sunny classroom.
“On the other side of the window is a one-way mirror,”
said Miss Mackay. “In other words, we are fully concealed.”
The room held three long tables, each one seating four
girls. Every girl had a small mirror on a stand in front of her.
Sophie homed in right away on the middle table, second girl
from the left. It took her a minute to remember the girl’s
name: Hannah Jacobs, that was it. She’d taken awards in
music and maths on Prize Day the summer before.
In Sophie’s memory, Hannah had an unusually expressive
face, a face that spoke so vividly as to make words almost
unnecessary. As Falstaff in a school production of Henry IV,
Hannah had brought the house down.
Now Sophie watched as Hannah’s facial muscles worked in
perfect synchronicity with the others’. The identical movements

175

were uncanny. The girls were physically alike only in age
and general prettiness, but their smiles could have come off
a factory production line.
“Smile,” said the instructor. “There. Look at your reflection. Smile in response to your own smile. Good. By moving
the muscles of your face, you release a flood of neurotransmitters to tell your brain you are happier than before. And again.
Wider, please, and be sure to involve the eyes.”
“Wonderful, isn’t it?” said Miss Mackay, sounding like a
proud parent. “These girls have been here scarcely six
months, and look at them now. Quite different from when
they arrived. Why, a couple of them cried themselves to sleep
the first few nights out of homesickness! They’re treated to
every luxury while they’re here; they’re not allowed out unaccompanied until the training is complete, of course, but we
arrange special excursions to boutiques and beauty salons so
that they have all the nice things they’ll need once they leave.
And they receive lessons in how to make themselves up, dress
attractively, and so on.”
Sophie couldn’t understand why the government should
pay for the girls’ hairdressing. What had these pretty paragons
to do with the torture chambers she’d seen just moments earlier? Had all the girls she saw passed through the course of
treatment, and what had it done to them?
“These ones will be ready to take up first-rate positions by

176

the end of the summer,” Miss Mackay added, “and we stagger
the groups so as to produce a new crop every three months. If
we go to war, of course, we’ll need to speed that up.”
Crop was such an agricultural word, as if the girls were
lambs being fattened for the slaughter! Even as Sophie
thought this, a girl at the back of the class began to flail
around in her chair. An alarm rang, and two attendants
appeared in an instant. They rushed to the girl’s side and held
her down as the seizure racked her body. Sophie flinched.
Miss Mackay pushed a button and the window went
cloudy.
“Don’t mind that,” she said. “A few girls experience side
effects, sometimes from the surgery itself but more often from
the drugs administered afterward. That girl will be treated at
once, and it is most unlikely the seizure will recur.”
She looked at her watch.
“I’ll show you into the garden now, Sophie,” she said,
leading Sophie back into the corridor, “and you can amuse
yourself there like a good girl. I’ll make sure Miss Hunter
knows where to find you.”
She unlocked a door and shooed Sophie out of the building.
Sophie felt rather shattered. What if she had to enroll at
IRYLNS and become one of those pretty, polished girls?
Would it be possible to do that and still be Sophie? Perhaps
this was what had happened to Sheena. Why, Sheena hadn’t

177

even recognized her the other day!
After a little while Sophie dug her book out of her satchel
and took a seat on one of the benches beneath the tree at the
bottom of the garden. Unfortunately the book was Mansfield
Park. She’d already read it at least four times, and it was altogether too somber in tone to console her now. But having a
book in one’s hands was good protective coloration. Sophie
gazed at the back of the institute. Through the windows on
the right, she could see the girls in the common room, their
placid expressions and general air of contentment now taking
on a far more frightening aspect.
Blinds covered the windows to her left, but as she
watched, a second door to the garden opened, the door from
the side of the house Sophie hadn’t set foot in. Two nurses
came out, each pushing a wicker Bath chair with a small bundled occupant. They trundled their charges over to a sunny
spot by the fence, parked the chairs and left them, then began
an intense chat on the paved terrace at the top of the garden.
Looking at the two figures in the chairs, Sophie wondered
for a moment whether the other half of IRYLNS housed some
kind of program for the elderly. The people in the chairs were
small and motionless. But the smoothness of their skin suggested they were quite young. What was wrong with them?
Trying not to attract the nurses’ attention, Sophie crept
closer until she could see that both patients were girls not much

178

older than herself. One had a surgical scar reaching down along
her left temple from beneath a turban of bandages; the other
was covered with scabs and bruises, including a black eye that
made her look as though she’d gone ten rounds with the heavyweight champion of the world.
“All right over there?” one of the nurses called out, not
looking up from the discussion of the second nurse’s sister’s
prolapsed uterus and the general iniquity of husbands.
One of the girls mewed, a thin keening sound like a baby
seagull. The other simply stared into space.
Sophie had never seen anything so dreadful in her entire
life, not even the tortoiseshell kitten squashed flat in the road
outside the house in Heriot Row. These weren’t kittens, they
were girls, real live girls like the ones at school, somehow
stripped of their humanity and reduced to damaged husks.
Was this what Sheena would come to in the end?
Was this what would happen to Sophie?
Sophie’s great-aunt found her pale and shivering. She gave
Sophie a sharp look but said nothing until they reached the
street.
“Do you know the age of the youngest person ever prosecuted for breach of the Official Secrets Act?” she said.
“No,” said Sophie, her teeth chattering despite the day’s
warmth.
“Twelve,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, hailing a taxi and

179

directing the driver to Heriot Row. The hand clutching her
purse looked like the talons of a bird of prey.
Sophie jumped out of the cab and let herself into the
house before her great-aunt even finished paying the driver.
She raced upstairs and threw herself into bed. Only when
she’d pulled the duvet up around her neck and curled into a
ball did she begin to feel safe.

180

a

Eighteen

L

ATER THAT AFTERNOON

Peggy knocked on Sophie’s

bedroom door and came in without waiting to be
invited.

“Didn’t you hear me calling you from downstairs?” she
asked, picking up a jumper from the floor and folding it
before replacing it in the chest of drawers.
Unable to fall asleep and unwilling to get up and tackle
her homework, Sophie had tried to banish all thoughts of
IRYLNS by reading her favorite novel, not Mansfield Park but
Pride and Prejudice. Her copy had been read so many times it
had almost fallen to pieces, but the story never lost its power
to transport Sophie out of her real life.
She apologized to Peggy for making her come upstairs.

181

“It’s not me who’s missed an important telephone call,”
Peggy said, straightening the oilcloth on top of the chest and
looking with disgust at the dust that came off on her fingers.
“Sophie, why don’t you tell me when Annie does such a poor
job of cleaning in here?”
Sophie’s senses finally came back to her. “Do you mean to
say there was a telephone call for me?” she said.
“Yes, and I wrote down the message like the young gentleman asked. Disappointed, he was, not to speak with you
yourself.”
“Oh, Peggy, you should have come and fetched me while
you still had him on the line!”
“Some people put their face in a book and go dead to the
world,” Peggy said, sniffing and tossing her head. “I did give
you a shout, Sophie, and you didn’t answer. It was a boy called
Michael, well-spoken but foreign, I’d say. Your great-aunt
would have a fit if she knew you were getting telephone calls
from young men; and it’s not just any young man, is it? Isn’t it
the one the police had in the other day?”
“Peggy, I must telephone him at once!”
“Oh, he left a number,” Peggy said, relenting at the sight
of Sophie’s unhappy face. “Better make the call while your
great-aunt’s out, Sophie; she won’t like you talking to that boy
again.”
Sophie raced downstairs to the message tablet by the

182

instrument in the hallway. It was characteristic of Great-aunt
Tabitha to have rejected hot and cold running water as unnecessary luxury while thoroughly embracing the technology for
transmitting and receiving the human voice over distance, the
brainchild of Aleksandr Tolstoy Bell, son of an eminent
Scottish educator of the deaf and his glamorous Russian wife.
The tablet usually held reminders about the times and locations of various spiritualist meetings. Now the top sheet bore
a telephone number in Peggy’s careful hand.
Sophie picked up the receiver. When the operator came
on, she asked her to put through a local call.
It went through almost at once, and Sophie heard Mikael
on the line.
“Sophie!” he said, his voice high and thready. Perhaps it
was just the distortion of the instrument, but Sophie thought
he sounded really upset. “Are you coming for tea on
Thursday?”
“Yes, of course,” said Sophie. “Mikael, is something
wrong?”
“Not exactly,” he said. “Look, what do you know about
how your great-aunt met up with this Mrs. Tansy?”
“Not much,” said Sophie. Did it really matter? “She tends
to hear about pretty much any medium above the level of a
fairground fortune-teller. They all seem to come to our house
sooner or later.”

183

“That Commander Brown had me back in yesterday afternoon,” Mikael said.
Sophie groaned. “Your aunt must be livid,” she said, wishing she and Mikael were in the same room talking. The way
the telephone didn’t show one the other person’s face made it
hard to tell what he was thinking.
“No, it’s all right,” said Mikael, sounding a little more like
himself. “He’s satisfied I couldn’t have had anything to do
with the murder, and he told me a few interesting things.
Apparently someone paid the medium off to approach your
great-aunt; they found a note in her records, no information
about who it was. And wait till you hear this: the Monday
morning after the séance, your great-aunt called a friend at the
ministry of public safety and asked him to have Mrs. Tansy put
under surveillance.”
“But didn’t Commander Brown say the other night that
his people had been following her for some time?”
“Yes, but they lost her shortly before the night you met
her—that was why they didn’t know she’d been to your greataunt’s house. I think that when your great-aunt sicced the people from the ministry on her afterward, Mrs. Tansy must have
got the wind up and gone to ground at the hotel.”
“What else did the commander tell you?” Sophie asked.
“Mostly he asked me more questions. They took me back
to the Balmoral—”

184

Sophie heard the shake in his voice.
“—and had me look at everything again, to see whether
the murderer might have left something behind him.”
“Did you see anything?”
“Not really. There were some strange tracks on the carpet
that weren’t there when I first arrived, but they may well have
been left by the room service cart or the police photographer’s
tripod; I’m not sure. But I did learn a few other things. Sophie,
it’s quite clear from the questions they asked that they believe
there’s some link between the dead woman and the Brothers
of the Northern Liberties.”
They both fell silent, listening to the hiss of the line.
“Sophie, are you there?” said Mikael.
“I’m here. What kind of link?”
“I’ve got no idea, and I don’t think they have much of one
either. I phoned just to pass this on and to ask you to be careful. Really careful, Sophie. If you’d seen the blood . . . these
people have no qualms about taking lives. It’s different for me.
But you’re a girl. I want you to stay well out of it.”
“A girl?” Sophie said stupidly. Of course she was a girl,
but what difference did it make? Mikael’s words made Sophie
feel irritable and aggressive, like wearing a scratchy wool vest
a size too small for you.
“Look, Sophie, I’ve got to go. I’ll see you on Thursday, all
right?”

185

Replacing the receiver in the cradle, Sophie felt so weary
that she actually sank to the floor and started to cry. When
Peggy found her there, she dragged Sophie into the kitchen
and made her a cup of tea, but Sophie could not be consoled.
She decided to try and get through some of her mountain of
homework, but after arriving at three different answers to the
same sum, she finally packed everything back into the satchel
and retreated upstairs to the solace of Jane Austen.
The most surprising thing of all happened on Sunday
evening as Sophie lay on her bed reading the chapters Miss
Chatterjee had set for Tuesday.
A knock came at the door.
“Come in,” Sophie called out, though she knew Peggy
always came in a moment later regardless of whether Sophie
had invited her or not.
But it wasn’t Peggy. It was Great-aunt Tabitha, who hadn’t
set foot in Sophie’s room for years, not since Sophie had had
whooping cough when she was eleven and received an awkward visit from her great-aunt bearing a toy from her own
youth, a stuffed woolly sheep that may or may not have been
responsible for the later infestation of moths in Sophie’s
wardrobe.
Equally surprising was the fact that rather than offering a
tart remark about girls who chose to ruin their posture (and,
it was implied, their morals) by lounging around reading in

186

bed, Sophie’s great-aunt paused for a minute at the door, then
crossed the room, sat down beside Sophie, and awkwardly
patted her shoulder.
When Sophie flinched away from her—she couldn’t help
it; her flesh recoiled at the thought of the gags and the electrodes—Great-aunt Tabitha took off her spectacles and
pinched the bridge of her nose between her thumb and the
tips of her fingers.
“Think of how much energy we waste,” she said, sighing
heavily, “when we experience unwanted emotions.”
This was unexpected enough to cause Sophie to roll over
to look at her.
“If only we could altogether suppress the irrational,”
Great-aunt Tabitha continued, “and manage our feelings with
the efficiency of a dynamo! Our own personal feelings are
good for nothing; the perfection of human nature is to feel
much for others and little for ourselves.”
Sophie was dismayed to find she didn’t disagree. It would
be a good thing if nobody ever felt anything beyond the mild
ups and downs of anticipation and enjoyment and occasional
disappointment. And yet there must be something terribly
wrong with this philosophy of self-control and self-sacrifice,
mustn’t there, if it culminated in those drooling wrecks in the
garden?
“Sophie,” Great-aunt Tabitha went on, “I want you to

187

know that I’ve been wrestling with my conscience over this
business of IRYLNS. Of course the institute contributes an
enormous amount to the good of the country, but I’ve had
doubts. . . .”
“What kind of doubts?” Sophie asked, prompting Greataunt Tabitha to withdraw her hand and begin pacing across
the room.
“Doubts about the associated costs,” said Great-aunt
Tabitha. “Don’t misinterpret what I’m about to say, Sophie. I
will never withdraw my support from the program. It does too
much good, and I continue to subscribe to the enlightened
social psychology. But the thought of what happens to those
girls as they become sophisticated machines for the suppression of feeling . . . well, if I could go back to the way I felt
before,” she added, “it would certainly be a blessing.”
“What changed?” Sophie asked, afraid but also really
curious to hear what Great-aunt Tabitha would say.
“You,” said Sophie’s great-aunt, spitting out the word. She
stopped in the middle of the rug, fists clenched by her sides.
“Various philosophers have wrestled with the problem of how
to restrain the excessive attachment that we are disposed to
feel for our own children above those of other people. . . . I
never understood the vehemence with which they treated the
topic until one day I looked at you (you were doing your
homework at the other end of the dining table) and surprised

188

myself by realizing I didn’t want you to go to IRYLNS.”
Sophie didn’t know what to say.
“Believe me,” her great-aunt added, “I struggled for some
time to dismiss these feelings as a momentary aberration. It
simply couldn’t be, I told myself, that I thought an exception
should be made for my great-niece because I loved her.”
Oh, how typical, how maddening of Great-aunt Tabitha
only to say she loved Sophie in the shadow of a future in which
Sophie’s present self might cease to exist! Sophie sat up and
swung her feet to the floor. It was a terrible disadvantage to be
lying in bed talking to a person who was standing up.
“It soon became clear,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, her voice
even drier than usual, “that my feelings were not about to go
away. I did not want you to go to the institute, and that meant
I did not wholeheartedly endorse what happened there. I
began to suspect that a truly ethical person would withdraw
from the institute; indeed, she might well resolve to make it
her job to bring the program to a halt. If one wouldn’t choose
to have one’s own loved ones undergo the procedure, fairness
would seem to dictate that one should prevent its being exercised on one’s fellow citizens.”
“So will you try to make it stop?” Sophie asked, though
she felt more despairing than hopeful.
“I am a pragmatist and a patriot, Sophie,” said Great-aunt
Tabitha. “I place the good of my country above that of any

189

private citizen, including myself.”
“What are you saying, then, Great-aunt Tabitha?” Sophie
said, unable to stop her shoulders from slumping. “Are you
telling me I’ll have to go to IRYLNS after all?”
“Don’t look at me like that!” And Great-aunt Tabitha
actually turned away from Sophie and resumed her unhappy
pacing, avoiding Sophie’s eyes. “With any luck, it won’t come
to it. I will do everything I can, within reason, to keep you out
of the program. What you don’t seem to realize, though, is the
extent to which my hands are tied.”
“I don’t understand,” said Sophie. “It sounds as though
you think what happens at IRYLNS is quite wrong. Those
poor mangled girls in the garden! I suppose I can see the point
of the argument for the national good. One of Nan’s brothers
lost his leg in the army, and everybody who goes into the service has to take the chance that something will go terribly
awry. But it wasn’t just the girls outside—can it be right to
turn the others into a sort of machine? Isn’t it almost as bad
as killing, to reshape someone so completely? How can their
parents let it happen? If everyone really knew what goes on
there, wouldn’t they put a stop to it?”
Great-aunt Tabitha was silent so long that Sophie thought
she wouldn’t answer. Then she sighed and turned back to
Sophie.
“Of course a few parents get upset. There’ve been lawsuits,

190

threats to expose the damage . . . but in the last analysis, everyone understands the program’s value greatly exceeds its costs.
And of course it’s only a handful of girls who have really poor
outcomes. Those excepted, the girls of IRYLNS are really
invaluable, not just because of their secretarial skills but for
other reasons, reasons you’re too young to understand. The
same way parents give up their sons to the army, knowing that
those young men risk grave injury or even death, they accept
the need to allow their daughters to serve.”
“But this isn’t like losing your leg or even your eyesight,”
Sophie said. “Those girls—they’ve lost their selves. Even the
healthy ones. Surely that’s the worst fate of all?”
“Nothing I have ever felt in my life,” said Great-aunt
Tabitha, the words strong and unadorned, “has persuaded me
that I wouldn’t give up all my feelings, every single one of
them, assuming the effects on the intellect to be negligible.”
Sophie felt this like a blow. Did Great-aunt Tabitha really
have any fondness for Sophie at all, if she would speak like this
of sacrificing it?
Great-aunt Tabitha cleared her throat and took on a
brisker tone.
“I’ve got a meeting with Augusta Henchman next week to
talk about your future,” she told Sophie. “I expect you’ll do
very well on your exams, assuming you’re allowed to sit them.
But if Parliament passes the bill that’s currently under review,

191

the government will have the right to dispose of you as it sees
fit, exams or no. And with that academic profile, IRYLNS’ll
snap you up in a flash. Girls like you are just what’s needed.”
“But couldn’t you somehow get me exempted?” Sophie
asked, though she knew that Great-aunt Tabitha didn’t believe
in bending rules.
“Imagine what the newspapers could do with that,” said
Great-aunt Tabitha, shaking her head. “One of the most stalwart supporters of IRYLNS pulling strings to get her ward
exempted from the scheme? Why, it might even be enough to
topple the government! And that’s where I draw the limit.
Sophie, I would lay down my life for you without a moment’s
hesitation, but in the scenario I’ve just laid out, it wouldn’t be
my own life at stake, it would be the safety of the country as a
whole.”
“Is there anything I can do?” Sophie asked. “To protect
myself?”
“Stay away,” said Great-aunt Tabitha. She had picked
something up from the top of the chest of drawers, where
Sophie always dumped the contents of her school satchel, and
fiddled with it as she talked. “Stay out of trouble and stay
away from IRYLNS. I took you there to show you what’s at
stake. I don’t want you even to think about telling anyone
what you saw.”
Sophie said nothing.

192

“The sleep of reason makes us all monsters,” said Greataunt Tabitha in the special voice she used to mark a quotation,
though Sophie had no idea where the words came from. “What
about finishing your homework before bedtime, Sophie?”
She set down on top of the chest of drawers the little thing
she’d been playing with. After she had gone, Sophie got up to
see what it was: that small token Mrs. Tansy had pressed into
Sophie’s hands—the iron . . . IRYLNS! Had the object itself
been a concrete warning, a signal that Sophie simply hadn’t
had enough information to understand at the time? But how
would Mrs. Tansy have known about IRYLNS, and why
would it have mattered to her that Sophie should be warned?
Sophie felt like Bluebeard’s wife. When Bluebeard gave
his wife the keys of the wardrobes and strongboxes and caskets of jewels, when he handed her the master key to all his
apartments, when he told her that she could go into any one
of them except the little closet at the end of the ground-floor
gallery, Sophie’s whole body always flared up in scorn, though
she knew this wasn’t the real moral of the story, for the weakwilled wife. Why couldn’t she have kept her promise? Sophie
always wanted to cry out, “Don’t! Just don’t unlock the door!
Be perfectly obedient and you won’t get hurt!”
Could Sophie live with herself, though, if she didn’t try to
find out what really happened behind the closed doors of
IRYLNS—find out and perhaps try to put a stop to it?

193

a

Nineteen

O

N

TUESDAY

AFTER LUNCH

it was Sophie’s turn to

asupervise the younger girls on the playground.
She’d been walking around like a zombie since

Saturday. Fortunately playground duty didn’t involve much
beyond making sure the children didn’t actually kill one
another, and though Sophie’s eyes rested on a group of girls
playing hopscotch, her thoughts were elsewhere. The other little girls were scampering over the climbing frame or running
around playing tag, one particularly noisy bunch amusing
themselves by shooting one of their playmates back and forth
across the tarmac on some kind of cart.
In her mental haze, Sophie at first hardly noticed the
police arriving, but within minutes the entire playground was

194

overrun with uniformed officers. What on earth was going
on? Recognizing the woman nearby as the constable from the
week before, Sophie took a chance that she would be friendly.
“What’s happening?” she asked.
“The interrogation of the man who assaulted the minister
of public safety here on Saturday has yielded information that
may lead to a breakthrough in another case,” said the young
woman, smiling at Sophie. “We’re here to pick up a crucial
piece of evidence, but they’ve sent the bomb squad as well, in
case it’s booby-trapped.”
“I’ve found it!” shouted an officer.
A team of men with Alsatians ran to join him. Once the
bomb-sniffing dogs gave the all clear, the men moved away far
enough for Sophie to see.
It was the cart the girls had been playing with, and a second later she realized it must be the Veteran’s transport, left
behind the other day after his arrest.
“Why didn’t they take it away on Saturday?” Sophie
asked, since the woman constable hadn’t moved away.
The woman shrugged and laughed a little. “Nobody ever
said we were perfect,” she said, sounding quite human.
If there had been a bomb, Sophie couldn’t help thinking,
several of the little girls might easily have been killed. She felt
a surge of anger, the kind that was a mixture of scaredness and
relief at surviving a danger one hadn’t even apprehended.

195

The bell rang to mark the end of recess, but most of the
girls ignored it to watch the police, now huddled together.
By nighttime, everyone knew the Veteran was to be
charged with the medium’s murder, but the story in the
evening paper wasn’t very forthcoming, and nobody was at all
sure how the police had linked him to that crime or why he
had attacked the minister.
Nan thought he might have been angry because of the
government’s decision to reduce pensions for veterans. She
had also heard that the minister had annoyed the school servants by not tipping any of them after the lavish ceremonial
breakfast. (Miss Hopkins had supposedly caused an uproar
afterward in the staff lounge by commenting that she wouldn’t
turn down a tip herself if a parent tried to give her one.) Nan
wondered whether the minister might have offended the
Veteran by not giving him money. That was easy enough to
imagine, but it didn’t really seem grounds for actually attacking a person, Sophie decided, even if the Veteran had a screw
loose.
Jean hadn’t heard anything.
Priscilla had learned from a well-informed friend that the
police had now definitely tied the Veteran to the murder at the
Balmoral, but that he still refused to tell them why he’d
attacked the minister.
“A friend!” Jean said, curling her upper lip and turning

196

away. “Boyfriend, more like.”
Priscilla smiled her pretty, teasing smile.
“James isn’t really a boy,” she said. “He’s a man; at least,
eighteen’s old enough to be allowed to get married.”
Jean slammed her chemistry textbook shut, knocking a
small china dog off the desk and smashing it on the floor.
“You’re not going to marry him, though, are you?” she
asked Priscilla. “Promise me you won’t!”
“Surely you’re not going to stand in the way of my union
with my one true love?” said Priscilla, in the same light tone
she might use to reproach someone for not passing the sugar
for her tea.
Sophie and Nan exchanged glances, but there was nothing they could do to avert the inevitable clash.
“Priscilla, you made me a promise that when we leave
school, you’ll share a flat with me while we both do our certificates at the School of Electric Cookery,” Jean said. She was
almost in tears by now.
“I said we might share a flat,” Priscilla said, calm as
always. “I never made any promises. It’s important to keep my
options open at this point; that’s what Daddy always says.”
“But what about me?” Jean cried out. “I can’t possibly
afford a flat on my own. Besides, it wouldn’t be the same without you. Why do you like those wretched boys so much?”
Now Priscilla looked really annoyed.

197

“You’re acting like a baby,” she said to Jean. “You talk as
though you’d like to stay a schoolgirl all your life. Now, that’s
all very well for girls like you and Sophie, but I know there’s
better stuff waiting when we leave this place, and nine-tenths
of the fun will involve men. I want to have a good time before
I settle down. But James is truly sweet, Jean; I wish you could
have seen him last weekend, kneeling on the ground in front
of me and holding my hand and telling me he adores me. . . .”
The image of James at Priscilla’s feet was more than Jean
could bear. She uttered a strangled yell and fled.
Priscilla began laughing. “Oh, it’s almost too easy,” she
said. “I really shouldn’t, but poor Jean does expose herself so,
and I simply can’t resist. . . .”
“Are you really going to marry James?” asked Nan, who
approved of James because he was captain of the boys’ cadet
corps at the Edinburgh Academy.
“Of course not!” said Priscilla. “I’m much too young. I
think twenty-one’s the perfect age to get married, don’t you?
I’m not one of those awful Brides-to-Be!”
The Brides-to-Be were the girls who dropped mathematics, science, and classics in their fifth year to take the
Housewife’s Certificate. Priscilla was scathing about them. “I
certainly don’t expect to do my own cooking and mending
and washing once I’m married,” she’d said in class once when
the domestic science instructor begged her to keep her mind

198

on the lesson. “Talk about a waste of time!”
“My father thinks I should take a degree in law,” Priscilla
said now. “He says that even if I’m married, it can’t hurt to
have another string to my bow.”
“I don’t mean to criticize,” said Nan, “but it’s quite cruel
of you to torment Jean like that. Won’t you go and find the
poor girl and tell her you’re sorry?”
“But I’m not sorry,” said Priscilla, sounding surprised.
“She asked for it. She’s got no business being so jealous. Let
her stew.”
And with that remark, Priscilla returned to her English
essay, leaving Sophie rather impressed with her ruthlessness.
When the housemistress came by to tell them to begin getting ready for bed, the three girls put their things away, turned
out the study lights, and went into the bedroom, where they
found Jean sitting shamefaced on Priscilla’s bed, her hands
clasped together in her lap, her eyes swollen and red.
“Priscilla, I’m so sorry,” she blurted out. “It’s none of my
business what you do when we leave school. I promise I’ll
never pester you about this again. Only I would love it if we
could share that flat. . . .”
“Well, let’s wait and see,” said Priscilla, sitting down next
to Jean and putting an arm around her shoulders. “You’re a
goose sometimes, but you’re my best friend. I won’t do anything without telling you first. Don’t worry, all right?”

199

“All right,” said Jean, forcing a smile.
Thinking about possible futures made Sophie’s mind run
again over everything she’d seen at IRYLNS. What if Jean
decided to go there? How would Sophie persuade her not to,
without breaking the injunction to secrecy laid upon her by
Great-aunt Tabitha? Would Sophie be able to save even herself from IRYLNS?

200

a

Twenty

O

N

THURSDAY AFTERNOON Sophie went for tea at the

aprofessor’s. She had to nerve herself up for it.
Assuming Mrs. Lundberg was still angry with her,

she went around the front way, with a vague sense that she’d
forfeited the privilege of entering through the garden.
She rang the doorbell and waited. What if they didn’t
want to see her?
But when the housekeeper opened the door, she threw her
arms around Sophie and hustled her into the sitting room
toward a particularly lavish spread of cakes and sandwiches,
just as if nothing had happened.
When Mikael came in, Sophie’s mouth went all dry and
she couldn’t swallow. It wasn’t as though they’d actually had

201

an argument, but there had been something painful and
unpleasant about the end of their last telephone conversation.
“Sophie?” he said quietly, speaking into her ear as his aunt
piled his plate high with food.
“I don’t know what was wrong when we talked the other
day,” Sophie said, the words tumbling out. She licked her lips
and swallowed. “I didn’t mean it. I—”
“Don’t be silly! You’ve got nothing to apologize for. I was
in a bit of a mood myself. Pax?”
“Pax,” said Sophie, and as he squeezed her hand, the
relief made her want to shout.
Over tea the professor told them about an Uppsala colleague who kept a pack of colobus monkeys in a two-acre
enclosure, artificially heated at quite amazing expense, where
the monkeys lived as they would in the wild. Nobody else said
much. When Mikael had eaten his fill, he sprang up out of his
seat and invited Sophie to join him in the garden, where, he
said, a huge number of weeds awaited them.
Sophie looked at the professor to see if he wanted them to
stay inside and keep him company, but he waved her away.
“If you two go outside now, I may finish with the proofs
of my article in time for the last post,” he said. “Sophie, I trust
to see you again before many days pass?”
Sophie assenting, the professor retreated to his study, and
she and Mikael went through the glass doors into the garden.

202

“Are we really going to weed?” she said to Mikael once
they were alone.
“Do you know how to tell weeds from flowers?” Mikael
asked.
“No,” Sophie admitted.
“Neither do I. I really just wanted to get you out of
earshot.”
They sat down on the bench beneath the tree at the bottom of the garden. Mikael pulled a branch from a bush and
began to strip its leaves off one by one.
“Sophie,” he said, his uneasiness making Sophie fidgety,
“the real reason I was in a bit of a state when we talked the
other day is that there’s something I still haven’t told you
about what happened in that hotel room.”
Remembering Mikael’s mix of self-possession and panic
that night in the Vaults, Sophie realized she wasn’t really surprised.
“What was it?” she asked. “Why didn’t you tell me before?”
“It didn’t seem wise.”
“Well, what made you change your mind, then?”
“I can only tell you if you promise to keep it a secret.”
“I promise,” Sophie said, though the words seemed to
scrape in her throat.
Rather than saying anything, Mikael took a pocketknife
out of his trousers. Sophie remembered seeing it with the rest

203

of his things at the police station.
“So?” she said. “It’s your pocketknife. What about it?”
“Sophie, this knife isn’t mine, though I said it was. When
I finally got myself out of that awful wardrobe at the Balmoral
and found Mrs. Tansy’s body on the floor, I sort of staggered
back and sat down on the couch. I didn’t mean to, but my legs
wouldn’t hold me up properly. And then something hard
pressed into my leg, and I felt for it without even thinking, and
it was this.”
Sophie still didn’t understand.
“Sophie, this isn’t just any old knife,” he said, turning it
over in his palm. “I recognized it at once. Look where it’s
chipped. You can see the spot’s just the shape of the British
Isles.”
Sophie examined it.
“So it is,” she said, “but what does it matter?”
“The knife isn’t mine,” Mikael said again. “But I’m one
hundred percent sure it’s my brother’s. It was our father’s,
before he died, and then it passed down to him.”
“It’s your brother’s?” Sophie said, feeling stupid. “Your
older brother, the one who’s so exemplary? But that’s impossible. What on earth would your brother have been doing in
Mrs. Tansy’s hotel suite? Are you sure you didn’t somehow have
the knife with you, and drop it yourself without knowing?”
“Quite sure,” said Mikael.

204

“Your brother’s not in Scotland, anyway,” Sophie said.
“He lives in Denmark, doesn’t he?”
“Well, Sweden, usually, but he could just as easily be in
Scotland,” said Mikael. “Nobody’s heard from him for
months.”
It didn’t take Sophie long to see what this meant. “You
don’t think—”
“I do,” said Mikael, a grim look on his face. “It’s unmistakably his. And the knife wasn’t there before. I’d been sitting
in exactly the same spot on the couch before the murderer got
there, and I’d have felt it beneath me if it was there.”
“How do you think it turned up?”
“Well, I suppose it’s just within the bounds of possibility
that my brother himself actually came to the room and killed
Mrs. Tansy.”
“Surely not!”
“I agree, it’s pretty much inconceivable. Whatever else
he’s been doing, I simply can’t imagine my brother’s become a
murderer. What’s more likely is that someone took the knife
off him and planted it there to incriminate him. But how did
they get the knife from him in the first place? I must face it:
there’s a real chance he’s hurt or even dead.”
“Dead! But Mikael, he can’t be; wouldn’t you have heard
something?”
“Normally, yes, but he’s been completely out of touch

205

with everyone in the family for several months now.”
“Even so, I simply can’t believe it. Pretend for a minute
that we’re in a detective novel: If he was actually dead, someone would have found the body and the police would have
identified him and got in touch with your mother.”
“Believe me, I hope you’re right. I’m pretty worried,
though.”
“I can see it’s terribly worrying. But you know, Mikael,
you really can rule out the idea that your brother committed
the murder himself. Didn’t you see in the papers? The police
are holding the Veteran, that homeless man who’s always
hanging around, for the murder. They seem quite certain he
did it; in fact, they were at school just the other day to pick up
the trolley he left behind after he attacked the minister of public safety on Waterloo Day.”
“When you say trolley,” Mikael asked urgently, “what
exactly do you mean?”
“A little wooden platform on wheels,” Sophie said. “He
rode around on it because of not having any legs; he lost them
at war.”
Mikael sprang up from his seat and began pacing back
and forth.
“Sophie, you’re absolutely right,” he said. “It must have
been your Veteran at the scene of the crime—”
“He’s not mine,” Sophie interjected. “That’s just the name

206

I have for him in my head.”
“When the commander took me back to the hotel, he was
especially interested in the marks on the carpet, marks I
thought might have been made by the wheels of the room
service cart. But they must have been the Veteran’s tracks!”
“I’m sure that’s right,” Sophie said. “What I still don’t
understand, though, is why he’d have wanted to kill Mrs.
Tansy. It’s all a bit random. Could someone else have hired
him to do it, do you think?”
“There’s another connection that might perhaps be
important,” Mikael said thoughtfully. “Commander Brown
thinks the medium may have tried to blackmail someone high
up in the Brothers of the Northern Liberties.”
It was easy to imagine Mrs. Tansy resorting to blackmail.
She must have known all kinds of things, many of them very
nasty. Perhaps she’d learned the identity of the man behind
the bombings and decided to turn it to her advantage.
“Say it’s true,” Mikael went on. “Then the man who’s
being blackmailed—the leader of the conspiracy, that is—
hires the Veteran to kill Mrs. Tansy.”
“Yes, all right, but why do you think the Veteran attacked
the minister of public safety?” said Sophie.
It was all most confusing, and it made Sophie wonder
how the authors of detective novels kept their clues straight.
She shivered when she remembered how many times she’d

207

seen the Veteran in the last few weeks. She had been close
enough to touch him—to touch the hands that murdered
Mrs. Tansy. Or for his hands to touch her. Had Sophie herself
been in danger?
“The minister’s main job is to stop the terrorists,” said
Mikael. “I suppose the leader of the Brothers might have very
good reason to want her out of the way.”
“That makes sense,” Sophie admitted, “but it still leaves
an awful lot out. For one thing, why was the Veteran so useless when he attacked the minister? He seems to have done
away with the medium in a most gruesome and effective manner, but the minister wasn’t even hurt. A good assassin would
have used a bomb or a sniper’s rifle.”
“I see what you mean,” Mikael said, sounding pensive.
“Well, then . . .” His voice trailed off.
“I don’t suppose there’s any way one of us could get in to
talk to the Veteran?” said Sophie.
“No,” said Mikael, “and he’d have no reason to talk to us
in any case. But Sophie, what can my brother have had to do
with it? Let’s assume he’s not hurt or killed. Could he have
been there in the hotel along with the Veteran? And if he
wasn’t, why would anybody want to implicate him by leaving
the knife?”
“Did you ever work out exactly what your brother did to
make your mother so angry?” Sophie asked. “If we knew that,

208

perhaps we could find out where he is now and what he’s
doing. Then we’ll know how his knife came to be there.”
“Oh, it’s too stupid for words,” said Mikael. “Nobody but
my mother would have made such a fuss; Aunt Solvej told me
the whole story the other day. My brother’s spent the last four
years working for a pharmaceutical company in Stockholm,
but it turns out that recently he left that job for a new one with
the Nobel Consortium, even though our mother told him
she’d never speak to him again if he took a job working for
Nobel.”
“The Nobel Consortium?” Sophie said, surprised. “But
they’re quite respectable! They sponsor a conference my
great-aunt goes to every summer in Finland, the International
Society for the Promotion of Peace.”
“Yes,” said Mikael, “but the Consortium’s got a pretty
sketchy reputation these days, in Scandinavia and the Baltic
states at least. You see, it’s so wrapped up now with the dynamiteurs and the munitions companies that some people say it’s
lost sight of its original goal of keeping the peace. The
Consortium was implicated in the death of Norway’s prime
minister last year—”
“The man who said there was no point in the Hanseatic
states adhering to the Geneva Conventions?”
“Yes, that’s the one. Dead as a doornail. Poisoned. And
the Consortium’s definitely had a hand in the deaths of a few

209

French industrialists. Aunt Solvej says my mother has convinced herself that my brother’s joining the Consortium is tantamount to his becoming a murderer himself.”
Mikael fell silent.
“That’s ridiculous,” Sophie said firmly. “Just because the
Consortium’s unscrupulous doesn’t mean your brother’s done
anything wrong. I’ve never met your brother, but I’m sure he
hasn’t suddenly turned into a murderer.”
Then she thought of something else.
“Do you remember the commander saying that the
medium was probably somehow connected to Nobel,” she
asked Mikael, “as well as to the Brothers of the Northern
Liberties? Couldn’t your brother have been there at the hotel
to see her on perfectly legitimate business, and left the knife
by accident? And don’t say it,” she added when Mikael
showed signs of interrupting, “I know you said it wasn’t there
before, but when things fall into the cracks of a couch, the
ordinary rules of matter in the universe don’t exactly apply.”
“Whatever it is,” said Mikael, “I must find him. I wouldn’t
cover for him if he did it; if he cut that woman’s throat, he
must have completely lost his mind. But I don’t think he did
anything of the sort. I’m afraid he’s in trouble.”
Sophie’s thoughts had gone off on another track.
“What we must do first, then,” she said, “is find the person who commissioned the Veteran to kill the medium—”

210

“We don’t know that someone commissioned him,”
Mikael interrupted.
“—because that way we also learn who’s behind the
Brothers of the Northern Liberties,” she finished up. “Then
we can stop the attacks, and perhaps save hundreds of lives.”
“Sophie, that’s not our problem! The intelligence officers
are working around the clock to arrest the terrorists. What can
we do that they can’t perform a million times better?”
Sophie struggled to explain. “It’s not just the bombs themselves that are so dangerous,” she told Mikael. “I promised my
great-aunt I wouldn’t tell anybody, so you must keep this a
secret, but it seems that the Brothers of the Northern Liberties
may be secretly accepting money from the European
Federation.”
“What?” said Mikael, looking at Sophie as if she’d lost her
mind.
“It’s quite true,” said Sophie. “And you see what that
means. If it’s proven, Scotland’s got the right to force the other
Hanseatic states to declare war on Europe.”
“But that would mean—”
“Yes,” said Sophie. “Death and destruction on a scale
greater perhaps even than the Great War. We can’t imagine it.”
“All right, then,” Mikael said, rolling his eyes. “It’s not
much of a job, is it? I’ve got to find my brother—who could
be anywhere in the Hanseatic states—and prove he didn’t

211

commit murder. You’ve got to work out who hired the
Veteran, bring that person to justice, track down the terrorists,
and cover up Europe’s part in the business so as to stop
Scotland from going to war. Have I left anything out?”
“You can poke fun all you like,” said Sophie, wishing she
dared tell him about IRYLNS as well—but IRYLNS didn’t
even bear contemplating. “We may not be able to pull it off,
but we must try.”
She jumped when Mikael whacked the naked branch hard
against the back of his hand.
“Sophie, I’m really worried about my brother,” he said.
The savage unhappiness in his voice gave Sophie a pain in
her insides. If Mikael’s brother had been anywhere near that
suite in the Balmoral, he probably was in big trouble. Sophie
wished she could tell Mikael that she was sure his brother was
all right, but there was no point saying something she only half
believed.
“You know, Sophie,” he added, “if you really do have any
rapport with spirits, now might be the time to start calling in
a few favors . . . maybe they can give you some information
that will help sort things out. Or at least find my brother for
me!”
“I must get back,” she said hopelessly. She couldn’t tell
whether he was joking about the spirit business. “I’ll find out
whatever I can.”

212

Mikael put his hands together and gave Sophie a leg up to
the top of the garden wall.
“Will I see you this weekend?” he asked.
“I’ve got an awful lot of homework,” Sophie said doubtfully. “Also Great-aunt Tabitha’s not likely to let me go out for
long; I’m still being punished. Shall we meet on Saturday
afternoon next weekend?”
“Where?”
“You wanted to see the Hanseatic Exposition, didn’t you?
Why don’t we meet at half past one in Jawbone Walk?”
“What a strange name!”
“Someone put up an enormous whale’s jawbone there, an
arch tall enough to walk through. It’s in the Meadows just
south of the university.”
“All right,” said Mikael. “But phone me if anything else
comes up in the meantime, all right?”
Sophie nodded, but she didn’t look back as she went over
the wall and returned to the tennis courts to watch the last set.
Nan and Jean’s crushing defeat of Harriet Jeffries and a sixthform girl called Marjorie gave Sophie great satisfaction, especially when Harriet greeted the final score by slamming her
expensive new racket to the ground and storming off the
court.
Back at school, Sophie let herself into the balance room
with the key Mr. Petersen had had cut for her and waited for

213

him to arrive and show her what he needed her to do today.
Ten minutes later, he still wasn’t there. She checked her
watch and racked her brain to see whether she could possibly
have misremembered the time of their appointment. Most
likely the teacher had simply forgotten.
It was stupid of her to feel so completely crushed with disappointment.
She decided to leave Mr. Petersen a note to let him know
she’d been here. The trick would be to write it in a way that
didn’t sound at all reproachful or upset. She looked about for
pencil and paper. The top drawer of the desk stood halfway
open, and she pulled it a little further out. Surely Mr. Petersen
wouldn’t mind.
There was the distinctive dark green passport recently
adopted by all of the Hanseatic states.
She knew she shouldn’t look at Mr. Petersen’s private
papers. She really shouldn’t look at them.
But if she looked at his passport, she could find out his
birthday and see what he looked like when he was younger.
She could see if he had a middle name she liked better than
that awful Arnold.
Surely it could do no harm to take a quick peek.
Knowing she was doing something that was enough to get
her expelled from school if she was found out, Sophie drew a
deep breath and flipped open the passport.

214

The first thing she noticed was the date. Mr. Petersen had
been born on the fifteenth of January 1912. That meant he was
twenty-six, only eleven years older than Sophie.
The next thing she noticed was an anomaly. She had
assumed Mr. Petersen must have been born in Scotland. But
his national affiliation was marked as Swedish. In fact, his first
name as it was given here wasn’t Arnold at all, but the much
more Scandinavian-sounding Arne!
There was nothing inherently suspicious about being
called Arne or having been born in Sweden, but why was Mr.
Petersen passing himself off at school as a Scottish person?
She flipped through the pages, and was even more
alarmed to find them stamped full of visas and entrance permits to all of the Hanseatic countries. Why, it seemed as
though he had traveled to Sweden alone at least half a dozen
times since he’d begun teaching in Edinburgh—almost every
single weekend! And yet he’d never said a word about it.
There was only one conclusion. Mr. Petersen was not what
he seemed.
He can’t be connected to the bombers, Sophie said to herself, hands sweating as she pushed the drawer closed to
exactly where it had been before. He simply can’t.
But taken in conjunction with his fixation on explosives,
the evidence of the teacher’s journeys seemed rather more
alarming. Might he even, like Mikael’s brother, have some con-

215

nection with Nobel, whose name was virtually synonymous
with Sweden?
In the end Sophie decided not to leave a note. She locked
the door behind her and raced down the hall to the refectory.
All through supper, she tormented herself about what she
should do.
If there was any chance that Mr. Petersen was the bomber,
she had to find out. The lives of others were at stake. But if
Mr. Petersen was mixed up with the terrorists, it wouldn’t be
safe to confront him directly.
In class Friday morning Sophie couldn’t keep herself from
examining Mr. Petersen for signs of treachery. She felt the
strangest mix of feelings for him: admiration and love muddled up with fear and suspicion and guilt. She broke a beaker
when she caught him gazing at her, and hardly noticed when
the others teased her about it at lunch.
The solution came to her halfway through the meal.
Sophie couldn’t risk confronting Mr. Petersen in person,
and even all those visas in his passport wouldn’t serve as
grounds for taking her suspicions to the police. What if he
were perfectly innocent?
The people who really had the answers she needed—the
medium, the suicide bombers—were all dead. They would be
able to tell her whether Mr. Petersen had any part in the business, and what the medium knew that got her killed, and pos-

216

sibly even where Mikael’s brother might have got to.
Everybody knew that radios could capture transmissions
from the spirit world. It happened all the time; indeed it was
often most inconvenient. Surely it couldn’t be hard to tune in
to the particular voice one wanted?
In school the year before they had built a proper wireless
set, with valves and everything. Sophie knew it would be far
simpler just to put together the essentials with a pair of headphones. She would get the things at the ironmonger’s after
school and build the apparatus over the weekend at home.
She still didn’t know what to do about IRYLNS. But
working out what exactly had happened to the medium and
whether it had something to do with the Brothers of the
Northern Liberties seemed like Sophie’s moral responsibility.
And if she could clear Mikael’s brother, not to mention find
out why Mr. Petersen had bothered to conceal his identity and
how the stick of dynamite had come into his possession, she’d
really be doing well.
Feeling for the first time in weeks that she had actually
taken charge of her own life, Sophie tore a piece of paper out
of her exercise book and began to make a shopping list: the
shiny metal lump called a crystal, the length of wire known as
a cat’s whisker.
Everything needed to build a radio for receiving the voices
of the dead.

217

a

T went y-one

S

OPHIE WAS NOT INVITED

to join that Friday evening’s

séance, an omission she took as a reprieve in the guise
of punishment. Instead, she locked the door of her

room from the inside and took out the kit she had purchased
that afternoon on her way home from school, an assortment of
odds and ends in a tin the size of a cigarette packet. The bright
red tin said MIGHTY ATOM in lurid yellow capitals; it included
tweezers and directions, as well as the galena detector crystal
and the cat’s whisker for the semiconductor junction.
The directions in the kit could not have been simpler.
Sophie had already fashioned a coil with a slider that would let
her tune the apparatus to different frequencies, and she had a
flimsy set of headphones left over from a similar project—sim-

218

ilar but non–spirit contacting—the year before. She fiddled
with the parts until she had successfully installed the crystal
inside a brass eggcup borrowed from the kitchen, then connected it to the iron springs of her bed (which would double
as an antenna) and grounded it to the lightning rod outside
the bedroom window.
They had learned about Marconi waves and other electromagnetic phenomena the year before at school. Thanks to
Hertz, Tesla, and the other pioneers of wireless telegraphy,
one could tune across the whole Marconi spectrum to a huge
array of programs broadcast on different frequencies, and
here and there spirit voices found a wavelength that would
carry their words back to the world of the living.
Headphones on, everything in place, Sophie tried running
the slider back and forth along the coil. She caught snippets of
speech, including a woman talking about how to get rust
stains out of linen and a man speaking in heavily accented
English about something called the death drive. She stopped
to listen: it was the great underground Marconi guru Dr.
Sigmund “Thanatos” Freud, who broadcast an illegal show
out of Hansestaat Hamburg that was picked up and redistributed on local frequencies by pirates all over the Hanseatic
states and Europe.
Sophie wasn’t staying up past her bedtime, though, to listen to the learned but peculiar ramblings of Dr. Freud, who

219

proposed a new psychology of desire, in which he postulated
that the denial of longing damaged one’s mental and physical
health. She had assembled a small pile of things to help her.
From the bundles of old newspapers in the coal cellar, Sophie
had obtained a decent collection of clippings about the attacks
in Canongate and Princes Street.
She was a little scared of touching the medium’s
thoughts—and of what might happen if she invited such a
powerful personality back into the world of the living. She had
decided as a result to start instead by trying to contact the two
most recent suicide bombers. If the dead bombers knew anything about their leaders, there was surely no reason they
shouldn’t tell it to Sophie. And unlike Mrs. Tansy, these men
had chosen to die, making it less likely they would latch on to
Sophie in anger and try to drain the life out of her, a form of
attack known to have been attempted by spirits wrenched
unwillingly from the world.
The dead lingered for some time where their lives had
been lost, particularly when they died violently. She would try
to reach the Canongate bomber first. She had been so close
when it happened, and in a sense the bomber had actually
spilled her own blood (her fingers went to the tiny scar on her
forehead), giving her a personal connection to him. She had
obtained several bedraggled flowers from the memorial at the
site and a fragment of broken glass from the chemistry class-

220

room, plus the grubby sticking plaster Matron had put on her
cut the day of the explosion.
The Canongate bomber’s name was Andrew Wallace, his
age nineteen, according to the newspapers, which also told
Sophie his place of birth was Lanarkshire. Andrew had lost his
father to the Great War and his two best friends to the government, the first dying overseas with the army, the second
arrested for demonstrating in favor of the No Conscription
Act and suffering a fatal asthma attack during his prison interrogation.
Sophie closed her eyes, touched the scrap of bandage to
the cat’s whisker, and let everything empty out of her
thoughts. Andrew had loved football as a boy, hoped to be a
car mechanic, and was fond of animals. A scene swam into
focus in Sophie’s mind: the black Labrador puppy called Fido,
a present for Andrew’s seventh birthday, now grizzled and
slow and unable to understand the loss of his master. It was
disgustingly sentimental, like something in a women’s magazine, but Sophie couldn’t help being moved. She saw the
empty bedroom in his mother’s little house, a football trophy
on the chest of drawers. On the bedside table, a collection of
childhood treasures, things prettier than a boy like this might
be expected to have: a glass paperweight blooming inside with
blue and yellow flowers, a diode of rose quartz, a piece of
green glass polished by sand and sea until it was the perfect

221

shape for holding in one’s hand.
Somehow Sophie knew that the pebble had lived in
Andrew’s pocket and spent many hours in the warm hollow of
his palm. Looking with her inner eye, she reached out for the
pebble with her left hand and could almost feel it settle into
place, her right hand steady all the while on the tuner.
Suddenly she felt herself there with Andrew in Canongate,
right in front of a shop window full of tartan. Andrew was
feeling reflexively in his pocket for the piece of green glass,
heart leaping into his mouth when it wasn’t there, then
remembering he’d left it at home on purpose so that it wouldn’t
be blown to bits with the rest of him.
He raised a hand—naked without the pebble—to wipe
away the sweat from his forehead.
Then he reached for the detonator.
“Speak to me, Andrew,” Sophie said out loud, brows
crunched in concentration, clutching the pebble so tightly that
her fingers began to hurt. “Speak to me. Tell me what happened. Who’s behind it? Andrew, did someone talk you into
doing this?”
The scene before her froze: Andrew, trapped just an
instant before the explosion.
She had to keep him there; she was afraid she might be
blown up right along with him if she let time move forward.
“Talk to me!”

222

She slid the tuner slowly along the coil and paused when
she heard something, a low murmur that resolved itself into
words.
“It’s worth it,” the voice said over the headphones, sounding uncertain and unhappy. “Just remember why you’re doing
this. Remember Tim. Remember Tommy. This is for the two of
them, and for all those others the government’s killed. I’m
doing it for them.”
“Andrew,” Sophie whispered intently. “Who helped you
do it? Who gave you the explosives? Who set you up?”
The voice continued as if Sophie hadn’t spoken.
“It’s for them. Joining the Brothers of the Northern
Liberties. Training for the mission. It’s all for them. I won’t
live myself to see the Free Zone, but others will. The Free
Zone. The Brothers.”
Sophie feared she hadn’t allowed for a proper mechanism
to get her words to the dead boy. “Andrew, who were the others?” she said, trying to shoot the question at him like an
arrow across the moat separating life from death. “Who’s
behind it all?”
“Cells. They’ve got us in cells so we won’t know the others and bring them into danger. My team leader’s Duncan,
Duncan from Fife, Duncan the baker’s boy. But Duncan’s
dead now. Dead, dead, all dead.”
Sophie remembered that one of the bombers who killed

223

himself in April had been called Duncan MacDonald.
“May his soul rest in peace,” she whispered to herself, her
lips barely moving.
“Duncan’s dead, Tommy’s dead, Tim’s dead,” said the
voice, gone softer now and sort of quavery.
She knew she hadn’t much longer before the spirit of
Andrew Wallace would retreat to the faraway place.
“Andrew,” she said, speaking now in her full voice, her
hand shaking with the strain of holding the slider in the right
position. “Andrew, it’s too many dead. Do you hear me? Too
many dead. I need to find the person who’s behind this and
stop him. Not Duncan. The big one, the one who tells everybody what to do. We’ve got to stop this. Enough people have
died already.”
“Green glass,” said the voice. “Green glass?”
Sophie knew she must be imagining it—the sound quality
was poor, and spirit voices were not known for their emotional
range—but she heard puzzlement in the Marconi waves.
“Duncan saw my lucky piece,” the voice continued.
“Green glass. The person’s eyes were glassy green, he said.
And me pestering him for a clue about our leader. Green as
glass. Where’s my lucky piece now? Where’s . . .”
As the voice faded in and out, Sophie desperately sent
thoughts of warmth and reassurance to the frantic disembodied spirit. Before long, though, whatever had been present was

224

completely gone, lost in the atmospheric tangle of electromagnetic waves.
She fiddled with the tuner, but Andrew Wallace was no
longer anywhere to be found.
It was past midnight, and Sophie felt bone-tired as she
relaxed out of the position she’d held for the past hour,
crouched over the apparatus and straining so as not to miss a
single whisper of sound through the headphones.
Finding her left hand still clenched into a tight fist, she
opened it and her heart seemed to skip a beat.
The green glass pebble lay in her palm, warmed to the
exact temperature of her skin.

225

a

T went y-t wo

AAKING BLEARY-EYED

W

on Saturday morning,

aSophie drank a huge mug of tea and ate a piece
of toast in the kitchen, then took her school-

books into the dining room, where she worked doggedly
through a huge pile of homework. Peggy was away for the
weekend at her second cousin’s wedding in Kirkcaldy, both
maids had been given the day off, and Sophie was in charge of
meals.
After a supper of scrambled eggs and toast, Sophie climbed
the stairs to her room, where she turned the key to lock the door
and then retrieved the elements of the crystal set.
She thought she’d learned as much as she could from poor
dead Andrew Wallace, and besides, she couldn’t bear the idea

226

of disturbing him again. The man who’d set off the bomb in
Princes Street was a twenty-three-year-old engineering student
called Malcolm Black, and Sophie had a few clippings and one
of the dead flowers from the memorial (the one she’d picked
up that day with Jean outside the electric showroom) to focus
her tuning.
This time it wasn’t nearly so easy, and she started to wonder if her success the night before had been beginner’s luck.
She focused like mad on Malcolm Black, repeating the name
to herself until the syllables stopped making sense. She had a
faint perception of presence, but it was as if the bomb had
pulverized Malcolm Black’s psyche along with his body.
More than half an hour passed before Sophie began to
detect a pattern to her failures. Both times that she’d almost
reached Malcolm, the same voice had cut in over his, a voice
whose timbre and accent suggested a working-class man, perhaps middle-aged or even elderly.
There was something familiar about it, she thought. Could
this be the voice of someone she had actually met? Someone
who wanted to speak to her now?
She put aside all thoughts of Malcolm Black and concentrated on the new voice.
With a little adjustment, she found the place on the
Marconi spectrum where it came through most clearly.
Holding the tuner in place, she sent her own psychic

227

energy to the unknown spirit.
Suddenly the words snapped into focus, no longer garbled. “Ma money,” the voice said. “Where’s ma money?”
And in a flash, Sophie knew who it was. It was the
Veteran, who had been asking Sophie for money for years,
every Friday afternoon, until he’d been taken away the week
before, and who had called out something very similar as he
attacked the minister at Waterloo Day.
But the Veteran wasn’t dead! He was very much alive,
held in a cell at the Castle. Could being imprisoned in a dark
cell let a spirit fly free of its body?
She decided to venture a question.
“What money?” she said. “Was it your pension? Or did
you get paid to kill the medium? Why were you at the
Balmoral, and who paid you to murder Mrs. Tansy?”
“Ma money,” the voice repeated. “Where’s ma money?”
“Who paid you to kill the medium?” Sophie said.
“They took away my pension, and they said I’d not regret
it,” the voice said, falling into a four-beat line like something
out of a poem.
“Who?” Sophie said impatiently. “Who was it who said
you’d not regret it?”
“They said I’d not regret it,” the voice said, sounding less
certain than before. “They took away my pension. They gave
me an assignment.”

228

“What was it?” Sophie asked.
“They gave me an assignment, and they said I’d not regret
it,” said the voice, words falling into the same four-beat
rhythm as before.
“What assignment?” she said.
“They told me the Balmoral,” said the voice.
The promptness and precision of the response took
Sophie so much by surprise that she lost hold of the tuner and
had to fiddle about for a few agonizing seconds before finding
the place again.
“—told ’em I was skint, and neither of ’em wanted to
know,” said the voice.
Sophie could have kicked herself. She’d missed the whole
substance of his answer, with no guarantee she’d be able to get
him to repeat it!
“And I said to him,” the voice went on, in full flow, “‘But
where’s ma money? Where’s ma bloody money? You’ve no
idea what it means these days, to live from week to week on a
fixed income.’ And so I took the other lady down, till they had
to tear me off her and carry me awa’.”
“Who wanted the medium dead?” Sophie asked, hoping
to prompt the voice back to its earlier topic.
But it was no good.
“Ma money,” whispered the voice, fading even as Sophie
listened. “All I asked for was ma money. . . .”

229

And try as Sophie might, she couldn’t find the voice anywhere on the spirit frequencies. It was all regular old everyday
radio pirates blethering on about how to set up an illegal still
or weatherproof a roof.
She listened for a few minutes to Dr. Freud rabbiting away
about the Daedalus Complex: men inventing machines that
caused the deaths of young people who ignored constraints on
how the technology should be used. Before too long, though,
she let go of the tuner and turned away from the apparatus in
disgust.
She put away all the equipment and changed into her pajamas, got into bed, and turned out the light. But there was
something she couldn’t get out of her mind.
Sophie’s crystal set picked up the voices of the dead at certain wavelengths, as well as living people broadcasting on the
frequencies in between. Obviously she’d somehow tuned in to
the Veteran’s thoughts as well. But how would that work? The
Veteran was alive and well.
It was just about possible that the force of the Veteran’s
obsession with the money had given his voice a special telepathic carrying power.
But wasn’t it more likely that the Veteran, too, was now
dead?
Sophie got up the next morning at half past six, hours
before the usual time on a Sunday, and put on her slippers and

230

dressing gown before creeping downstairs to retrieve the
newspapers from the front doorstep.
Having lit the range and put a large kettle on the stove,
she sat down at the kitchen table and spread the papers
before her.
Half an hour later, the kettle had long since boiled and
was now releasing clouds of steam, but Sophie didn’t even
notice, her whole attention fixed on a story in the left-hand
column of the front page of the Scotsman:

The vagrant who was arrested last week for his
attack on a member of the cabinet at the Waterloo
Day observances of a well-known Edinburgh girls’
school, and subsequently charged with the murder
of Mrs. Euphemia Tansy, 56, at the Balmoral Hotel
on the 15th of June, was found dead late Saturday
evening in a cell in the Vaults at Edinburgh Castle.
A spokesman for the authorities announced that to
all appearances, the man—a veteran of the armed
forces—died of natural causes. There were no signs
of foul play, and the authorities have not scheduled
an autopsy at this time.
The Veteran was dead.
He’d spoken to Sophie from beyond the grave.

231

And she had no doubt—despite the paper’s bland assurances—that the death had been arranged, probably by the
same person who hired the Veteran to kill the medium in the
first place. Someone who feared that under interrogation the
man might reveal what he knew and implicate his employer in
that terrible crime.
What kind of person had access to a prisoner locked up in
the country’s securest stronghold?
Were Sophie and Mikael in danger?

232

a

T went y-three

B

ETWEEN WORRYING ABOUT

murderers, IRYLNS, and

the everyday threat of terrorism, Sophie felt like she
was on the verge of a complete breakdown. And

IRYLNS was almost the worst of it. It was shocking how different the city looked to Sophie after having been to IRYLNS.
The young women were everywhere. Sophie spotted
more than a dozen of them before she’d even got halfway to
school on Monday morning: the girl in the pink jacket on the
tram, the girl wearing the plaid tam-o’-shanter and modest
ankle-length skirt, the handsome young woman with black
bobbed hair buying a cup of coffee from the stall at the corner of Waterloo Place. All their faces were as smooth and
blank as wax.

233

In contrast, the girls in first-period English looked reassuringly ordinary. Even Harriet Jeffries couldn’t be mistaken
for anything other than a real (horrible) living breathing
human, especially when she caught Sophie staring and shot
her an evil grimace, then resumed her usual butter-wouldn’tmelt expression before the teacher noticed.
But though the girls looked just as they should, Sophie
still had a strange cloudy feeling of cobwebby things hanging
at the edge of her vision. Half a dozen times that morning she
felt a tap on her shoulder and jerked around to find nothing
there, so that when Nan came to fetch her to lunch, Sophie
ignored her until the others began laughing at her absentmindedness.
Over lunch in the refectory—greasy little pellets of
mince like rabbit droppings, dun-colored mashed potatoes,
and turnips—Sophie caught up on the weekend’s news.
Having received special furlough from the headmistress on
account of war preparedness needs, the others had gone home
to Nan’s family’s house for a marathon session of driving
lessons.
“Nan’s brother’s lovely,” said Priscilla.
Nan beamed at her.
Jean put down her knife and fork.
“How’s he doing with the prosthesis?” Sophie asked. It
would be interesting to have a mechanical limb; it would make

234

one into a kind of human-machine hybrid.
“Pretty well, I think,” said Nan, though she didn’t sound
confident. “The worst of it is that he didn’t lose the leg in
combat. It was a Scottish mine that blew up the truck. When
he first got home, he wouldn’t do anything but sit in Father’s
armchair drinking whisky. But once they fitted him with the
new leg, he began to feel much better. The best news is that
there’ll still be a position for him in his old regiment. Not just
a desk job, either: he’ll fight alongside everybody else. That’s
cheered him up no end.”
Sophie privately found this perverse, but it would not do
to say so.
“I daresay it cheered him up even more to have Priscilla
hanging all over him,” Jean said, sounding so bitter that
Sophie looked at her with surprise. “I found it quite disgusting.”
“They were just dancing,” Nan said, rising at once to her
brother’s defense. “I thought it was lovely. If it cheered Tom
up, what’s wrong with that?”
“I certainly enjoyed myself,” said Priscilla. She sounded
almost angry. “Tom’s a wonderful dancer. Nan, do you think
he has a girlfriend?”
“No,” Nan began, “he was engaged, but—”
The rest of the sentence was drowned out by Jean smashing
her teacup down onto her tray so hard that the saucer cracked

235

in two. She pushed back her chair and ran from the room.
Sophie looked around to see if any teachers had noticed,
but there wasn’t a single adult in sight.
What had happened? Usually at least two or three of them
supervised at lunch.
Priscilla followed her train of thought without effort.
“Miss Henchman’s called all the teaching staff to a special
meeting,” she told Sophie. “It’s supposedly something to do
with the government bill about the school learning age and
war preparedness. It sounds as though certain programs will
be able to pick which girls they want and—”
“It’s wicked of you to tease Jean like that,” Nan interrupted. “She can’t bear it that people like you so much, and
that you’re so, well, nice to them all.”
“By people, I suppose you mean boys?”
“Well, yes, but I didn’t want you to think I was being
rude,” Nan said.
They didn’t see Jean again until they arrived in Mr.
Petersen’s classroom after lunch and were greeted by three
words on the chalkboard: POWER

IN POWER,

the motto of the

Hanseatic League.
“Our topic for the day,” said the teacher when all the girls
had taken their seats, “is the relationship between science and
politics. Everybody knows there’s a pun in the Hanseatic slogan. Paraphrased and expanded, it might read ‘Political

236

power depends on the effective harnessing of new technologies and natural resources.’”
Oh, for goodness’ sake, a man with this knack for making
everything long-winded and tedious simply couldn’t be in bed
with the terrorists! Sophie began drawing an elaborately decorated letter P in her notebook.
“Speaking simply of the forms of power that actually make
machines run,” Mr. Petersen continued, “what are the traditional preferences of the Hanseatic states?”
Nobody answered.
“We generally prefer electricity to fossil fuels,” Sophie
said, feeling the rest of the class go stiff with boredom. “We’ve
developed highly efficient technologies partly because of our
relative lack of natural resources. Countries that’ve got a lot of
coal tend to be almost profligate with steam power; it’s precisely because we can’t afford to use up all our supply running
trains that we’ve developed ways of using electrical power to
move vehicles far in advance of anything they have in Europe
or the Americas.”
“Part of what Sophie’s saying,” said Mr. Petersen approvingly, “is that human ingenuity can do a great deal to counteract so-called natural disadvantages. In Scotland, for instance,
engineers have developed superb new technologies that quite
make up for the fact that coal’s in such short supply. And at
the international level, the Nobel Consortium has been able to

237

use its monopoly on top-quality armaments to secure political
autonomy for the Hanseatic states. Weapons equal peace.”
At the word armaments everyone groaned. Even Sophie
wasn’t sure she agreed with Mr. Petersen. Weren’t explosives
responsible for more evil than good in the world? Sophie
remembered crying when she first learned about the seals
trained to drag harnesses of explosives to blow up tankers.
The poor creatures died in the service of a cause they didn’t
even understand, and that couldn’t be right, could it?
“No, no, hear me out,” the teacher said. “This weapons
business is really important. What’s the classic example of science directly affecting politics?”
“The establishment of the state of Israel,” Fiona said.
“Chaim Weizmann traded the secret of the acetone process—
which lets you turn corn into acetone for manufacturing
cordite—for the European Federation’s support for the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine.”
“Very good, Fiona,” said Mr. Petersen. Sophie was bursting with jealousy. “Of course, politics can have very direct
results on science and technology as well. The outcome of
America’s War of Secession depended very heavily on access
to explosives. At the war’s outset, almost all the gunpowder
mills were located in the Northern states. The Northerners
would have won and the United States of America would still
exist as a single entity if Delaware hadn’t seceded to join the

238

Southern cause. Why was Delaware so important?”
Everyone knew the answer to that.
“Delaware had the DuPont munitions factories,” Jean said.
Her eyes were still a bit red, Sophie noticed, but she didn’t
sound upset anymore. “Once the Southerners got hold of
them, the Northerners had to let them secede.”
“Mr. Petersen?” said Fiona, raising her hand.
“Yes, Fiona?”
“Weren’t we supposed to do an experiment today? We’ve
used up more than half our class time already.”
Mr. Petersen looked at the clock and did a comical double
take when he saw the time.
“We’ve not a moment to lose!” he said.
It turned out that Mr. Petersen had got hold of an old but
functional pair of Caselli pantelegraphs, which allowed a person at one end to transmit an image to a receiver at the other.
The sender wrote a message with nonconducting ink on a
sheet of tin, which was then fixed to a curved metal plate and
scanned by a needle. Telegraph wires carried the electrical
message to the receiving machine, where it was transcribed in
Prussian blue onto paper soaked in potassium ferrocyanide.
This was fun, Sophie thought, watching each set of lab
partners take their turn to send a message, with much wrangling over who got to have the final product as a keepsake.
Sophie and Leah were the last ones in line, and when their

239

turn came, only minutes before the end of class, Leah took the
sender’s station and Sophie manned the receiver.
“I’m going to send you my famous drawing of a camel,”
Leah said, scraping earnestly at the tin with the writing instrument.
She came to join Sophie once she’d finished drawing and
positioned the needle to do its work. As the clean blue marks
began to appear on the paper, the two girls leaned over to
watch, holding their breath.
“Look!” Leah said, jumping up and down and pointing.
“There’s the crescent moon in the background!”
Leah’s camel posed in silhouette against a desert horizon,
complete with palm tree and oasis and moon sliver. They
watched with excitement as the triangular leaves of the palm
tree and the camel’s skinny head and neck began to emerge at
the top of the page.
About a quarter of the way down, though, the line experienced a disruption. The stylus dug deep into the paper, racing
back and forth.
“What’s happening?” Leah asked Sophie.
The machine had gone haywire. After a minute the needle
began to behave again, falling into its regular back-and-forth
movement. But something was clearly awry. Beneath the horizontal strip of desert landscape with camel was a slice—growing even as they watched—of something quite different.

240

“What is it?” Leah asked Sophie, who shrugged again and
shook her head.
“Some kind of a technical drawing?” one of the other girls
said.
“Yes,” said Sophie with impatience, “but what’s it a drawing of ?”
Leah peered at the line of text along the bottom. Parts of
the diagram were labeled as well.
“Oh!” she said. “At first I thought the letters had come
through all fuzzy because of the needle, but they’re not even
real letters!”
When Sophie looked, though, she saw something quite
surprising: the letters were real, but they were in the Cyrillic
rather than the Roman alphabet.
Beginning to puzzle out the words, she’d caught nothing
more than the place and date lines—Sankt Peterburg, 21-0223—and the words serdtsevina and reaktor when a hand
snatched the page out of the calipers holding it in place. The
stylus began whirring, and a wisp of smoke drifted from the
guts of the machine.
Sophie looked up to see Mr. Petersen, his face pale and his
hands shaking.
“What’s wrong?” Leah said. “Mr. Petersen, why did you
take our facsimile? We hadn’t finished looking at it—do you
know what went wrong?”

241

“Does the machine have a mechanical memory that it
stores pictures in,” Nan asked, “and could it have sent an old
one by mistake?”
“No,” said Mr. Petersen blankly, “there’s no memory. I
can’t imagine what happened. Some kind of a misfire, I suppose.”
“Oh,” said Leah. “Will we get full credit for the experiment, even though it didn’t work properly?”
“Certainly,” said Mr. Petersen, a little color coming back
into his face. He had rolled up the malformed image and
tucked it into his breast pocket. “Full credit for the practical
part, at any rate. I won’t make any guarantees about your
marks for the report. It depends on how well you write everything up; better than last time, Leah, I hope!”
The bell rang. Sophie lingered as the others left the classroom.
“I’m sure it was a technical drawing of some kind,” she
said to Mr. Petersen. “Had you any idea what it might be for?”
Mr. Petersen gave her a wary look. “Had you?” he countered.
Sophie shook her head. It was strange, but she could have
sworn he seemed relieved.
“Do you think I could take it with me, and see if I can
work out what it is?” she asked.
“No,” said Mr. Petersen in a loud voice. “I need to hold

242

on to it,” he added semiapologetically, “to help me learn what
went wrong.”
“All right,” said Sophie, though she couldn’t see how it
would help him. In any case she remembered the drawing perfectly well.
Her first impression was that it was some kind of fortified
chamber, something one might build to test a high-powered
explosive reaction, but the real mystery was where it had come
from. In spite of Mr. Petersen’s dismissive answer to Nan’s
question, could the machine have retained the memory of
something transmitted in the past?
It was an intriguing puzzle, one consuming enough that
Sophie barged straight into Miss Chatterjee in the corridor
outside the chemistry classroom.
“Sophie!” said Miss Chatterjee, using a handkerchief to
wipe the hot coffee off her front.
“Really, Sophie,” added Miss Hopkins, who had been
walking alongside Miss Chatterjee, “you could hardly be more
careless.”
“I’m terribly sorry, Miss Chatterjee,” said Sophie, feeling
like the worst person in the world.
“Sorry doesn’t put dinner on the table,” Miss Hopkins
commented. “Sophie, get the mop and bucket from the janitor’s cubby and clean up that spill before someone slips and
hurts herself.”

243

“Yes, Miss Hopkins,” Sophie said, not bothering to mention that mopping would make her late for her next class.
Of course it took ages to find the bucket, fill it with hot
water and Nightingale fluid, and go back to clean up the mess.
By then Sophie was mopping so frantically that it took her a
minute to realize she was hearing a three-way conversation
between Mr. Petersen, Miss Hopkins, and Miss Chatterjee in
the classroom behind her.
“Are we protecting the girls,” said Miss Chatterjee in her
unmistakable cut-glass accent, “or are we simply protecting
the country?”
“A ridiculous question,” Miss Hopkins said. “There’s no
reason to see any conflict between the two. Myself, I think the
latest development’s more exciting than ominous.”
“It all depends,” said Mr. Petersen, “on what you think of
the procedure itself. I remember—”
But Sophie was not to hear what Mr. Petersen remembered. A loud snort caused her to look around and see the
unmistakable looming figure of Miss Henchman.

244

a

T we nt y-four

“I

ASSUME A TEACHER GAVE

you permission to use

the janitor’s equipment?” the headmistress said
frostily.

“I’m sorry to get in your way, Miss Henchman,” said
Sophie. She’d never seen the headmistress in the science wing;
she hoped it wouldn’t set a precedent. “I bumped into Miss
Chatterjee and spilled her coffee, and Miss Hopkins told me
to clean up.”
“Quite right, too,” said Miss Henchman.
Miss Henchman was surprisingly fair when it came to real
accidents. She didn’t have the irritable and unjust temper that
led some teachers to punish one for mishaps resulting from
carelessness rather than disobedience.

245

“Aren’t you meant to be elsewhere by now?” the headmistress added.
“Yes, Miss Henchman,” said Sophie, thinking that she’d
better not rush off until Miss Henchman actually dismissed
her.
The headmistress nodded, and Sophie trundled the
bucket as fast as she could back to where it belonged, then
hurried to class.
There Miss Botham, rapt to the point of passion, was
already in the midst of praising to the girls the nineteenth
century’s innovations in standard office practice, down to
improvements in ordinary writing tools (the mass-produced
lead pencil, the steel-nibbed pen, the patented reservoir pen
with its ink stored in a kind of fountain inside the barrel).
“Typewriters, invented in the 1860s, shortly became indispensable,” said Miss Botham, sounding like a braying donkey,
“and the word typewriter soon came to be used interchangeably with secretary or clerical assistant. The machine became
even more valuable with the introduction of the Dictaphone,
which allows an employer to dictate a draft of a letter or a
memorandum at any hour of the day or night in a medium the
secretary may transcribe later on the typewriter.”
The woman sounded like a paid advertisement, Sophie
thought. Meanwhile Miss Botham drew a diagram of the
Dictaphone on the blackboard.

246

“Girls who go to IRYLNS, girls who go modestly and
without complaint to work in a local office, girls who stay at
home to help their fathers with secretarial tasks,” she rhapsodized, “all these girls do the country a service that may add
up to precisely the difference between victory and defeat.
Remember, your outlook is just as important as the skills you
learn. To be a really first-rate secretary, one must know far
more than shorthand and typewriting.”
“And what’s the correct outlook, Miss Botham?” asked
Harriet, leaning forward in her seat with a disgustingly angelic
smile.
“The perfect secretary experiences a sense of pleasure and
excitement about each piece of work she undertakes,” said
Miss Botham, smiling at Harriet in a way that made Sophie
want to be sick. “The perfect secretary is without morbid selfconsciousness or sensitivity. She is a miracle of tact and discretion, and she is always in a good mood.”
It was a relief when Miss Botham finally stopped and
showed them how to put on the headphones and operate the
foot pedal for slowing down or speeding up the rate at which
the machine played back.
Sophie surprised herself by adjusting to the new technology with something like delight. She rapidly figured out how
to turn herself into a highly efficient automaton—one had to
leave one’s brain entirely out of it, becoming a linked circuit of

247

ears and hands and eyes without any conscious input.
Thinking about any individual part of the procedure would
only slow one down.
After a little practice, she was able to type the memorandum recorded on her particular cylinder (a terribly dull set of
revisions to the school out-of-bounds rules—it was just like
Miss Henchman to kill two birds with one stone by getting the
girls to do her typing for free) without touching her foot to the
slow-down pedal more than once every thirty seconds. Then
she sped the recording up even faster than the ordinary speaking voice. Now her fingers flew over the keyboard, typing
faster and faster until a pair of hands wrenched off her headphones.
Sophie looked up to see Nan staring at her, Sophie’s headphones in her hands, a circle of girls surrounding them and
Miss Botham fuming at the front of the classroom.
Sophie was bewildered. She’d really been in the flow of
things. It was most annoying of Nan to interrupt!
“Sophie, you were typing so fast we thought you must be
pretending,” Nan said. “Fiona used her stopwatch and
clocked you at a thousand keystrokes per minute—you were
ripping those sheets out of the platen like nobody’s business!
I can’t believe the machine didn’t jam. Miss Botham thought
you must be putting it on. She asked me to stop you and see
whether you were really typing what was on the recording.”

248

“Why should there be a problem?” Sophie said.
Her brain had been so far out of the loop of activity that
she couldn’t even remember what she’d just typed. It was
always faster to type that way, even if one sometimes introduced awkward mistakes. Still, since Nan seemed worried,
Sophie rolled the page out of the typewriter and hastily
glanced at the first few lines.
“It looks fine to me,” she said.
Nan took it from her hand, no longer so certain as before
that something must be wrong. A few minutes later, though,
she started laughing.
“All right, I admit it’s a good joke,” she said. “For a
minute there, I really thought you’d acquired superhuman
prowess as a typist, or crossed over into the fifth dimension or
something. I still don’t see how you got the machine to work
so fast. What’s the trick?”
“There’s no trick,” said Sophie, snatching the page back
from Nan and reading it more slowly from the top.
Nan jabbed a finger at the middle.
“That’s what you’re looking for, I think,” she said. “I must
say, Sophie, I don’t approve of that kind of language.”
Many of the other girls had gone back to their work, but a
few still stood nearby, Miss Botham hovering at the periphery.
Sophie followed the direction of Nan’s finger and gasped.
How had she made such an awful mistake? Would she ever

249

survive the shame of Nan having seen it?
A quick look suggested that the previous pages were just
as they should have been. This one, though, contained an
appalling swerve from the straight and narrow.
In the numbered list of instructions she’d been typing, the
break was painfully obvious:
48. No girl shall wear slippers outside the dormitories.
49. No girl
if the bloody bitch hadn’t interfered i’d not be here at all i’d
be living it up in one of the baltics damn them all to hell and
the girl too for all she looked so young and that other harpy
who paid me off in the first place and the gentleman too both
of em up to no good i’d say but the young un worse than the
old un and what’s happened to my favorite little fellow i’d like
to know
xajiodgoihovhoiahdoifhdaoifnoidasngoidnagoinadgoinagsoin
doignadoignado;isgnoadsingoai;sdnaoisdhfiuoahughdoiaugna
dskjnfgasdngdasiohgoiadshgoia
mind me girl it’s not the one you think it’s the other one make
sure th

250

And the rest of the page was blank from where Nan had
cut her off.
Sophie crumpled the paper into a ball and stuffed it into
her pocket so that the teacher wouldn’t be able to read it.
“Nan, I swear I didn’t do it on purpose,” she said urgently.
“It must have been some kind of a fit. I think it might be
related to what happened in Mr. Petersen’s class just now. I’ll
explain—”
But Miss Botham had marched up to them, gathered up
the stack of typed pages beside Sophie’s machine, and laid her
meaty hand on Sophie’s shoulder.
“You’ll not get away with creating a disruption in my
classroom,” she said, “not after being so disrespectful as to
arrive late without an apology.”
“But—,” Sophie started to say.
Miss Botham jostled her so hard that Sophie almost fell,
her leg crumpling under her.
“Put your things together,” the teacher said in a cold
voice, “and go straight to Miss Henchman’s office. You’ve distracted the other girls and willfully created a nuisance.”
Sophie waited wretchedly by the door as Miss Botham
scribbled a note and sealed it in an envelope.
“That’s for the headmistress,” said the teacher, “and
above and beyond whatever punishment she metes out, you’ll
type me ten clean copies of page three hundred and fifteen of

251

Walter Scott’s Redgauntlet. A fine way for a big girl like you to
behave! I expect to see a thoroughly reformed character the
next time I lay eyes on you, Sophie Hunter.”
Sophie trudged along the corridor toward the head’s
office with a strong feeling that the world was against her. It
seemed incredibly unfair to get in trouble for something she
had done in a trance, and worse to think of having fallen into
an altered state without even knowing it.
She thought suddenly of Jekyll and Hyde and the way the
transformation came on more and more easily until Dr. Jekyll
actually lost his original form and became only Mr. Hyde. Had
Sophie somehow opened herself up to this degradation by her
own willful meddling in the spirit world?
She told the secretary that Miss Botham had sent her to
see Miss Henchman, then took a seat on the bench. It was
funny how horrible it felt to have to wait there outside the
head’s office, even knowing she had done nothing substantially wrong. It gave her a disconcerting glimpse into what it
would be like to be one of those girls who got into trouble all
the time.
Her thoughts intent on what had happened in class just
now, it took Sophie a little while to notice that the voices in the
office had become loud enough for her to hear them.
The person in the head’s inner sanctum was none other
than Sophie’s Great-aunt Tabitha.

252

“I hadn’t thought of it for her, possibly not at all and certainly not yet,” Sophie heard her great-aunt say. “Let her complete the university degree first. There are far too few women
in the sciences, and I have always argued that a handful of
exceptional young women must be allowed to opt out of the
scheme.”
Sophie heard the murmur of the headmistress’s voice, but
couldn’t distinguish the words.
“Nonsense!” said Great-aunt Tabitha.
Miss Henchman’s more muted voice responded.
“Certainly not,” said Great-aunt Tabitha.
Another inaudible statement by the headmistress.
“Well,” said Sophie’s great-aunt, sounding rather less certain, “I suppose I can’t stop you.”
They were arguing about what Sophie would do after taking her exams.
Great-aunt Tabitha thought Sophie should go to university.
Miss Henchman thought she should go to IRYLNS.
The headmistress was winning.

253

a

T we nt y-five

S

OPHIE DECIDED TO WALK

home from school on Friday

afternoon rather than taking the tram. Walking lubricated the thought processes, somehow. She decided that

the incidents with the pantelegraph and the Dictaphone had
to be related. Both came close on the heels of her using the
radio to contact the dead. Had Sophie opened up some kind
of doorway? Who wanted to contact her, and why?
The technical diagram from Mr. Petersen’s class remained
a mystery. Sophie had consulted a number of reference
books without finding anything like it. When she asked Mr.
Petersen the next day whether he’d worked out what had
gone wrong, he brushed off her questions, avoiding Sophie’s
eyes.

254

Putting aside the drawing for the moment, Sophie could
see a pattern.
The first dead bomber had revealed hardly anything. He
had been too young, too confused, too remote from the heart
of the conspiracy and, Sophie thought, too long dead.
The second voice had been the Veteran’s. The Veteran had
told her more than poor Andrew Wallace, but not with the
kind of detail that would clear up any mysteries. He’d talked
about the minister taking away his pension and someone hiring him for an assignment, probably the murder of the
medium. He was clearly trying to say something else about the
minister, but Sophie shrank from the idea of contacting him
again. Let him rest in whatever peace he could salvage.
Then the next verbal communication, the words on the
typewriter in Miss Botham’s class. Sophie still had no recollection of hearing anyone on the recording other than Miss
Henchman. She’d gone back afterward and begged Miss
Botham to allow her to finish the typing job properly. That was
just what Miss Botham wanted to hear, and so she let Sophie
listen again to the whole thing, on the condition that she type
out a clean copy. And there was nothing out of the ordinary,
unless one found it extraordinary that Miss Henchman
thought it possible to prevent girls from being seen in town
during term time without the full, correct school uniform.
But there was no doubt in Sophie’s mind that the voice

255

she’d heard belonged to the dead medium. The spirit of Mrs.
Tansy had spoken of a bloody interfering bitch—Sophie mentally cringed, but mightn’t she be talking about Great-aunt
Tabitha? What if Sophie’s great-aunt had interfered in some
crucial way, perhaps by telephoning the ministry to ask for
surveillance after that first séance?
Though the medium had alluded to an old one and a
young one, Sophie didn’t know who they might be. But she’d
also mentioned a favorite young fellow, and it had come in a
flash to Sophie at breakfast that Mrs. Tansy might have been
talking about her cat.
She’d seemed to speak directly to Sophie, in any case,
when she warned her “it’s not the one you think it’s the other
one.” But which was which?
Sophie tried to reason backward from the medium’s
words. Two people, a young one and an old one. Who might
they be? And who was the man the Veteran had conversed
with, the conversation that led him next to mention the attack
on the minister?
The strap of Sophie’s satchel pressed painfully into her
shoulder, and a blister was forming in the place where her
sock had worn through. Absently her hand found Andrew’s
green glass piece in her pocket. At the same time her eye fell
on the pyramid of fruit in front of the greengrocer’s: punnets
of strawberries, raspberries, currants, and gooseberries beside

256

a few lonely bunches of imported grapes.
The dead boy had said something about a man with eyes
the glassy green of peeled grapes, hadn’t he? All grapes were
pale green once you peeled them, even red ones—the same
green as the softly polished glass under her fingers. Green like
gooseberries. Green like glass.
And in a blinding flash, Sophie saw it. What an idiot she
was not to have thought of it sooner!
The dead boy hadn’t spoken of green grapes, only of
green glass. It was Sophie who’d met a woman whose eyes
reminded her of peeled grapes, a woman whose assistant had
eyes the exact same color.
The Veteran had attacked Joanna Murchison in public,
asking where his money was. Not his pension, but his rightful
payment for a commission?
Murchison’s ministerial portfolio included Scotland’s prisons as well as the army veterans’ association. She would have
had no difficulty having the Veteran killed in his cell.
Joanna Murchison—the minister of public safety—
responsible for the Veteran’s death, and for the medium’s
before that?
The thought struck Sophie like a thunderclap. What if the
minister had ordered the medium killed because Mrs. Tansy
had discovered she was the puppet master pulling the strings
of the Brothers of the Northern Liberties, directing all the

257

terrorists’ actions from behind the respectable façade of the
ministry, perhaps even supplying them with explosives?
What a fool Sophie was for not having seen it before! The
great thing about the attacks, from the minister’s point of view,
was that they provided the perfect pretext for Scotland to go
to war with Europe. The minister believed that only war
would keep the country safe. That meant she would do just
about anything to make sure people agreed, even if it meant
killing hundreds of innocent citizens. Someone like the minister, Sophie felt certain, could easily persuade herself that giving explosives to terrorists was for the greater good.
Joanna Murchison had probably been tracking the
Brothers of the Northern Liberties and planting evidence
against the Europeans all along. When her plan came to
fruition, she would make the evidence public, arrest all the
remaining terrorists, and lead the country to war. Even peace
supporters would want revenge for the deaths of so many
civilians on Scottish soil.
The most shocking thing, if this was true, was the way the
minister hadn’t scrupled to sacrifice the lives of Edinburgh’s
citizens. Almost more than the murders of the medium and
the Veteran, that showed what kind of person she was.
Wait, though. Was the minister the principal villain of the
piece, or was it Nicko? That must have been what the medium
was trying to tell her. It wasn’t the old one, it was the young

258

one! The green glassy eyes that Andrew’s spirit had mentioned
were just as likely to belong to Nicko Mood as to his master.
The actual perpetrator, the person who dealt with the terrorists and hired the Veteran to kill Mrs. Tansy, surely wouldn’t
have been the minister. It was far more likely to have been
Nicholas Mood, Nicko with his insatiable desire to please and
his desperate impulse to advance himself. Why, it even seemed
possible that the minister herself might not know about all of
his stratagems.
Sophie didn’t realize that she’d stopped with her key actually in the lock until the front door fell open, Great-aunt
Tabitha on the other side.
“Sophie, what on earth . . . ?” she said. “I thought it might
be some sort of salesman—didn’t like the idea of someone
lurking on the front doorstep without ringing the bell—
thought I’d surprise the villain—never thought it might be
you. Were you having trouble with the lock?”
Without waiting for an answer, she hustled Sophie into the
sitting room and rang for tea.
“I’m off shortly,” she told Sophie, “but I thought you’d
like to see the results of last week’s séance.”
Sophie hung back. If only Great-aunt Tabitha would leave
her alone!
“Come and see,” coaxed Great-aunt Tabitha, her tone,
Sophie couldn’t help thinking, rather like the wolf’s in “Little

259

Red Riding Hood.” “At last week’s Domestic Photo Circle, we
captured a number of the dead on film. Look, this is my dear
departed sister Alice, who died of diphtheria when we were
children.”
The picture looked like nothing so much as the blurry
image of the cirronimbus cloud type in Sophie’s geography
textbook. It was hard to understand how even the most fond
bereaved person could see a human being.
Great-aunt Tabitha didn’t notice Sophie’s lack of enthusiasm. She chattered away until Sophie’s head ached, then left
Sophie drinking a cup of strong, sweet milky tea while she got
ready to go out. At least she didn’t seem annoyed with Sophie
any longer.
“I won’t be late,” she told Sophie before going upstairs.
“If you’re still awake when I get back, I’d like a word before
you go to bed.”
Afterward Sophie took the tea tray down to the kitchen,
said hello to Peggy, who was grumbling because the price of
eggs had gone up again for the third time since March, and
went upstairs to her room.
Unpacking her satchel, she stopped dead in her tracks.
Photography! That was the way to prove her suspicions
groundless or else get firm corroboration, especially given the
need to find out who was more culpable, the minister or her
assistant.

260

Spirit voices spoke in vague suggestive phrases. But if
Sophie asked a spirit questions about the crimes and received
an actual image of its perpetrator in response, the evidence
would be irrefutable. Photos were by far the best way of identifying someone for certain.
In primary school Sophie had made something called a pinhole camera, which was a fancy name for an ordinary cardboard
box with a hole poked through the side, used for watching an
eclipse without hurting one’s eyes by looking directly at the sun.
If she worked out something like that, Sophie wouldn’t need
an expensive camera, just a box and some special paper covered with photographic emulsion, a low-budget substitute for
the mechanically sophisticated image trappers used by the
professionals.
And she knew the perfect place to get what she needed!
Checking her watch, Sophie saw it was only half past five.
Good. That funny little shop next door to the bookshop in
Broughton Street Lane would still be open, the one that sold
photographic supplies and spiritualist equipment.
She dug around in her bag to see how much money she
had, then sifted through the dish of coins on top of the chest
of drawers, superstitiously averting her eyes from the mirror.
That was where it all had started, with that pretty lady in
the mirror on the day Mrs. Tansy had come for the séance.
There was something painful in thinking about it. She very

261

much wanted to see the lady again, and learn who she was—
surely it must be a connection to Sophie’s dead mother’s family? The resemblance had been striking.
When she finished counting her money, Sophie pulled
herself together to face facts. She didn’t have much, she
might well need more, and what that meant was that she’d
have to break open the bank she’d had since age five, a
hideous red clay pig with a rather sweet expression on its
squashed face. The only way of getting the money out was
to smash it open.
For ten years now Sophie had put money into the bank
whenever she could spare it—against a rainy day, Peggy would
say. It felt satisfyingly heavy when she shook it around, the
jangling of coins muffled by a few ten-shilling notes from
birthdays and Hogmanay.
Though it seemed to mark the destruction of her childhood, it was the work of only a moment to smash open the
pig with the fireplace poker. Amazingly, she had over ten
pounds.
She tucked away most of it beneath her underthings in the
top drawer, then shoveled several pounds’ worth of coins into
the front pocket of her satchel. She’d have to find a dustpan
and brush to clean up the wreckage, otherwise Peggy would
want to know what she was up to, and Sophie had no intention of telling.

262

She did stop back in the kitchen to say she’d be out for
half an hour. Peggy muttered something about people who
didn’t take their meals at regular times, but when Sophie
promised to be back for supper at seven, Peggy kissed her on
the cheek and told her not to hurry, they’d wait on her, fine
lady that she was turning into.

263

a

T we nt y-s ix

AALKING THROUGH THE streets, Sophie’s feet felt

W

alight, like in the kind of dream where one

speeds effortlessly forward, four or five inches

off the ground. For a moment she wondered whether she
might be getting assistance from the spirit world, then felt silly
when she realized it was just the effect of having emptied the
schoolbooks from her satchel.
It was a great relief to find the shop still open. Sophie had
never been inside before, having felt more aversion than
attraction to the mysterious notices in the window (“Lady psychometrist seeks spiritualist gentleman, smokers need not
apply”; “Train your powers of psychic communication in SIX
EASY LESSONS”).

264

It was a cramped room stuffed almost to bursting, the wall
to the left dominated by a reproduction of Daguerre’s famous
photograph of the Champs Elysées. The picture made Paris
look like a ghost town, the presence of the thousands of people who must have passed across the camera’s field of view
during the plate’s exposure marked only by fleeting streaks of
light.
Sophie heard someone clearing his throat. She turned to
find a very young man with slicked-back hair, a spotty face,
and a painfully prominent Adam’s apple, who smiled and
asked how he could help her in a pleasant but nasal voice.
Great-aunt Tabitha loathed and despised what she called
jumped-up shop assistants, but Sophie thought this boy
sounded nice. She decided to tell him the truth about what she
needed.
“I want to buy a packet of photographic paper,” she said,
digging the coins out of her satchel and tipping them in a heap
on the counter. “Whatever kind’s best for capturing images
from the spirit world.”
“Hmm,” the boy said, his fingers stroking a pitiful fringe
of chin hair that only a dyed-in-the-wool optimist could have
called a beard. “Tell me more. What kinds of spirit? Do you
mean to use a camera, or do you prefer direct exposure? If I
know exactly what you’re wanting to do, I’ll be better able to
help you choose the right materials.”

265

He had a good forceful way of speaking, and Sophie
thought he’d be better off selling things over the telephone
than in person, where extreme youth cut into his authority.
“I’m not exactly sure,” she confessed, leaning her elbows
on the counter and resting her chin in her hands. “I’ve been
conducting an investigation, asking spirits quite practical
questions and getting answers that are vague to the point of
being actively unhelpful. What I want now is to get something
more precise. I thought that photographs might make things
clearer.”
“So you’d like to use photography to persuade your spirits to narrow things down,” said the shop assistant. “You’ll not
be wanting to take pictures of the spirits themselves, then?”
“Oh, no,” said Sophie, a little shocked. “Why would I
want to do that?”
“You’d be surprised what people want,” said the boy.
“You do see the difference between the two kinds of photography, don’t you? I’m Keith, by the way.”
“I’m Sophie,” Sophie said.
They shook hands solemnly, Sophie revising her estimate
of his age downward from nineteen or twenty to sixteen or at
the very most seventeen.
“Yes, I know I look awfully young,” said Keith, disconcerting Sophie by seeming to read her thoughts, “but I turned
eighteen last week and I’ve been subbing for my older brother

266

in the shop for years. He’s off north to cover the Highland
Games for the Courant—it might not sound like much, but
the paper will put him on staff if he does a good job. He’s not
like me; he goes mad if he has to spend every day in the shop,
so we’re all crossing our fingers it’ll work out.”
Sophie promised to add her own positive finger-crossing
powers in aid of Keith’s brother’s advancement, and Keith
thanked her before turning over a flyer for an amateur photography competition and beginning to sketch a diagram on
the back.
“Back to what I was saying,” he said, “if you’re simply trying to capture spirit presences, you don’t need anything fancy.
Think of Becquerel proving the existence of radioactivity by
wrapping a photographic plate in black paper. All he did was
lay a sample of uranium on top, and it emitted rays that fogged
the plate. In the same way a spirit will often leave traces on
film, so long as the room’s really dark. Very often what people
display as spirit photography, of course, really just shows they
haven’t sealed the room properly.”
Sophie thought of Great-aunt Tabitha’s latest effort and
nodded.
“What you’re wanting to do is something rather more
interesting,” Keith said, scribbling another diagram beside the
first. “There used to be a superstition that the eyes of a murdered man could actually trap an image of the murderer. I

267

don’t know about that, but I do know that the police have
been experimenting with a device that does something rather
similar. They’ve mostly given up on it, though, because it
won’t work unless you’ve got a good psychic scientist on staff,
and all they’ve got is a handful of crackpot spiritualist types.
No offense,” he added.
“None taken,” said Sophie. Keith was exactly Sophie’s
kind of person.
“The basic idea,” Keith said, so earnestly it was almost
comical, “is that many serious crimes—murder’s an obvious
example—leave no witnesses aside from the perpetrator. So
you want to get the dead to testify, but their words are often
so vague as to be useless, not to mention that the 1921 decision in Scotland v. Blavatsky affirmed that recordings of the
voices of the dead are inadmissible in court. They’re simply
too easy to fake.”
“You really know your stuff, don’t you?” Sophie said,
impressed.
Keith nodded. “Yep, this is something I’m specially interested in,” he said. “The legal aspects are fascinating—you
should see the judge’s opinion in—”
Sophie interrupted him by tapping the face of her watch
with her index finger.
“Oh. Yes. Well, most of the same objections don’t apply
to images. Trickery’s far from unknown in spirit photography,

268

but it’s relatively easy to prevent fraud if you know what
you’re doing. What you want is a setup capable of recording
the last visual memories of the dead person. You get that by
creating an arrangement that mimics the workings of the
human eye—cornea, iris, lens, and so on—and using photographic paper as an artificial retina for recording patterns of
light, which are organized by the psychic scientist and the
dead person’s spirit.”
“Do you mean to say that ordinary spirit photography
doesn’t even require a camera, just a simple mechanism for
recording images,” Sophie asked, not sure she’d understood
him, “but that what I want to do needs a very special kind of
camera?”
“Yes, that’s exactly right,” Keith said.
“Would it be very expensive to get one?” she asked.
“I think there’s a way around that,” said Keith. “Sophie,
it’s funny you came in today. It’s almost as if it was meant.”
Sophie didn’t like it when people suggested that perfectly
ordinary minor coincidences signaled some deep pattern in
the universe, but it was true she’d felt an instant connection
with Keith.
“What are you saying?” she asked.
“I’ve been building cameras like that for years,” he said.
“It happens that I’ve got a new prototype I’m anxious to test.
And though I’m far from being a medium myself, I’ve got a

269

strong feeling—oh, call it a psychic premonition—that you’re
exactly the partner I’ve been looking for. What do you think?
Are you willing to serve as medium?”
Then, when Sophie said nothing: “I haven’t offended you,
have I? You are a medium, I’m sure of it. Oh, I’ve got it all
wrong as usual, haven’t I? I’m sorry, Sophie, I didn’t—”
“Be quiet,” Sophie said. “I’m thinking.”
What did it mean, that someone she’d only just met would
guess that Sophie was a medium? She hated the very sound of
the word. She wasn’t any such thing. Or was she?
The struggle showed in her face, and Keith sighed.
“All right, let me guess,” he said. “You’re worried about
whether you can trust me. I’m going to lay out all the advantages. First: you may not realize it, but you’re talking about
something technically quite difficult. Second: it’s not a good
idea to do this kind of work on your own. You need safeguards to make sure you’re not simply capturing images from
your own memory; you need someone to operate the camera,
so that you can concentrate on the mental aspects; and you
need someone to observe and certify the results.”
“Maybe it isn’t such a good idea,” Sophie said, discouraged.
“Don’t be an idiot!” Keith said, more cheerful than ever.
“Third: I’m betting you don’t have a license. But I’ve got my
certification from the Glasgow Society for Psychical Research,
Spirit Photography Division. Look!”

270

He whipped out his wallet, withdrew a card, and slapped
it down on the counter between them.
Sophie picked it up and examined it. Printed on the back
was the Dodgson Compact, a version of the Hippocratic Oath
adapted for spirit photographers by one of the first scientists
to enter the field. The text below identified Keith as a fully
licensed psycho-photographic consultant, with authority to
testify as an expert witness in courts throughout the Hanseatic
states as well as to supervise spiritualist investigations by unlicensed practitioners.
“Aren’t you going to tell me how young I am to have got
this?” Keith asked.
“Certainly not!” Sophie answered. “Didn’t anyone ever
tell you it’s bad manners to fish for compliments?”
Keith started laughing. “I think I’m still allowed to gloat,”
he said. “The card only came in yesterday’s post!”
“Anyway, telling a person how young he is sounds more
like an insult than a compliment, doesn’t it?” said Sophie. “I
think young people should be treated exactly like older ones.”
“I couldn’t agree more,” said Keith, contemplating the
document with great satisfaction before putting it away in his
wallet. “But seriously, Sophie, I’m not fooling around when I
say you’ll get much better results this way. You don’t think I’m
trying to pull one over on you, do you? I won’t charge you a
penny; I’ll even pay for the materials.”

271

“No, I’m paying for the materials,” Sophie protested, only
realizing this meant she’d agreed to work with him when he
whooped with delight.
He seemed so pleased, she dismissed the remaining scruples from her mind. She would make sure he didn’t end up
out of pocket, and she wouldn’t tell him anything that would
put him in a difficult or dangerous position.
“Ordinarily, my brother helps with the technical part,” he
said, “but since he’s away, have you a friend you trust to stand
in as our assistant?”
Sophie’s thoughts went at once to Mikael.
“Yes, I’ve got someone,” she said. “When shall we do it?”
“Tomorrow’s good,” said Keith. “I close up the shop
around six, so we’d be able to get started soon after. Does that
sound all right?”
“Oh, yes,” said Sophie, amazed and grateful at how
smoothly it was all working out. “Do you need me to bring
anything?”
“No, nothing at all,” said Keith.
“Thank you so much,” Sophie said impulsively. “I can’t
tell you how little I was looking forward to this. I’m fine with
machines—radios and such—but I’ve no affinity for pictures.
And it’s creepy dipping into the spirit world all by yourself!”
“Yes, that’s something best done in the company of others,” Keith said.

272

Then, as Sophie turned to leave: “Aren’t you forgetting
something?” he said.
“What?”
“Your money,” he said, waving a hand at the pile of cash.
“Won’t you take it toward the supplies for tomorrow?”
Sophie asked, feeling magnanimous and rich.
Keith brushed away her offer, which he seemed ready to
take as a reflection on his social standing, so Sophie scooped
the money back into her satchel, where it jangled ridiculously
loudly during her walk home.
For supper Peggy gave her a ham sandwich and a bowl of
tomato soup heated up out of a tin. Afterward Sophie took a
book and went to read on the window seat in the sitting room.
It was so private there, it was almost like being in her own little house. The cushions and the curtains completely concealed
her from the rest of the room.
Her eyelids kept drooping, and she jerked herself awake
several times before deciding there was no reason not to give
in and sleep.
She woke with a start.
“Minister of public safety, indeed!” said a familiar voice.
It took Sophie a minute to realize it belonged to Miss Grant,
Great-aunt Tabitha’s ally from the Scottish Society for
Psychical Research. She sounded absolutely furious. “It’s a

273

perversion of the language to suggest the wretched woman
will bring Scotland to anything other than calamity and mass
destruction.”
“I couldn’t agree with you more, Ruth, but we must put
our minds to the problem and work out what to do next,” said
Sophie’s great-aunt. “What do you think?”
“I’ve assigned several operatives to see if they can dig up
anything to use against Murchison,” said the younger woman.
“I’m confident they’ll find dirt, but it’s a question of timing. If
she goes public about Europe and the Brothers of the
Northern Liberties before we come up with anything substantial, it’s going to be difficult to stop things from moving inexorably toward war.”
“I’m currently looking into the situation with the
Brothers,” said Great-aunt Tabitha. “I don’t think she’s told
us the whole story, and it may prove a weak point in the
defenses.”
“What about Nicko Mood?” asked Miss Grant.
“I don’t think he’s capable of doing much on his own,”
said Great-aunt Tabitha, “but he may well have become an
effective instrument. The real pity is that Joanna’s come down
so hard on the side of war. When we were younger, I worried
about her politics, but I never thought it would come to this.
On almost every other issue she’s completely sound: she’s the
only member of the cabinet who agrees with me about the

274

importance of higher education for women, for instance, and
she’s admirably tough-minded on the Highland fisheries.”
“Why do you think she’s come on so strong for war, then?”
“I’m not sure, though I suppose that if I were the only
woman in the cabinet, I too might grow weary of having all the
men roll their eyes whenever I spoke about peace. It is awfully
tiresome when one’s pacifist side is attributed solely to the fact
of one’s being a woman.”
“A number of prominent men count themselves part of
the peace party as well,” Miss Grant objected.
“In the Hanseatic states as a whole, certainly,” said Greataunt Tabitha, “but in Scotland, at least over the last ten or fifteen years, willingness to speak boldly of war has become a
kind of shibboleth of masculinity. No, if Joanna’s used unacceptable means to put together the case for war, she must be
exposed and brought to account, but I’m not saying I don’t
feel for her. We must see what we can do to stop her.”
She fell silent, then spoke again. “One thing’s certain,
Ruth.”
“What’s that?”
“The program at IRYLNS must be expanded at once. I
tell you, those girls provide the single most effective bulwark
against the Europeans. There’s not a moment to be lost.”
They spoke for a few more minutes, then left the room.
Still in shock at her great-aunt’s continued support of

275

IRYLNS, Sophie wondered if she should confess to Great-aunt
Tabitha she’d overheard the whole thing. No, discretion sometimes really was the better part of valor. It was strange how often
she’d benefited in the last few days from eavesdropping—
though perhaps benefited wasn’t the right word.
She opened the sitting-room door a crack and heard
Great-aunt Tabitha let Miss Grant out, then lock the front
door and descend to the kitchen for her evening cup of
chamomile tea.
Sophie slipped upstairs to her bedroom, tore off her
clothes, and threw herself into bed. Ten minutes later, when a
knock came at the bedroom door, Sophie lay still as a dead
mouse. The knock came again, but Sophie didn’t answer. She
could hear Great-aunt Tabitha’s breathing outside on the
landing. After a few minutes more, the sound of departing
footsteps told Sophie that her great-aunt had decided not to
disturb her.
It was a relief in a way to know that Great-aunt Tabitha
hadn’t just given in and accepted the ascendancy of the minister of public safety. If anyone could stop Joanna Murchison,
surely it was Great-aunt Tabitha. But how could she speak
with such approval of expanding IRYLNS? Why was she so
willing to give the girls—except Sophie—up to the knife? And
would anything intervene to halt the proceedings when
Sophie’s turn came?

276

a

T we nt y-s e ve n

“W

EE CAN’T DO IT,

we simply can’t,” Mikael

asaid, pacing back and forth on an isolate
patch of grass in the Meadows the next

afternoon.
“What’s your objection, though?” Sophie asked. “I know
you’re not wild about spiritualism. But you were willing to
pose as a client for Mrs. Tansy, and I don’t see how this is different, except that the stakes are an awful lot higher now. You
were the one who told me to see if the spirits could tell me
anything about your brother!”
“I was joking!” Mikael shouted.
Sophie hoped nobody could overhear them.
“I wouldn’t have actually sat in a séance, besides,” he

277

added in a quieter voice. “Here you’re asking me to take part
in exactly the kind of shady transaction I most despise!”
“It won’t be shady at all,” Sophie said, struggling to keep
her temper. “Keith says himself that most of what’s presented
as spirit photography is fraudulent. He wouldn’t have anything to do with that sort of thing, he’s mostly just excited
about trying out his new invention. In fact, in a way it’s us
who’ll be helping him, not the other way around. You’ll see
how good he is when you meet him.”
“What is it with you, Sophie? You meet this chap and all
of a sudden it’s Keith this, Keith that. You’re ridiculously
impressionable! I don’t think much of your loyalty to your old
friends, I can tell you that much.”
He picked up a large pebble and flicked it toward the
ducks in the small ornamental pond nearby. The flock of birds
flapped up off the surface of the water and flew away.
Mikael sounded almost jealous of Keith, though Sophie
couldn’t think why. She hadn’t adopted Keith as her new best
friend. People were so silly about things like this. Sophie had
to push away a strong sense of irritation as she applied herself
to the task of soothing Mikael’s injured feelings.
Half an hour later, Mikael had agreed to help operate the
camera that evening and to reserve judgment on the authenticity of the results.
“After all, we can’t afford to waste time argy-bargying

278

when there’s a murderer running loose,” he concluded, looking smug.
It took all of Sophie’s self-control not to roll her eyes.
To seal their reconciliation, they shared a dry hunk of cake
pilfered by Sophie from the tin in the kitchen at Heriot Row.
“Aren’t you going to eat yours?” he asked Sophie, who
had picked off the icing and left the cake in several pieces on
the greaseproof paper.
“I don’t like cake very much,” Sophie said. “The one
really good thing about cake is that it’s an excellent icing delivery system.”
“What an extraordinary thing to say! You don’t mean to
say you’d rather have icing than cake? Can I have yours if you
don’t want it?”
“It’s all yours,” Sophie said, and the cake vanished into
Mikael’s mouth.
“Wouldn’t it make more sense, then,” Mikael asked
through a spray of crumbs, “not to bother with the cake at all,
and to eat icing with a spoon straight from the bowl?”
Sophie passed him the bottle of fizzy lemonade.
“That wouldn’t be the same at all,” she said. “For one
thing, the icing goes all lovely and hard when it’s actually on
the cake, with a sort of crust of crumbs on the side where it’s
attached. Picking it off and leaving the rest feels naughty and
luxurious.”

279

They finished the lemonade and put the rubbish into a bin
nearby, already overflowing with refuse. In central Edinburgh
all the bins had been removed because they provided such
ready receptacles for bombs, but the city council had evidently spared this one, probably because the terrorists
wouldn’t waste their matériel outside the densely populated
city center.
“How long have we got before our appointment with the
Boy Photographic Wonder?” Mikael asked.
“Three hours,” said Sophie, ignoring his sarcasm.
“Good. I’m dead set on seeing the exhibition.”
“I don’t see why we shouldn’t walk through the displays,”
Sophie said. “They don’t charge admission, except for a few of
the pavilions.”
“Right, then. What are we waiting for?”
Sophie led the way to the Bruntsfield Links, formerly a
golf course, now home to the tents and permanent pavilions of
the Hanseatic Expo. On the other side of the links were
ancient burial pits supposed to contain more than ten thousand plague victims, and Sophie thought for one queasinessinducing second that she could actually smell the half-decayed
bodies. A moment later the smell resolved itself into an agricultural miasma rising from the first display area, a show of
prize livestock proclaiming Scotland’s superiority in the matter of pigs, sheep, chickens, and dairy cows.

280

They watched a Punch-and-Judy show, Sophie struck by a
strong resemblance between the Judy puppet and Miss
Henchman (could one of the puppeteers possibly have
attended Sophie’s school?), then sampled thirteen different
kinds of jam, all made of fruit native to Scotland. Sophie was
afraid that Mikael must have seen much better exhibitions in
Denmark, but he seemed well entertained by what was on
offer, particularly when it was edible.
The fair was thronged with buskers and beggars, most of
them veterans of the armed services. Sophie gave away a few
coins, although Great-aunt Tabitha always said not to because
the money would just be spent on drink.
They coughed up the entrance fee for the Grand Pavilion,
which housed a rotating set of scientific exhibits designed to
demonstrate Scotland’s achievements in technology. Outside it
was impossible to tell exactly what they were paying for, but
by the time the line snaked forward into the main tent Sophie
was no less eager than Mikael to lay eyes on the Miracle of Life
Extended.
Inside, two pretty girls in skimpy one-piece spangled outfits posed on either side of a giant glass box. Mikael whistled
his appreciation.
A person who wore something like that on the beach at
North Berwick, Sophie thought sourly, would surely be
arrested. That was to say, if she didn’t freeze to death first! But

281

she decided not to say anything in case Mikael thought she
was jealous.
Closer up, the two girls looked older and less pretty, their
long slim legs and acrobatic torsos belied by the wrinkles on
their faces and the ropy skin of their necks.
As they got close enough to see inside the glass case,
Sophie craned forward to read the label below.
Mikael suddenly clutched Sophie’s arm.
“Tell me those aren’t real babies,” he said.
Sophie looked at him with surprise.
“Of course they’re real!” she said, laughing at his expression. “If they were just dolls, what kind of a demonstration
would it be?”
Six tiny babies lay almost motionless in the incubator. The
legend below told the history of the artificial incubator, known
to the ancient world in primitive versions but refined over the
nineteenth century for hatching chicken eggs. At the turn of
the century, the Irish obstetrician Oscar Wilde saw one of
these chicken incubators in the Edinburgh Zoological Garden
and realized it could be adapted for the care of babies delivered before the full term. The incubator box’s double walls
were filled with hot water for insulation, its lower half a reservoir containing roughly sixty liters of warm water. The
preterm babies lay in the top of the box, where a thermometer kept track to make sure the temperature never fell beneath

282

thirty degrees centigrade, a miracle of technology that Wilde
and his colleagues had popularized by sending incubators to
expositions throughout the Hanseatic states.
“Does it really seem a good idea to exhibit live babies like
this?” Mikael said. “It’s like an agricultural show! Whose
babies are they, anyway?”
“I don’t know,” Sophie said curtly. If one had any choice,
of course, one wouldn’t let one’s own baby be put on display
like this. But Sophie didn’t like it when Mikael criticized
Scotland. “Probably babies born at the Lying-In Hospital for
the Poor.”
“Sophie, let’s get out of here,” said Mikael. “This place is
too horrible for words.”
They hurried out of the tent and back into the daylight.
As they left the park and cut through the grounds of the
Infirmary north toward Lauriston Place, Sophie couldn’t
get the sight of the infants out of her head. The rational part
of her brain knew they wouldn’t have been put there if the
incubator hadn’t represented their best, perhaps their only,
chance of survival. But to be exposed in public like that
would surely haunt one’s dreams in later life, assuming one
survived.
“Sophie?” Mikael said, sounding odd.
“What’s the matter?” she said, stopping and turning to
look at him. He grabbed her arm and hustled her onward.

283

“Hey, that hurts!” Sophie protested, trying to loosen his
bruising grip.
“I don’t want to frighten you, but I think we’re being followed,” Mikael said. Then, as Sophie reflexively began to turn
her head to look in back of her: “No! Don’t look. I don’t want
him tipped off that we’ve spotted him.”
They sped up, Sophie soon gasping and frightened,
despite herself, by Mikael’s grim expression.
“This area’s no good for losing him,” Mikael said.
“Anywhere that’s public enough for us to be allowed in, he’ll
be able to follow us.”
“Who is he, do you think?” Sophie ventured, hoping
Mikael wouldn’t be angry with her for asking. It was difficult
enough just to talk at all, at this speed, and the leg on the side
of her slight limp was already throbbing.
“Do you remember that beggar you gave a shilling to,
back at the Meadows?”
Sophie remembered, though it was almost impossible not
to look around and confirm it with her own eyes.
Something occurred to her and she let out a short sharp
exclamation. “Mikael, I’ve just thought of something. What if
the man following us is a kind of colleague of the Veteran?
What if this man’s working for the same person that hired the
Veteran to murder Mrs. Tansy?”
What if he’d been hired to kill them?

284

“I think it’s very likely he’s working for the same person,”
Mikael said, speeding up again so that Sophie had to break
into a jog. “It’s possible that the true murderer has a whole
pack of veterans working for him. If that’s so, it might be
another clue we can use to figure out who he really is.”
Sophie hadn’t breath enough to fill him in on her current
state of thinking concerning the minister; it would have to wait
till later.
“This wretch can’t possibly mean to kill us in public,
Sophie,” Mikael added, though he didn’t slow down. “If he
did, he’d not have a dog’s chance of getting away afterward.
He’d have to be a really super marksman to hit either of us
with a pistol at this distance, and it’s easy to see he’s not carrying a rifle. Still, I’ll feel a lot better if we can lose him.”
“Mikael?” Sophie panted.
“What?”
“I think he might have followed me from Heriot Row.”
She had a sketchy memory of seeing a lame figure on the
tram. It seemed very likely that it was the same man.
“We’ll certainly assume that they know who you are and
where you live,” Mikael said. “But that doesn’t mean we can’t
get some privacy for this evening. We’ll go to the most
crowded part of the Old Town and see if we can’t give him the
slip there. We’re moving so fast he’ll know that we’ve spotted
him, but let’s not slow down—I don’t want him getting too

285

close to us, just in case he’s got a gun after all.”
Sophie felt calmer because of Mikael having a plan. The
most frightening thing was not knowing what was going on;
putting even one’s worst fear into words always made it less
awful.
By now they’d reached Grassmarket, and they turned
right and hurried toward St. Giles’ Cathedral. They raced up
Old Fishmarket Close to the High Street, where they slipped
into a draper’s shop. While Mikael peered out the window,
Sophie watched a customer give a ten-shilling note to the
assistant, who wrapped the money in the customer’s invoice
and packed it into an egg-shaped container that she pulled
down from a wire hanging above her head. The container shot
up and away through pneumatic tubes to the countinghouse,
where a boy made the correct change. When the container
shot back down, a bell rang and the assistant reached up and
pulled out the change from its cocoon.
“He saw us come in,” Mikael reported, pressing his face
up against the window. “He’s lurking now in the area downstairs from the shop across the road. What we need to do is
walk out of here, stroll up the High Street, and then make a
break for it. We’ll run up one of those little streets and hide
before he can follow, and with luck he’ll think we’ve only gone
into another shop.”
“And if he sees us?”

286

“Then we split up. You’ll go ahead. I’ll find a way to slow
him down, then lead him astray and lose him. I can outrun
him if I’m by myself. Then we’ll meet up at the bookstall in
Waverley Station.”
“Good thinking,” said Sophie, glad Mikael hadn’t suggested splitting up as the first line of defense. He could run
much faster than she could, but the thought of their being separated made her feel rather ill.
“Ready?”
Sophie nodded.
They pushed open the door and sauntered out into the
street.
They crossed the road, the beggar stuck on the other side
behind a line of schoolchildren.
“Now!” Mikael said.
They began running.
“Here!” Sophie grunted.
They turned into a narrow alley whose name she couldn’t
remember, running now through narrow streets of tenements
like blond sandstone cliffs.
“I’ve got an idea,” Sophie said, clutching the stitch in her side
as they came out into Market Street. Her hip was pulsing like the
devil, a dull pain that was quite tolerable so long as she didn’t
think about it. She couldn’t hear the beggar’s footsteps behind
them, but that didn’t mean he wasn’t there. “Let’s get a taxi!”

287

“Have you enough money?” Mikael asked.
“Yes,” she said, grabbing his hand and practically dragging him to the nearest taxi rank. Fortunately there were three
cabs waiting for customers—on a nice afternoon like this, a
properly frugal citizen wouldn’t waste money on a taxi—and
they jumped into the backseat of the first one.
“What’s all this, then?” said the driver when they asked
him to drive in the direction of St. Mary’s. “How am I to know
this isn’t just a silly game?”
Sophie scrabbled through her satchel and dug out a tenshilling note and two half-crowns.
“I can’t explain it,” she said, “but it really does matter—
we need to leave right now!”
As the words left her mouth, Mikael jabbed her in the
side. The beggar had materialized at the opening into the
street.
Sophie thrust the note into the drawer of the bulletproof
plastic partition that separated the driver from his passengers,
required by law after a terrible series of murders the year before.
“Just drive!” she said, almost shrieking in her anxiety to
be gone.
Shaking his head, the driver pulled out into traffic and
turned left onto North Bridge.
Sophie shuddered. They were going to pass the Balmoral
Hotel once again.

288

“No need for hysterics,” the driver said reproachfully as
the car surged ahead of a bus and took them up Leith Street
and into the New Town. “All you need to do is ask nicely,
miss, and I’ll take you wherever you like.”
“Is he behind us still?” Sophie said to Mikael, speaking
quietly to avoid attracting the driver’s attention.
“No sign of him,” Mikael reported. “This was a prime
idea, Sophie. He wasn’t dressed respectably enough to hail a
taxi himself, even if he had the cash. Why, we’re barely
respectable enough ourselves!”
“It’s quite true,” said Sophie, looking herself and Mikael
up and down and starting to laugh. They clutched at each
other in a near frenzy when they saw how hot and dirty they
were. Then a trickle of cold perspiration ran down into the
small of Sophie’s back; she broke off laughing, and caught her
breath in something like a sob.
The driver let them off in Gayfield Walk, only five minutes
from Broughton Street Lane. Sophie did not have the courage
to ask for change back from her note; it was an awfully expensive cab ride, but then again it had possibly saved their lives.

289

a

T we nt y-e igh t

O

UTSIDE THE PHOTOGRAPHY

shop, Mikael paused.

“Must we really do this, Sophie?” he asked.
“We have to,” she said. “It’s our best chance.

We must learn what happened to the medium; we can’t go
around like this forever, with our lives perhaps in danger and
not even knowing whom to suspect.”
“All right, then,” said Mikael, breathing hard and running
a hand through his hair. “What are we waiting for?”
They pushed open the door and walked into the shop, the
electronic chime sounding its welcome.
At first Mikael and Keith acted like two dogs circling
around and deciding whether they’re going to fight. But once
Keith had locked the front door and drawn the blinds and

290

rather stiffly offered the visitors a hot drink, Mikael unbent
enough to accept a cup of coffee, and after that the obligations
of the guest-host relationship forestalled any direct hostilities.
Sophie cupped her hands around a mug sporting a patchy
image of a black standard poodle. The warmth of it in her
hand was a comfort. Taking a sip, she thought what a good
thing it was that Sir Humphry Davy had put aside his chemical experiments long enough to invent the dehydrated coffee
sachet. Instant coffee was far nicer than the real coffee in
Italian sandwich shops, especially with lots of condensed milk,
which made it taste almost like cocoa.
“So what exactly have you two got planned?” Mikael
asked.
Keith didn’t seem to notice the edge to his words.
“We’re going to test a new camera I’ve developed,” he
said. “Well, to be strictly accurate, it’s not really a new camera,
just a modification of an existing one. Its purpose, as I’ve
designed it, is to capture the images seen by a dead person.”
Seeing Mikael about to snort, Sophie kicked him in the
ankle.
“So, Keith,” Mikael said, glancing sideways at Sophie and
rolling his eyes, “what parts do we play?”
“I’m going to look on,” Keith said, ignoring Mikael’s
rudeness. “That may sound lazy, but in spirit photography the
photographer’s own memories and desires tend to interfere

291

with things. We can’t do anything with the results of this
evening’s experiment unless we know I haven’t affected the
images we receive, either by accident or by fraud.”
“Fair enough,” Mikael said. “What do you need me to
do?”
“Mikael, you’ll operate the camera,” Keith said. “It’ll be
mounted on a tripod, so you won’t need to point it in any particular direction, but the machinery needs a human hand to
advance the film to the next exposure. Don’t worry if you
don’t have much experience with a camera, any old idiot can
do it.”
“What about me?” Sophie asked, putting her hand on
Mikael’s arm to stop him from reacting badly to Keith’s tactlessness.
“You’ve got the toughest job,” Keith said. “All I have to
do is document everything I see in writing, and your friend
here will simply advance to the next frame each time one or
the other of us gives him the go-ahead. You’re the one who has
to find the spirit we want and shape the series of questions. It’s
best to be as specific as possible: requests like ‘show me your
loved one’ are liable to backfire.”
“Oh, I’ve already thought of what I want to ask,” Sophie
said. The questions had been circulating at the back of her
head all day, except for during the chase, when she had been
too frightened to think about spirit photography. “But how do

292

I get in touch with the spirit in the first place?”
“You’ll call it to you, of course,” Keith said. “Don’t worry,
it won’t be difficult. It’s often tricky to get spirits to come and
let you take pictures of them, but that’s not what you’re asking. You just want to know what they saw. Dead people aren’t
so different from living ones, really: even folks who run and
hide when there’s any risk of their being photographed are
usually quite happy to take a photograph as a favor. I’ve got a
good feeling about this, Sophie.”
“So who exactly are you going to contact, Sophie?”
Mikael asked, smirking a little.
Before Sophie could say, Keith held up one hand, palm
toward them.
“It’s best we watch with an open mind,” he said. “Sophie,
don’t tell us a thing until afterward. Are you ready to get
started?”
Sophie and Mikael looked at each other, then nodded.
They followed Keith from the small lounge to a tiny darkroom at the back of the shop. As Keith switched on the
infrared lamp, they looked warily at each other in the spooky
orange glow.
Keith showed Mikael how to operate the camera, then
told him to load a clean roll of film; the factory seal was unbroken. He asked Sophie whether she’d rather sit or stand.
“Stand,” she said.

293

She stayed quite still while Keith fastened a blindfold over
her eyes.
“All set,” he said after that. “Mikael, I’ll tell you when it’s
time to release the shutter. Sophie, it’s all yours.”
Sophie took a minute to slow her breathing back down to
the normal rate. There was no point being nervous. She was
among friends, wasn’t she?
The room felt small and cramped and airless. Sophie
could smell sweat through the photographic chemicals. It was
strange having no visual input at all. She put up her hand and
tweaked the blindfold into a more natural position. She hoped
it would stay properly fastened; Keith hadn’t really tied it
tightly enough.
She had actually worked out her plan the night before in
bed. It had to be Mrs. Tansy she would contact, though
Sophie was frightened of the medium’s strongly malevolent
personality and her almost palpable desire to come back and
make somebody pay.
Sophie focused on breathing in a slow, regular pattern as
she waited for the spirit to find its way to the darkroom.
“You’re not far away,” she said. “You found me the other
day in Miss Botham’s class. You worked out how to speak to
me through the Dictaphone. Now I’ve got something different
for you, something even easier because you won’t have to put
any of it into words. I’m going to ask you some questions.

294

When you answer, I don’t want names, just faces. My friend
Keith’s built a special camera and after each question, you’ll
picture the face of the person I’ve asked about. Mikael and I
will help you print the pictures; together we’ll organize the
light so that the image can be laid down on the film in the
camera.”
She stopped to take several deep breaths, then readied
herself to begin.
“I want you to put yourself in a very particular time and
place,” she said slowly. “It’s the fifteenth of June—a
Wednesday—and you’ve checked into a grand suite at the
Balmoral Hotel.”
Mikael coughed, and Sophie lost her concentration for a
second.
“It’s midday and you’re waiting for your next appointment,” she went on after a minute. “It’s the young man
booked by the night receptionist. There’s a knock at the door.
You open it and show the boy in. Now, the first thing I want
you to give me is a shot of that boy.”
Sophie squeezed her eyes tightly shut behind the blindfold, wrapping her fingers around her thumbs, and concentrated as hard as she could to help the spirit lay down the
memory of Mikael’s face onto the film in the camera. This
would be a kind of control for the rest of the experiment. It
was a good way of getting a feel for it, and the medium’s

295

experience with this kind of work would surely make everything easier.
She kept her eyes closed until she felt a kind of slidinginto-place, like the snick when a jigsaw piece slots into the
right spot.
“I think that’s it,” she whispered.
“Mikael, advance the film, please,” Keith said, sounding
quite calm. “From now on, I’ll tap you on the shoulder to let
you know when it’s time. Sophie, you’re doing very well.”
“All right,” Sophie said, speaking not to Keith but to the
spirit, who felt very close by. She hoped the medium hadn’t
actually materialized: an ectoplasmic embodiment of her too,
too solid flesh would be beyond awful.
“You had another visitor after that. That’s the person I
want you to picture for us now. Before you answered the door,
you bundled Mikael into the wardrobe and locked him in.
Then you answered the door. Who did you see there?”
She waited without feeling anything, then realized she had
to give the medium a little more help.
“What was it?” she said, breathing deeply and feeling suddenly as if her rib cage had come into alignment with someone
else’s, two hearts pumping, two pairs of lungs expanding and
contracting. “Oh. You answered the door and at first you
thought that nobody was there.”
She paused to get a clearer sense of the scene.

296

“You’re looking straight ahead and you don’t see anybody.
You’re thinking someone’s knocked and then run away, like
those awful children in the street where you used to live.”
The words were coming fast to Sophie’s tongue.
“You look left, then right. And then you hear someone
chuckling and you look down. . . .”
The click from before echoed again in Sophie’s head.
Keith seemed to hear it too, for he muttered encouragement
to Sophie.
“The man comes into the room. He’s at ground level. Now
he’s coming toward you and throwing his arms around your
knees in something like a rugby tackle. He’s bringing you to
the floor. He’s got a straight razor and almost before you know
it, he’s clambered up onto your body and slashed your throat
and you roll back away from him as the blood starts gushing
out. Look—look right at his face. Look at the face of the man
who’s just killed you. There—give it to us now.”
Snick. Louder and more definite than before.
“And your spirit’s leaving your body now, hovering over
it. But I need you to answer a few more questions. Mrs. Tansy,
did you ever talk to someone from the Nobel Consortium?
The police seem to think you were in contact with someone—
is there a person I can talk to and find out more?”
Sophie felt the spirit waver. It was rather like leaning over
a boiling saucepan and letting the tiny waves of warmth hit

297

one’s face like hot invisible jelly.
She concentrated hard. “Nobel,” she said again. “Did you
speak to someone of Nobel’s?”
Click. Faint but firm.
“Forward to the next frame, Mikael,” Keith whispered.
“I’m sure we got an image there.”
“Just two more things,” Sophie said now, trying not to
betray the importance of these last questions.
“We think you had strong suspicions about who was
behind the bombings. Did you identify anyone in connection
with them? And if so, who was it? We might need this picture
to track the person down,” she added, “so it will be especially
helpful if you can give us a really good shot.”
Click. The unmistakable sound of a picture being taken.
Sophie heard Mikael advance the film to the next exposure.
“One more,” said Sophie softly. She felt drained and
exhausted from concentrating so hard. “Just one more thing.
Can you tell us who you think hired the man who killed you?
Who sent the Veteran to kill you, Mrs. Tansy?”
SNICK. This time the click was quite loud. Sophie heard
one of the boys swear—she couldn’t tell which—as he failed
to catch a jar of chemicals that slid off a shelf and smashed on
the floor.
“Time to stop this,” Mikael said in a loud voice, angry and
afraid.

298

“Don’t worry,” Keith said, his voice more excited than
fearful. “Telekinetic disturbances often accompany this kind
of manifestation. Sophie, can you hear me? Are you ready to
stop?”
Sophie reached up to take off the blindfold, but paused to
thank the medium first. She did it silently, not wanting to
sound silly to the others, but the words in her head were heartfelt. Thank you. Thank you so much. That was really helpful.
And I promise you I’m going to bring your true murderer to
justice. The Veteran’s dead. I expect you know that. But I
swear to you I’ll do everything I possibly can to find the person who sent him to kill you. I’ll stop that person, if it’s the last
thing I do.
She hoped the medium would go away now. She still
had a slight unpleasant sense of the woman’s presence in the
room.
Taking off the blindfold, she found the other two staring
at her.
“What’s wrong?” she asked.
“Are you all right, Sophie?” Keith asked.
Sophie considered the question.
“I’ve got a bit of a headache,” she said. “Not too bad,
though. How soon will we know whether we’ve got any
results?”
Keith looked at his watch.

299

“It’s half past seven,” he said. “Even working with highspeed chemicals, it’s going to take me at least ninety minutes
to process the film, make a contact sheet from the negatives,
and blow up the prints. Why don’t you two leave me to it for
now and come back just before nine to take a look at what
we’ve got?”
“How do we know you’re not going to pull a switcheroo
on us and substitute another film for the one in the camera, or
give us a completely different set of proofs for that matter?”
Mikael asked, advancing on Keith, his right hand clenched.
Sophie shrank away from Mikael’s fist, but Keith just
sighed and held his ground.
“Look,” he said, “I suggested that Sophie mix in questions she knew the answers to with ones she didn’t, if you see
what I mean. I don’t even know Sophie’s last name or where
she lives, let alone what she’s just been talking about.”
“Don’t you read the papers? You must have recognized
the details—the murder of the woman at the Balmoral—”
“Now I do, but I couldn’t have had pictures prepared in
advance. You’re going to have to trust me on this. You can certainly stay and watch if you like, but it’s awfully cramped in
here and the smell of the chemicals gets to you after a while,
especially if you’re not used to it. Sophie needs to eat something—she’s just expended a huge amount of mental energy,
and I bet her blood sugar’s low. Do me a favor and go to the

300

chip shop around the corner, get her something to eat, and let
me do my part of the job in peace and quiet, all right?”
He let Sophie and Mikael out the back door into an alley
full of garbage, a pack of feral cats nosing through it for their
dinner.

301

a

T we nt y-nine

“W

AIT FOR ME!”

Sophie called out as Mikael nav-

igated through the rubbish.
Mikael turned around to look at her, arms

folded across his chest, face expressionless. Sophie couldn’t
tell what he was thinking.
“What is it?” she said, her voice faltering as she caught up
with him. She felt quite sick to her stomach.
“Don’t tell me you really don’t know,” Mikael said, not
meeting her eyes as he kicked an empty tin across the way.
“I really don’t know!”
“Sophie, this whole spirit business—well, for a long time
I didn’t believe in it at all. Recently I haven’t been so sure.
Some things you have to take seriously, and I can see that

302

tonight’s one of them. So you can cross me off the official
skeptics list.”
Sophie just looked at him. What did he mean her to say in
response? Something flat in his delivery made his words more
hurtful than reassuring.
“Good,” she said uncertainly.
“Just don’t think this whole ‘medium’ business makes you
special,” he added. It was frankly almost a relief to hear the
anger overtly now in his voice, easier than having him angry
with her and insisting he wasn’t. But she didn’t understand
why he was so angry. “Mediums are creepy, and that part of
my opinion’s never going to change. You’d better be very careful you don’t start picking up bad habits, Sophie.”
Letting him browbeat her like this was hardly any different from encouraging him to punch her repeatedly in the
stomach, but Sophie felt immobilized by submissiveness. They
were standing outside the chip shop by now, its greasesmeared windows all steamed up on the inside, and the sight
of a random beggar out of the corner of her eye forced her to
speak.
“We’ve got to go into the shop,” she said urgently. “It’s
too dangerous hanging around outside like this. For all we
know, there’s a whole gang of homeless veterans out looking
for us.”
Mikael let himself be dragged into the storefront, where

303

the smell of hot fat enveloped them like a cloak of invisibility.
“I’m starving,” he said, sounding surprised. He turned to
Sophie and laid a hand on her elbow, an apology fluttering in
the softness of his touch. “Let’s get some food. Have you any
money left?”
They ordered two fish suppers and an extra portion of
chips and mushy peas. Though the chips were soggy, the fish
was shockingly good, its flesh falling into fragrant white flakes
under the crisp batter shell.
“So what do you think?” Sophie asked when the ruins of
the meal lay on the table between them.
Mikael swigged the last of his Iron Brew, a rust-colored
fizzy drink (“Made in Scotland from Girders”). He burped
and wiped his hands on a paper napkin.
“On the basis of that beggar following us this afternoon,”
he said, “I think we’re justified in drawing a few conclusions.
Are we in agreement that (a) the same person may be responsible for the terrorist attacks as well as for the murder of Mrs.
Tansy, and (b) he’s also potentially running a whole network of
those army veterans you see begging on the streets?”
Sophie nodded. She supposed there was no point saying
that it might be a woman; they would have to see what the pictures showed.
“It’s possible, of course,” Mikael continued, “that the beggar following us today isn’t working for the same person who

304

hired your Veteran to kill the medium—”
“Possible, but not likely,” Sophie interrupted.
“That’s right,” said Mikael. “Which means that (c) this
person’s found something out about our investigation and
alerted his gang to follow us wherever we go. How would you
say we attracted his attention, Sophie?”
“When you were taken to the Castle and questioned,”
Sophie said, “that would have sent up a red flag. And I was
there too. Because of the Veteran being killed in his cell, we
know the villain must be someone with pretty good access,
maybe even someone who’s part of the government. . . .”
“Well, whoever he is,” said Mikael, “it wouldn’t have been
hard for him to have had one or both of us tailed.”
“Both, most likely,” said Sophie.
They looked at each other, their faces pale and frightened.
“I don’t see what we can do about it,” Sophie said finally.
“We’d better both be very careful,” Mikael said.
Shortly before nine o’clock, they bought a paper poke of
chips for Keith and returned to the door in the alley.
“You’re not going to believe what good shots we’ve got,”
Keith said in greeting. “Oh, thanks,” he added as Mikael
handed him the chips. “Just let me lock up back here, and I’ll
show you everything.”
He ushered them again into the darkroom, where sheets
of photographic paper were clipped to washing lines with

305

ordinary clothes-pegs, amid a strong smell of chemicals and
the sound of dripping water.
“They’re exceptionally clear,” Keith said, stuffing chips
into his mouth and gesturing to the suspended prints. “I’ve
printed two sets, Sophie, one for you and one for me. You
must promise you’ll work with me again. I’ve never seen anything so good.”
Sophie was just relieved he didn’t use the word medium.
She tried not to look at Mikael.
“Each time Sophie asked a question,” Keith continued,
tactfully directing the explanation toward Mikael, “it was
framed in such a way that all the spirit had to do was focus on
a single face. With the first question, she asked the spirit to
provide an image of the young visitor that day. And look!”
He held up a head-and-shoulders portrait that was so
unmistakably of Mikael himself that even Sophie wondered
for a split second whether Keith could have rigged a secret
camera. Then she dismissed her suspicions. She had felt the
medium’s presence, after all.
She cast a quick look at Mikael, but it was impossible to
tell what he was thinking.
“After that, Sophie asked the spirit to focus on a second
visitor. Here’s where Sophie made really imaginative use of her
knowledge of what must have happened. Look, this print shows
several superimposed images; it’s rather like what happens

306

when an ordinary camera jams and gives you multiple exposures in a single frame. It’s a little dizzying, isn’t it? You two
aren’t so used to it as I am. But look at the picture’s different
layers. See, here’s where the dead woman—not that she was
dead yet, of course—opened the door of the hotel room and
looked straight ahead. If you look closely, you can see she’s
actually captured the pattern of the wallpaper on the other
side of the corridor.”
Mikael leaned forward to look more closely.
“I recognize that fleur-de-lis pattern,” he said, his voice
hoarse with surprise. “That’s exactly the wallpaper they’ve got
on the hotel walls, a sort of bumpy velvety stuff.”
“These blurry marks show her moving her head from side
to side,” Keith continued, politely ignoring Mikael’s shock.
“And then she finds the target: she looks down and sees the
person Sophie asked about. We’re facing down toward a figure—an elderly man, pretty scruffy-looking—who’s sitting for
some reason on the floor in front of the doorway. Look, it’s so
clear that you can actually see the weave of the carpet behind
him.”
“He’s not really sitting on the floor,” Sophie said. “He’s a
double amputee, a war veteran, and if you look closely you can
see he’s on a sort of cart.”
Keith looked, raised an eyebrow, and wrote a few lines in
the fat exercise book lying open on the counter.

307

“The next one’s a bit gruesome,” he warned, pausing for
a moment before he held it up for them to see.
Sophie and Mikael stared in silence at a picture all the
more horrifying for not showing any actual gore.
All that could be seen was the Veteran’s contorted face,
much too close up.
Sophie could almost feel the flash of the razor across her
throat and the pressure of the man’s powerful arms holding
down her shoulders as she tried to roll away from him, his
breath hot and horrible in her face.
She suddenly wished she hadn’t eaten all those chips. She
hoped she wasn’t going to be sick.
“Sophie asked next about the Nobel Consortium,” Keith
went on. “I suppose she’s trying to get a sense of the woman’s
political entanglements. Well, there’s a pretty clear answer on
this one. I’ve got no clue who the man is, but it’s an extremely
clear photograph, and perhaps one of you has some ideas
about where to look for him. . . .”
And the photograph he held up? It was Mr. Petersen!
She was conscious of a fierce bubbling excitement—now
they were getting somewhere, this made sense of so many
other things, of course Mr. Petersen was working for
Nobel!—and was about to open her mouth to identify him
when she felt Mikael painfully grip her upper arm. “Don’t say
anything,” he said in a voice just above a whisper. “We’ll talk

308

about it later—there’s no reason to let Keith in on it.”
Keith politely ignored the conflict—he really was an
unusually patient and well-mannered boy, not like Mikael,
whose fingers were bruising Sophie painfully. How did Mikael
know what she was about to say? She supposed her face must
be more transparent than she thought, or else Mikael just
knew her very well.
“All right,” she whispered angrily to Mikael, “but stop
making such an ass of yourself, it’s not polite.”
“Polite?” Mikael yelped, but he let go of Sophie’s arm and
said a gruff “Sorry, mate” to Keith.
Sophie was consumed now with impatience to see the last
two photographs, of the person Mrs. Tansy suspected of being
behind the bombings and the person who’d sent the Veteran
to kill her at the Balmoral.
It was conceivable that the picture would show the face of
some entirely unknown and quite ordinary-looking person,
one impossible for them to track down. If the man had never
been arrested and wasn’t a public figure, a picture wouldn’t
necessarily yield a name. Sophie felt sure, though, it wouldn’t
simply be some anonymous face. Joanna Murchison, Nicko
Mood—she had thought about it for many hours and she was
certain that one or both of them must have been involved.
Mrs. Tansy had almost certainly understood that to be the
case.

309

“Let’s take a look,” said Keith.
Sophie envied him the luxury of having only a technical
interest in the results.
“These last two pictures are quite astonishing,” said Keith.
“Sophie, this is really one for the history books! I’ve never
seen anything like it. And the level of detail in the faces, given
the nonrepresentational quality of the design—all I can say is
that it’s quite extraordinary.”
“Show us!” Sophie said.
“Oh,” said Keith, looking surprised. “I forgot you hadn’t
seen them yet.”
Sophie almost tore the pictures out of his hands. Their
beauty knocked the breath out of her. With Mikael close by
her shoulder, she laid the two photographs on the table. At
first glance they were virtually identical; both pictures, though
they were the same size as the previous ones, looked less like
ordinary snapshots than like blown-up images of the court
designs from a deck of playing cards. They even had the suit
and designation in the corners—how on earth had that happened, and what did it mean?
The image produced in response to Sophie’s question
about who sent the Veteran to kill the medium? The knave of
clubs—and the face of the right-side-up knave was unmistakably Nicholas Mood’s, his features clear in every particular
although he was dressed as if for a costume ball, with hair

310

hanging about his shoulders and the strange flat cap and
embroidered waistcoat the knave always wore in decks of
cards. But the most surreal thing was that when the card was
rotated a hundred and eighty degrees, it should have been the
knave again (of course) but it wasn’t. The hair and clothes
were the knave’s, but the face belonged to Joanna Murchison,
as if Mood and Murchison were conjoined twins.
The next card—the medium’s best guess about the person
behind the bombings—was the queen of clubs. This time, the
minister’s face could easily be discerned peeping out from the
wimple and brocade—but the upside-down face at the other
end of the card was Nicko Mood’s.
“She’s telling us something about a man and a woman,”
said Keith.
“Do you suppose they’re real people?” Mikael asked.
Sophie had almost forgotten the others were there, let
alone that they wouldn’t recognize the faces. “They’re real
people, all right,” she said grimly.
“How do you know?” It was Mikael, of course, sounding
distinctly skeptical.
“Because I know who they both are,” said Sophie. “I’ve
met them. They came to my great-aunt’s house for supper, and
I’m not in the least surprised to see their faces again here.”
“But who are they, Sophie?” said Keith. “You must tell us!”
“The man’s name is Nicholas Mood, and he works for the

311

woman, who’s called Joanna Murchison.”
“Joanna Murchison,” said Mikael. “Sounds familiar—
seems to me I’ve seen that name in the newspapers recently.
Oh, no, Sophie—you’re not serious. . . .”
“I’m dead serious,” she said. “She’s the minister for public safety, the person responsible for bringing terrorists to justice and keeping Scotland safe.”
“But—”
This time it was Sophie who silenced Mikael by turning
and catching his eye and making a tiny gesture with her head
toward Keith.
“Don’t worry, you two, the politics of it really aren’t my
business,” Keith said comfortably into the awkward silence
that ensued. “You can explain the whole thing to him later,
Sophie. I can see you’ve got a pretty clear idea of the way
things must have happened, you and that spirit were on the
exact same wavelength.”
Sophie shuddered.
“What I’m really impressed with,” Keith added, “is the
way the medium’s left you with a nice puzzle.”
“A puzzle?” Sophie asked, feeling by now as if her brain
was barely functioning. “What puzzle?”
“It’s obvious what he means, isn’t it?” said Mikael, picking up both prints and looking back and forth between the
two. “Which one of them really did it? Did Mrs. Tansy simply

312

not know, and implicate them both as suspects? Was Nicholas
Mood working primarily as the minister’s agent, and is she the
one to hold culpable? Or is it the other way around, with
Mood having gone beyond his mandate as the minister’s
tool?”
Sophie gave Mikael a warning look. She had said too
much already, no need for him to compound the problem.
They thanked Keith and promised to tell him what happened,
though it made Sophie feel distinctly cheap to leave him so
much out of things.

313

a

T h i rt y

M

IKAEL INSISTED ON

walking Sophie home.

“Boys and girls are perfectly equal,” Sophie
said when he wouldn’t let her go by herself.

“Yes, of course they are, but Sophie, there’s something we
must talk about.”
To Sophie, it all seemed quite clear. Convinced that
Scotland had a moral obligation to go to war with the
European Federation, Joanna Murchison must have channeled funds (under the pretense that the money came from the
Europeans) to the impressionable and easily directed young
Brothers of the Northern Liberties. If the minister could only
implicate Europe in the deaths of Scottish citizens, Scotland
would be able to go to war—and the rest of the Hanseatic

314

League would have to join them.
The medium must have learned something about the minister’s role in the bombings and tried to extort money from
her. But the minister was not the sort of woman to be blackmailed. She hired the Veteran, probably using her loyal assistant
Nicko as a go-between, and the woman’s death was assured.
When the Veteran spoke about money—“Where’s ma
money?” he’d cried out as he attacked the minister—he was
talking about the money he’d been promised for the hit,
promised but never paid. It would have been safer and easier
for the minister or Nicko to send another assassin to the
Veteran’s jail cell than to leave the man alive.
Meanwhile the pair of them prepared to expose the terrorists’ “European backing” and mobilize the country for war.
“Haven’t we already talked it all to death?” Sophie said,
barely stifling a huge yawn. It was as though a chemical fog
had descended on her brain to prevent thinking.
“Sophie, this is really important. Look, isn’t there somewhere near your house where we can find a safe place to talk?
I can see you’re quite done in, but we must have a word.”
In the end they took shelter behind a shed in Queen Street
Gardens.
“Give me those pictures,” said Mikael.
Sophie handed him the manila envelope, her hand brushing against his in a way that made her skin tingle.

315

He fanned them out and then picked the picture of Mr.
Petersen from the rest. Oh, god, Sophie had almost forgotten
about that. She would have to ask the teacher about Nobel,
that was for certain, but first she must get some sleep . . .
sleep . . . her head nodded forward, eyelids drooping.
“Sophie?” said Mikael, speaking very loudly into her ear.
“What?” she asked. Oh, if only she could lie down and
close her eyes, just for a minute! She would give a hundred
pounds to be allowed to go to sleep right here and now.
Wait. The picture. Mikael.
Still swaying a little with tiredness, she looked from the
photograph of Mr. Petersen back to her friend’s face with
mounting incredulity. How on earth had she never seen it
before? Why did it take her being practically dead with
exhaustion to put two and two together?
“Mikael,” she said slowly, her tongue sticky and thick in
her mouth, “your surname isn’t Lundberg, is it?”
“No, that’s my aunt’s name,” he said, sounding surprised.
“Sophie, don’t you know my full name? We’ve been friends
for years!”
It was strange to realize she didn’t know Mikael’s last name.
How different the real world was from the world of school!
There, one could hardly think of anybody without their entire
name coming to mind. Harriet Jeffries would stay “Harriet
Jeffries” long after she married and took her husband’s name—

316

not that anybody sensible would want to marry Harriet Jeffries;
she would be one of those awful wives who laid down vinyl
over the carpet to stop it from getting soiled.
Sophie tried to get a grip on her meandering thoughts.
Mikael’s next words seemed inevitable.
“My name’s Petersen, of course, Mikael Petersen. And
this picture—Sophie, it’s my brother.”
Sophie groaned and dropped her head into her hands.
Oh, she might as well be the village idiot for all the intelligence
she’d shown up to this point!
She lifted her head back up and took the picture from him.
“Your brother,” she said, “and my chemistry teacher. Mr.
Petersen.”
“You’re not serious,” said Mikael, looking horrified.
“I’m completely serious,” she said. “He came in March—
our old teacher left to be married, under slightly strange
circumstances.”
“Sophie, tell me, is he safe?”
“Yes, of course,” Sophie said. “At least, I haven’t seen him
since yesterday, but he was perfectly all right then.”
Mikael let out a huge breath.
“Mikael,” Sophie asked, “what can your brother possibly
be doing in Edinburgh? Do you think he came here for the
teaching job, or is it something more nefarious? Could the
Nobel people have sent him here for some reason?”

317

“He was always as likely to be here as anywhere else,”
Mikael said. “The Nobel Consortium posts its operatives
throughout the Hanseatic states, and he’d certainly be quite
comfortable in Edinburgh—his English is much better than
mine because our parents lived here for a few years when he
was little. Nobody would be able to tell he wasn’t Scottish
born and bred, not if he put his mind to it. But the main thing
is that I must see him and talk to him as soon as possible! I’ll
be able to ask him about the knife, and find out how he’s
doing—oh, my aunt will be awfully relieved when I tell her.
And of course we must ask him what we shall do about the
minister and all that.”
“Will you come to school, then, and see him there?”
Sophie asked. She could see Mr. Petersen would be the best
person to consult; there was certainly no point going to Greataunt Tabitha—and yet it didn’t sit altogether well with her to
hand the problem off to someone else like that. Just because
she and Mikael weren’t adults didn’t mean they weren’t fully
capable of taking responsibility. “I don’t know where he lives,
though I expect I could find out.”
“No, school’s fine,” Mikael said. “Shall I come on Monday?”
Sophie thought about it.
“Tuesday’s better,” she said doubtfully. “You see, I work
for him and I’ve got a regular appointment with him on
Tuesday afternoons, so we’ll be sure to find him alone. Can—

318

can you wait that long, do you think?”
“I suppose I must,” said Mikael. “It’s only a few days. The
thing is, I’m leaving for København next Saturday.”
“What?” His remark took Sophie’s breath away. “Are you
going for a visit? Why didn’t you tell me sooner?”
“Sophie, I live there,” he said, sounding so annoyed that
Sophie shrank back from him, she couldn’t help herself. “I’m
not going back for a visit, I’m going home. Don’t you remember? I never stay in Edinburgh for more than a few weeks.”
“But I thought you’d stay longer this time!”
The prospect of his departure made Sophie realize how
much—how very unwisely—she’d come to depend on Mikael.
She slumped down and hoped he couldn’t tell she was upset.
“Well, I’ve got no say in the matter,” said Mikael. “My
passage is booked on the Gustavus Adolphus, leaving from
Leith a week from today.”
Sophie was too tired to feel as shattered as she might have
otherwise.
They made an arrangement to meet at the side of the
school in the middle of the day on Tuesday, Sophie beginning
to fret now about the lateness of the hour.
“One other thing,” Mikael added, laying a hand on
Sophie’s arm. “Will you promise me something?”
“What?” Sophie said, suddenly breathless for a reason she
didn’t understand.

319

“I’m worried about what’s going to happen after I go back
to Denmark,” Mikael said.
Sophie made a noncommittal sound.
“Yes, I know you’re capable of superhuman displays of
fortitude and willpower. But all this has proved pretty overwhelming. I can’t help thinking the danger’s going to get even
worse if I leave you to face this alone. I suppose I might be
able to delay my departure somehow,” he added, “but it
would create difficulties at home.”
“No, you can’t possibly do that,” Sophie said fervently.
“Your aunt would never forgive me, for one thing.”
“She’ll never forgive you if you get yourself killed, either,”
Mikael said, sounding really angry now. “Edinburgh’s the
most dangerous place for both of us right now. It would be
much better for you to go to København as well. You really
could come with me, you know. It would be a lot safer than
staying here. My mother won’t mind putting you in the spare
bedroom; she’s good that way.”
“I’m not leaving the country,” Sophie said, at once
annoyed and elated that he should have suggested it. “Aside
from everything else, it’s illegal for children under eighteen to
leave Scotland without a special visa, and it’s supposed to be
almost impossible to get.”
“I know, I know,” said Mikael. “I’m not going to force
you to do anything against your will. But I want you to

320

promise me you’ll think about it.”
“I can’t!” Sophie said. “Why, even if I could get a visa, I’ve
got my exams at the beginning of August—I’m sure there’s no
way to take them abroad, and besides, I’d miss the last weeks
of prep—no, Mikael, it’s kind of you to offer, but I really
couldn’t think of it.”
“It’s all very well to talk of exams,” Mikael said furiously,
“but what if someone’s planning to cut your throat?”
When Sophie began to explain again why the exams were
so important, Mikael cut her off.
“Don’t say it,” he said, speaking in a crisp, irritated way.
“I know you’d have to be dragged on board ship kicking and
screaming. You’d rather risk death than miss sitting your stupid exams. I know all that. I’m not asking you to promise to
come with me, I’m just asking you not to dismiss the idea out
of hand. Depending on how things go, it might look a lot more
appealing this time next week.”
Finally Sophie said she’d think about it. Then she hurried
the rest of the short way home, where she had to endure
Peggy’s scolding as well as an endless stream of questions
about the supper served in the private rooms at the Balmoral
Hotel (Sophie had invented a cover story involving Priscilla’s
birthday and a meal at the hotel), before begging exhaustion
and hauling herself upstairs to bed.

321

a

T h i rt y - o n e

O

N

MONDAY

EVENING

Sophie resolutely put every-

athing else out of her head and concentrated on
working her way through a huge set of sums, paus-

ing now and then to rub out a mistake.
Nan was struggling on the other side of the room with an
essay on “The Rime of the Ancient Mariner.”
“Oh, it’s hopeless,” she said for about the fifth time, laying down her reservoir pen and rubbing her eyes. “If I went to
a wedding and one of the other guests plucked my sleeve and
tried to tell me such a ridiculous story, I’d smack the stupid
man!”
Priscilla and Jean were in the middle of a quiet but intense
conversation at Jean’s desk.

322

“It’s not like you to make so much fuss about homework,”
Sophie said. “That essay won’t take much longer, will it?
Anyway, I like the part where they reach the equator and the
ship won’t go. The doldrums, that’s what they call it.”
“Doldrums is right,” said Nan, tipping her chair onto its
back legs and running both hands through her hair. “All this
is a complete waste of time. Whether or not that bill goes
through Parliament, I’m joining the Women’s Auxiliary Corps
the moment I turn sixteen.”
“When’s your birthday?” asked Sophie, who could never
remember people’s birthdays.
“August fourteenth,” Nan said. “The first day of those
wretched examinations, in case you’d forgotten. I’ve given up
on the idea of having any kind of a party; it’s not worth the
trouble. I suppose I’ve got to take the exams, though. It will
only mean a week’s delay, and it’s an awful waste doing all this
work if I don’t sit them after all.”
Nan always came solidly in the top third in maths and science, and she did better than that in history, the only subject
she really liked.
“It’s not really a waste, is it?” Sophie asked. “Isn’t it worth
learning all this for its own sake, apart from the exams?”
Nan stared at her.
“Sophie, you’re mad,” she said. “I’d be far better off starting my training right away. We might well be at war within the

323

next few weeks, and it’s frustrating to think I won’t see combat before January at the earliest.”
“You sound as though you want to see combat!”
“Well, of course,” Nan said. “What’s the point otherwise?”
As Sophie tried to explain to Nan why she found this so
extraordinary, the other two girls’ voices rose in a full-scale
row.
“What’s up, you two?” Nan asked, switching her attention
away from Sophie.
“Jean’s being even more impossible than usual,” said
Priscilla.
“I’m not!” Jean shouted.
Sophie hoped the hall monitor wouldn’t hear them.
“Sophie,” Jean said in a more moderate voice, “what do
you think? Isn’t sixteen too young to get married?”
“I don’t know,” said Sophie. “I suppose it depends on the
person. It sounds awfully young to me.”
“Scottish law has always allowed minors to marry without
the permission of their parents and guardians,” Nan objected.
She put her essay aside and rested her elbows on the desk.
“That’s why English couples in the old days used to elope to
Gretna Green, because it was the first place you came to over
the border. If you were a young man who’d run away with an
underage heiress, you could marry her there legally, and her

324

family wouldn’t be able to stop it.”
“But don’t you think that must have happened more often
in novels than in real life?” Sophie asked Nan.
“Oh, can it, you two!” Jean shouted, scowling at them.
“We’re not talking about history or novels. We’re talking
about the modern world, and in the modern world sixteen’s
much too young!”
“In the modern world,” said Priscilla, “lots of girls marry
at sixteen.”
The color had risen in her cheeks, and she looked both
very pretty and seriously annoyed.
Only now did Sophie register what was going on.
“Priscilla, you’re not thinking of getting married, are
you?” she said.
“Why not?” said Priscilla, preening a little under Sophie’s
horrified look. “If the government bill concerning schoolleaving age goes through, being married is likely to become
one of the only ways of getting an exemption—at least that’s
what my father thinks. I’ve had two proposals already, and I’m
certainly not going into the ghastly Women’s Auxiliaries. That
uniform is terribly unflattering!”
“You’re hopeless,” Nan said, shaking her head. “But
really, Priscilla, surely Jean’s right and you’re much too young?
If you wait a little longer, you’ll have a much better chance of
getting a really good husband.”

325

“I don’t see why that should be the case,” said Priscilla.
“My mother met my father when she was fourteen and he was
nineteen, and they married as soon as she’d left school.”
“Just because it was right for them,” Sophie said, “doesn’t
mean it would be good for you. Besides, doesn’t your father
want you to take a degree?”
“Oh, he doesn’t really mind one way or the other,”
Priscilla said, “and in any case, the situation may change at any
moment.”
“Well, I can’t stand it,” Jean said, sounding quite grim.
“What about our flat? I won’t be able to afford it without you,
Priscilla. You mustn’t let me down like this.”
Priscilla shrugged. “You’ll work something out,” she said.
“Besides, you know I haven’t said yes to anybody yet!”
As Jean groaned, the door to the study opened, and the
earnest freckled face of Miss Hopkins appeared in the crack.
“Nan, are you there?” she said.
“Yes, of course, Miss Hopkins,” Nan said.
“Miss Henchman would like to see you at once in her
study,” the teacher said.
The girls looked at one another.
“Don’t worry,” Miss Hopkins added, though her voice faltered. “Nan’s done nothing wrong.”
After Nan had left, Miss Hopkins came all the way into
the room and shut the door behind her.

326

“Girls, I’m afraid something very dreadful has happened,”
she said.
Sophie thought she looked almost as bad as the day she’d
told them about the bombing in Princes Street.
“It’s one of Nan’s brothers, isn’t it?” she said, though she
could not explain how she knew.
“Yes,” said Miss Hopkins simply. “Her oldest brother,
Sam, has been killed in a skirmish in the Urals. Nan’s father’s
downstairs with Miss Henchman; they’ve decided it’ll be best
for her to stay at school until the day of the funeral. Her
mother’s not taking it too well.”
“How awful,” Priscilla said. All the color had left her face
and her hand had gone straight to Jean’s. They sat next to each
other, looking much younger than before. “What can we do to
help?”
“Treat her gently,” said the teacher. “Encourage her to see
Matron if she’s not eating or sleeping properly. Beyond that, I
don’t know that there’s anything we can do.”
“Will we have permission to go to the funeral?” Priscilla
asked. Sophie suddenly and desperately hated her for always
knowing the right thing to say.
“Well,” said Miss Hopkins, her voice trailing off, “I don’t
know. . . .”
“Surely we’ll be allowed!” Jean cried.
“It’s not that, Jean,” the teacher said, clearing her throat.

327

“It’s just that until the army returns the—er—the remains,
they won’t be able to have a funeral. It may be some time.”
Having silenced them entirely, she asked if they needed
anything. They said no, and she sighed, shook her head, and
left.
Lights-out had come and gone before Nan crept back into
the room. As she undressed and changed into her nightgown,
Sophie decided to speak.
“Nan?”
The other girl didn’t answer, but her muffled sobs kept
them all awake for a long time.
In the morning Nan’s eyes were red and swollen, though
she insisted she felt fine and said a soldier’s highest honor was
to give his life for his country.
Breakfast was sad and quiet. Everyone knew what had
happened, and several girls came up to Nan to tell her how
sorry they were about her brother.
“Priscilla?” Jean said just before history class was due to
start.
“What?”
“Don’t let’s argue anymore.”
“All right.”
They shook hands on it as Miss Chatterjee came into the
room to begin the lesson. But the day went on feeling strange
and sad, and even Sophie had to fiddle with her handkerchief

328

and pretend she’d got a bit of dust in her eye when the teacher
spoke a few words of condolence to Nan.
As the bell rang and Sophie began to put away her notes,
she looked up to see Nan at her side.
“Sophie, I need you to do something for me,” she said.
“Something really important.”
“Anything,” said Sophie.
“Promise?”
“Promise.”
“We all know what really happened last week in class,”
Nan said. “That weird drawing in Mr. Petersen’s class, and the
stuff you typed off the cylinder for Miss Botham. You’re a
medium, Sophie, aren’t you? You’ve been hearing the voices
of the dead.”
It didn’t take psychic powers to predict what Nan was
going to say next.
“The thing I can’t stand,” Nan said, now crying outright
despite the fact that they were absolutely surrounded by other
girls putting away their things and pretending not to listen, “is
knowing I never said good-bye to him. On Sam’s last leave, he
was only home for forty-eight hours, and my parents didn’t
want to break up my school week. Oh, if only I’d seen him
then! But Sophie, you’ll be able to fix things. You’ll help me
speak with him, won’t you?”
Then, when Sophie said nothing: “Sophie, you promised!

329

Of course I won’t blame you if we try it and it doesn’t work. I
know you can’t always control these things. But I must speak
with him one more time, if it’s humanly possible, and say a
proper good-bye to him.”
Was this Sophie’s punishment for dabbling in the spirit
world? All her old ambivalence about the supernatural
flooded into her mind. It couldn’t be right to want to talk to a
loved one after he or she died, it simply couldn’t.
But Sophie had made Nan a solemn promise. With an
awful sense of foreboding, she said they’d talk about it later.
“You’ll do it, though, won’t you?”
“Oh, all right,” said Sophie, though she couldn’t see any
good coming of it, and the thought of opening herself up again
to spirits made her quite sick.
Nan just pressed her hand and sobbed.

330

a

T h i rt y - t w o

J

UST BEFORE LUNCH

Sophie slipped away from the other

girls to meet Mikael at the school’s side entrance. He was
at the door already, wearing a cap and a navy blue shirt

and trousers and carrying a brown paper parcel; he could easily have been mistaken for a delivery boy, which was exactly
the idea.
Sophie led him through the halls to Mr. Petersen’s classroom. The teacher wasn’t there yet, though they could hear
him talking on the telephone in the office at the back. Sophie
had arranged to be there earlier than usual because it suited
Mikael better.
They heard him put down the receiver. Sophie and Mikael
looked at each other.

331

“I still can’t believe it’s really him,” Mikael whispered.
“Do you think—?”
Then Mr. Petersen appeared in the doorway. He saw
Mikael at once. His face went white and then red, and the two
of them rushed into each other’s arms.
Seeing them together like that made Sophie inexplicably
angry. She could hardly remember why she liked either of
them in the first place.
“Mr. Petersen!” she said.
“What is it, Sophie?” he asked.
He and Mikael were smiling like idiots; Sophie sourly
reflected that they hadn’t even thanked her for helping them
to be reunited.
“There are things I need to ask you about,” she said.
Mikael looked at her curiously. Could he tell how angry
she was?
“Arne, you must tell me the truth about this first,” he said
urgently to Mr. Petersen, reaching into his trousers and
pulling out the pocketknife. “I found—”
“My pocketknife!” said Mr. Petersen. “But how—?”
“It had fallen into the back of the couch in the suite at the
Balmoral,” Mikael said. “The suite where the medium was
killed.”
“What?” said Mr. Petersen.
They had all taken seats around the lab table at the back

332

of the classroom, and Sophie’s teacher looked genuinely horrified.
“I misplaced that knife a month ago,” he said, “but however can you know it turned up at the scene of the crime? I
certainly never heard a word from the police, though I wondered whether they would contact me; I had several appointments with Mrs. Tansy in the weeks preceding her
disappearance, though I was as surprised as anyone else to
hear of her death.”
Sophie wanted to ask about the appointments, but Mikael
spoke first.
“I was there,” he said stubbornly. “That’s how I know
about the knife.”
“There at the hotel? You mean, when the medium was
killed?” said Mr. Petersen. “That can’t be!”
Sophie could see they were going to go on at crosspurposes if someone didn’t set them straight, so she gave a
clear short explanation of how Mikael had come to be at the
hotel.
Mr. Petersen looked terribly worried.
“The knife must have got there by way of the Veteran,” he
said. “You know the man I mean, Sophie, don’t you? I don’t
think I’ve ever been so horrified in my life as when I saw him
attack the minister. After that, it was less surprising to learn
he’d also been implicated in the death of the medium. But it

333

still sends shivers down my spine to think of my own involvement with him. I can’t quite forgive myself—I felt awful when
I heard about how he died, and I fear I may bear some of the
responsibility for the crimes he committed along the way.”
“How so?” Sophie asked.
Before Mr. Petersen could answer her, Mikael asked
another question. “Why did the Veteran want to implicate
you? He could have framed anyone he wanted. Was there
something about your dealings with him that might have given
him a dislike for you?”
“He knew I worked for the Nobel Consortium,” Mr.
Petersen said thoughtfully. “Hmm . . . I must mull that one
over.”
“But why are you here?” Sophie burst in. “Are you still
working for Nobel? Why did you meet with the medium and
the Veteran?”
“That I can’t tell you,” said Mr. Petersen, sounding quite
annoyingly apologetic. “Confidentiality. Sorry.”
There were all sorts of other things Sophie wanted to learn
too. It would drive her mad if he wouldn’t answer any of her
questions!
“Did you pay off our old chemistry teacher so that you
could take her place?” she asked.
“Why do you say that?” said Mr. Petersen warily.
“Jean and I spotted her in the electric showroom in

334

Princes Street, still using her maiden name and spending
money like water. It was clear she hadn’t got married at all, but
on the other hand she had much more money than before. It
was most odd. Then I accidentally saw the travel visas in your
passport—I do apologize, I couldn’t help it, I was looking for
something to write you a note with and it was right there in
your desk drawer. I couldn’t understand why you’d been traveling back and forth so often to Stockholm without saying
anything. It made me wonder whether your job here was just
a cover for something else.”
“Damned fool!” said Mr. Petersen. “Sorry, Sophie; not
you. Miss Rawlins is really the most impossible woman. I’m
not surprised to hear of her behaving so foolishly. Well, that’s
another little job for me. . . .”
“You’re not going to kill her?” Sophie asked, aghast. She
didn’t like Miss Rawlins, but that didn’t mean it was all right
to talk about disposing of her as one might an unattractive garden shrub.
“Kill her?” Mr. Petersen looked quite horrified.
“Certainly not, Sophie. Whatever must you think of me? Oh
dear, I see you’ve got hold of the wrong end of the stick completely. God, what a mess!”
He jumped out of his seat and began pacing back and
forth. “You’ve got no reason to trust me, Sophie,” he said.
“But by the most solemn oaths possible, I swear I mean you

335

no harm. On the contrary, your safety’s vitally important
to me.”
“What about the bombings?” Sophie asked. It was her
deepest darkest worry, especially now that the Nobel connection had been proven. “If you had anything to do with those
deaths, we can’t keep it secret.”
Mikael might be satisfied simply to know his brother hadn’t
been at the murder scene, but Sophie couldn’t let things go so
easily, even if it was her beloved Mr. Petersen.
“Sophie, I swear to you on my mother’s head that I’m not
involved in any way with the Brothers of the Northern
Liberties,” said Mr. Petersen. “I’d never intentionally harm
another human being. I’m deeply committed to pacifism.
Look, I can see why you’re suspicious. Those entry stamps in
the passport must have been a bit of a facer! Indeed, I must
confess that I was involved with one of the bombings, the one
at St. Giles’ Cathedral.”
“The one where nobody was killed?” Sophie said, confused. “But—”
“I was asked to find the device and, if possible, to
defuse it without detonating it. Unfortunately the bomb
went off as soon as I sent in the first mechanical probe. It
wasn’t supposed to work that way, but at least it prevented
the bomb’s going off in the middle of morning services, as it
was meant to.”

336

“A mechanical probe?” Sophie asked, curious despite
herself.
Mr. Petersen looked for a moment as if he would like to
indulge her curiosity. Then he shook his head.
“Another time, Sophie, I’ll tell you all about the latest
antiterror gadgets,” he said. “All you need to know now is that
I was there with the full knowledge of the police—indeed, at
their request. They contacted the Nobel Consortium, and
someone there told them I was nearest by.”
“Oh,” said Sophie. “Mr. Petersen—”
She was going to ask why he had taken the teaching job in
the first place, but she stopped when Mikael started chuckling
quietly. She supposed he thought it was funny, the way she
kept calling his brother by his formal name.
“Stop it!” she said, so annoyed she actually reached
across—she couldn’t believe she did it—and whacked him in
the stomach, a hard backhanded blow that took him completely by surprise. He reached over and grabbed her arm and
forced it back until she begged him to stop.
Now it was Mr. Petersen laughing.
“I can see you two are old friends,” he said. “Oh, it’s so
good to see you again, Mikael!”
He clapped Mikael on the shoulder, and the two of them
looked at each other affectionately.
At that moment Sophie had a revelation—a horrible

337

revelation. She let her arm go limp so suddenly that Mikael
was put off balance and couldn’t stop her from snatching it
back from him. She didn’t want to touch him; she couldn’t
let him touch her for even a moment longer.
For months Sophie had believed herself to be in love with
Mr. Petersen. Everyone knew about it and joked about it, and
even Sophie had grown comfortable with the idea. Of course
Mr. Petersen would never fall in love with Sophie—that was a
given.
But Sophie wasn’t jealous of the love she could see in Mr.
Petersen’s face as he looked at his younger brother. It was
Mikael whose affections she begrudged; she could hardly bear
seeing even an iota of love in his eyes for someone else, even
for his brother.
It was really Mikael Sophie had been in love with all
along! Oh, how awful, how shameful; it was the most humiliating—the most unforgivable—thing she had ever done.
Falling in love with her best friend!
The other two were looking at her curiously. She couldn’t
say a word to explain why she’d gone silent. She was briefly
consumed with a powerful and irrational dislike for both of
them. Why couldn’t they have stayed in Denmark where they
belonged?
“Forgive me for saying so, Sophie,” said Mr. Petersen,
after a quick look at his watch, “but I have a strong feeling

338

you’re going to be in very hot water if you don’t make haste to
lunch.”
“Oh, golly,” said Sophie. At least it was an excuse to leave
right away.
“Give me a week to sort things out,” the teacher said.
“That’s all I ask. Then I’ll tell you everything I can.”
“But Mikael will have gone by then!”
“I’m traveling to Denmark next week in any case,” said
Mr. Petersen. “I’ll explain everything to him then; it will be
easier that way.”
But when would Sophie get to see Mikael?
“Away with you now,” said Mr. Petersen. “Don’t worry,
Sophie, it will all come right in the end, with a bit of luck.”
“Come to tea on Thursday,” Mikael called after her as she
left. “I’ll tell Arne now about everything else that’s happened,
and then you and I can talk on Thursday about what to do
next.”
She waved a hand to show she’d heard, but didn’t look
back. Probably they would enjoy having some time alone
together. It wasn’t hard to tell when she was superfluous.
Realizing she was in love with Mikael only drove home how
peripheral Sophie was to his life. She would have to be scrupulous in making sure he caught no glimpse of her feelings; she
would rather die than be exposed.

339

a

T h i rt y - t h r e e

T

HAT EVENING

SOPHIE plowed steadily through an

enormous pile of homework without letting anything
distract her. Schoolwork was nothing compared to

everything else that had happened recently.
Jean and Priscilla had yet to resolve their argument, but
agreed to put their differences aside. Nan herself spent the
evening in bed with her history textbook. She could hardly
have turned more than a page or two, but if she was crying,
she did so very quietly.
They all talked softly in bed until eleven o’clock, much too
keyed up to feel in the least sleepy. Once the last inspection
had come and gone and the corridor lights been put out, they
joined Nan on her bed, Priscilla wearing a very fancy pair of

340

blue silk pajamas, the other three in the distinctly less glamorous regulation ones.
“Did you find the things I asked for?” Sophie asked Nan,
speaking softly, though not actually whispering. Nan’s
bereavement would keep them from being punished for
breaking the lights-out rule only so long as their offenses were
not too glaring. Quiet voices and a single candle would be
safest.
In silence Nan laid a series of objects on the bed: a
snapshot of Sam with his arm around Nan’s shoulders; a little
double-action revolver, formerly Sam’s, usually kept in the
rifle-club cabinet and illegally borrowed for the evening; an
Azerbaijani woven bracelet Sam had sent his sister for
Christmas; half a dozen postcards.
“Don’t you need anything else?” Jean asked Sophie.
“Some incense, or a crystal ball?”
“I’ve got a powder compact with a mirror in it,” Priscilla
suggested, “and there’s also my transistor radio.”
Her willingness to contribute her most treasured possession (Priscilla’s father had obtained the radio from one of the
men who had actually invented the transistor) set Nan off into
tears again.
“We won’t need anything like that,” Sophie said, trying to
project confidence. “We’ll just use these things as a way of
connecting with Sam.”

341

Sophie didn’t want Nan to hear her brother’s voice
directly. There was something upsetting in the sound of a disembodied voice even when it didn’t belong to someone you
loved, and hearing Sam’s spirit talk in its present thinned-out,
incoherent state could do Nan no possible good.
“How does it work?” Nan asked. She seemed to be trying
hard to behave as though everything was all right.
“It’s a technique called psychometry,” Sophie explained.
“Every object retains impressions of the people who’ve handled it. They sometimes do it at séances—people put things
like a pen or a watch into a tray, and the medium gives readings from them. It doesn’t have to be something of your
own—people often get readings on an object belonging to
someone they’re worried about.”
She felt incredibly silly stating the obvious like this, but
the things taught in the mandatory Spiritualist Instruction
class were all airy-fairy nonsense and none of the others
came from the kind of family that had Friday-night séances. It
wasn’t a question of social class, more of different cultures:
Great-aunt Tabitha’s civil-service-oriented and rather mandarin
circles practiced spiritualism very regularly, while most other
people felt that it was all very well but not the sort of thing one
did in one’s own home.
Priscilla and Jean stayed cross-legged at the foot of the bed,
Nan at the head, while Sophie crouched on the floor beside them.

342

“Put the candle on top of your locker,” she told Nan, “and
then touch each of these things, saying your brother’s name
every time.”
The others watched Nan touch each relic in turn, her lips
moving as she faintly sounded the name.
Once Nan had finished her pass along the row of objects,
Sophie let her own fingers brush over them, forcing her mind
to become as receptive as possible. Sophie had met Sam a few
times over the years, but her mental image of him as distinct
from the other Harris brothers remained blurry. Best of all
would have been something that had been on Sam’s body
right at the moment he died, for his spirit would cling to it
afterward. Most of the things here gave off a much clearer
sense of Nan than her brother, and it was with some discouragement that Sophie made a second pass over them, this time
letting her hand rest a little longer on each item.
As she came to the pistol, the candle guttered and a breeze
swept through the room.
Jean yelped, Priscilla shushed her, and even Sophie (by
now more or less hardened to the presence of the uncanny)
almost lost her balance, stopped from toppling over only by
Nan grabbing her shoulder and holding her upright.
“It’s not really glowing,” Priscilla whispered as Sophie’s
fingers closed over the pistol’s grip. “That’s just a reflection of
the ambient light.”

343

Nobody bothered to correct her.
Sophie couldn’t imagine Nan hadn’t unloaded the pistol
as a safety precaution, but she double-checked the cylinder to
make sure the chambers were empty. Then she took hold of
the gun and let her mind go blank.
Next thing she knew, she found herself standing in the
middle of the room, trapped between Jean and Priscilla, who
were each holding one of her arms. All her muscles hurt, and
her throat felt raspy and sore.
“Be quiet!” Jean hissed. “You’ve been shouting loud
enough to wake the dead!”
“Surely that’s the point of the exercise?” Priscilla murmured, dragging Sophie back over to Nan’s side.
“Nan, was it any good?” Sophie asked. She couldn’t
remember a thing—a strange and frightening feeling.
The others looked at one another.
“I’m not sure if good’s the word,” said Nan, sliding over to
make room for Sophie as the others resumed their places at
the foot of the bed. Her face was very white, and she swallowed several times as if trying not to be sick. “It was too
much of a jumble for us to make much sense of. Sophie, I’m
sure it was Sam speaking through you. He speaks—used to
speak—very quickly when he’s excited, not a stutter exactly
but a sort of jerky pattern. The way you were talking just now
was exactly like it.”

344

“And what did I say?” Sophie asked.
She hadn’t meant to give voice to Sam’s thoughts, just to
receive a message she’d be able to pass on later to Nan, but
clearly her control wasn’t as good as she imagined.
The others exchanged glances.
It was Priscilla who spoke.
“It was pretty much what you’d expect,” she said, “from
someone fighting hand to hand and knowing he’s about to
die.”
“Oh, Nan, I’m sorry,” Sophie said, tears springing to her
eyes. She clasped Nan’s hand, and Nan flinched at the contact.
“It’s not your fault, Sophie,” she said, detaching her hand
from Sophie’s. “That’s war. We all know it can end like that.
But Sophie, he really wasn’t himself. I think the pistol took
things in the wrong direction. Too violent. Do you think you
could try one more time? What I need is to say good-bye, and
feel at least for myself that he hears it. I can see it’s horrible for
you, Sophie, but it would mean the world to me if we could
do it.”
Sophie gave Nan a doubtful look, then sighed. What did
she think she was saving herself for, anyway?
“All right,” she said. “I’m going to try something different
this time. I think there’s something I can do with the postcards. I only thought of it just now, but it should be better
than the gun. That was a mistake.”

345

She sat and thought for a minute, the others afraid to
interrupt. Then she picked up the little sheaf of postcards and
looked at them closely. She laid them out writing side up on
the coverlet like a game of solitaire.
“I need to get a few things from the other room,” she said.
“Back in a minute.”
She tiptoed across the room and into the study, where she
found an exercise book and a plumbago pencil.
“All right,” she said, back beside the others and amazed at
the steadiness of her own voice. (It was a good thing she’d
gone to so many of those wretched séances over the years.) “I
need you all to work with me this time. We’re going to form a
small sitter’s circle, the kind they use at real séances. You’ll all
join hands, but I need to keep mine free, because I want to try
letting Sam communicate with Nan in writing. That’s been the
pattern of their contact over the last few years while he’s been
abroad.”
Priscilla took Jean’s hand and Jean took Nan’s. Sophie
asked Priscilla to rest her right hand lightly on Sophie’s left
forearm, Nan doing the same on Sophie’s other side. Then
Sophie took up the pencil and let it rest on the exercise
book, her left hand pressing the page flat to the surface of
the bed.
This time she spoke aloud. She didn’t think her concentration had been good enough the last time, perhaps because she’d

346

had little conviction that Nan would benefit from hearing
what her dead brother had to say. But she couldn’t protect the
others, not really. They were living through bad times, and
whatever happened, there would be many deaths.
She raised her head and closed her eyes.
“Sam,” she said. “This is Nan’s friend Sophie at school.
Nan’s here with me right now, and so are two other girls we
share a room with, Jean and Priscilla.”
She stopped speaking and felt for some kind of a
response—anything, really. She felt a little tug or a tweak, like
a dog whistle pitched high above human hearing.
“Sam, your sister’s right here and she wants to say goodbye,” Sophie said, tipping her head in Nan’s direction and
hoping she’d have the sense to speak.
“Sam?” Nan said. “I just wanted to tell you how sorry I
was to miss you on that last leave. I’m so proud of you, and I
love you. That’s all. I hope you’re at peace now.”
The words would mean nothing in a storybook, but the
sound of them being spoken by a real person she actually
knew made Sophie want to cry. She heard some sniffling, and
one of the others pulled up a clasped pair of hands to wipe
eyes on a sleeve.
Sophie forced herself to stop thinking so much and tried
to make her mind blank. Then, suddenly and startlingly, something began to happen.

347

Her left hand felt for the edges of the exercise book, gripping the upper right-hand corner of the page, her forearm
pressing it down flat along the top. Meanwhile her writing
hand adjusted itself into a different grip on the pencil and
began to move in fits and starts over the paper.
The feeling was altogether so strange that Sophie couldn’t
help opening her eyes to look. She stared as the words took
shape.
Two, three, four lines of writing. Sophie hoped it would be
enough.
Just then she had a flash of him, the agonizing presence of
whatever remained of Sam Harris, the shreds left over from
the pain of his last moments (he’d died in fire, Sophie realized,
gagging), his own self weakened by months of deprivation and
the unrelenting hostility of the people he was meant to be protecting.
Within the agony, though, she sensed the solid core of
his self intact. Even without having seen what he’d written,
Sophie knew that none of Sam’s agony or his ambivalence
about the army’s so-called peacekeeping mission or his doubt
as to whether the sacrifice of his own life had any meaning
would feature in the message to his baby sister.
Sophie found her lips moving, silently mouthing, “Please
let him be at peace; oh, please be at peace, Sam,” repeating it
over and over until the pencil fell still in her hands and she

348

slumped forward onto the bed.
She came to herself a moment later in a scene of quiet
chaos: Priscilla in tears, Jean’s arm around Nan’s shoulders,
Nan herself shaking with hysterical sobs as she read the words
on the page.
“Are you all right?” Priscilla asked Sophie.
“Quite all right,” Sophie said. She couldn’t shake the
memory of how Sam felt—the fear and the sorrow and the
self-disgust and the awful sensation and smell of burning, and
yet through it all something human and real that had to do
with his love for his family and his old life in the world. “Does
the message make any sense?”
Nan thrust the exercise book in Sophie’s direction, then
got up and staggered across the room to the basin, where she
ran water to splash on her face.
Sophie held the book under the small pool of candlelight
and read the dim scrawl wandering up and down across the
ruled lines.
“My dearest little Nanny goat don’t spare me another
thought. So proud of you. Confident you’ll find your heart’s
desire in Women’s Auxiliaries but do be careful Nan it’ll be
harder than it seems at home. Look out for Mum and Dad
they’ll need you now and take care of your good self with all
love for evermore from your loving brother Sam.”
The gap between Sam’s message and the torrent of pain

349

and anger she’d felt from him struck Sophie hard. What must
it have cost him to send these loving words? They had none of
the vagueness Sophie associated with the run-of-the-mill spirit
message—the postcard template had helped him write something very much like what he would have inscribed in life.
Sam telling Nan she’d thrive in the army, after his own
experience and in full knowledge that she too might lose her
life, showed a generosity and willingness to sacrifice that
Sophie couldn’t begin to emulate.
The loud tread of the teacher patrolling the corridor
brought them all back to the real world. Sophie blew out the
candle and practically leaped back into her own bed, while
Jean and Priscilla scurried across the room. Only Nan
remained out of bed and over by the sink, the tap still running.
The steps paused outside for a moment. It was easy to
imagine the teacher leaning down and checking the crack
under the door to see if they had a light on, and then deciding
not to bother the poor things.
“Nan?” Sophie whispered, after five minutes had passed
and it seemed reasonable to assume the corridor was clear.
“I’ll come to bed soon,” Nan said.
“I’m so sorry,” Sophie said. “I didn’t mean to hurt you.”
“No! You can’t imagine what you’ve done; it’s all I hoped
for. Thank you, Sophie. I don’t know how I can ever repay
you.”

350

Sophie felt wretched. This couldn’t be right. Wasn’t one
supposed to judge an action by its fruits, and hadn’t the night’s
work only brought Nan more pain?
What if Nan asked Sophie to contact her brother again,
wanting more messages? What if she became addicted to
crossing the boundary between life and death?
Sophie buried her face in the pillows. First thing in the
morning, she’d swear the others to silence. She certainly had
no intention of becoming the on-call psychic for the whole of
the fifth form. She fell asleep to the background of Nan’s quiet
sobs and a faint whispered conversation between the other
two girls.

351

a

T h i rt y - f o u r

W

AAKING MUCH EARLIER

than usual, Sophie

aarrived at breakfast in time to bag one of the
two much-coveted private tables, tables that

seated only four instead of fourteen and were usually snapped
up by groups of sixth-form girls who had no scruples about
rousting out anyone who dared encroach on their territory.
Several older girls loitered nearby with their trays, but Sophie
glared at them until they went away.
Nan got there next. She and Sophie ate their cereal in
silence until they saw the other two girls at the head of the
food line. Then Nan turned to Sophie.
“I know you hate being thanked,” she said, “but it mattered to me to have that last word from my brother.”

352

Sophie felt awkward and irritable.
“I can’t ever do it again,” she warned, “and you mustn’t
tell anybody else what I did, either.”
“Why ever not?”
“Because it’s too horrible, that’s why,” Sophie grumbled,
mashing the Weetabix with her spoon.
“How can you say that?”
“It’s playing around with people’s emotions, and I really
hate it.”
Jean and Priscilla slid into the seats across from them.
“You must swear never to tell a soul about what happened
last night,” said Sophie, so loudly that one sixth-form girl
looked over from the next table to see what was going on.
“We swear,” said Priscilla, her face drawn and tired.
“You two,” said Jean, “we’ve got important news.”
Sophie looked more closely and saw that Jean looked as
tired as Priscilla, but more at peace with herself than she had
seemed for months.
“We talked it all through last night,” Jean continued, “and
Priscilla’s changed her mind. Assuming they’ll take us, we’re
both going to join IRYLNS as soon as we’ve got our exam
results.”
“IRYLNS?” Sophie said stupidly.
“That’s wonderful,” said Nan, mustering more enthusiasm than Sophie would have thought possible. “You two

353

aren’t cut out for the army, and IRYLNS is the best other way
of serving.”
“Yes, and we have to thank you and Sophie for showing
us the way,” Jean said, smiling at them. “The idea of service—
it really makes sense of everything, doesn’t it? It did for your
brother, Nan, and it does for you. And now it will for us as
well.”
Sophie was so horrified she couldn’t speak.
“We’re going to see Miss Henchman straight after breakfast,” said Priscilla, “and tell her what we’ve decided.”
“You can’t!” said Sophie, finding her voice at last. “You
simply can’t!”
She couldn’t believe that she’d contributed to this decision by her participation in the séance. She’d never forgive
herself.
“Why not?”
“Because—because—”
She couldn’t tell them about what she’d seen, could she?
The strict prohibition of the Official Secrets Act closed up
Sophie’s throat so that she could hardly breathe.
But she had to tell. She simply had to. She fought to get
control of her lungs and larynx and tongue so that she could
speak the warning.
“Because IRYLNS will destroy you,” she found herself
saying. She hoped she didn’t look as wild-eyed as she felt.

354

“They make girls into monsters—you mustn’t do it.”
Meanwhile Priscilla regarded her suspiciously, then broke
into a delighted chuckle. Even Nan was smiling a little.
“Oh, Sophie, you can’t fool us,” Priscilla said. “It’s a good
idea, to try and get back at me for teasing you about Mr.
Petersen. But a tale about the gothic secrets of IRYLNS—
we’re living in the twentieth century, after all!”
Sophie stared at the others. This was worse even than
she’d imagined. She’d thought of the possible consequences
of telling, the chance that she might have to endure prison and
even perhaps torture or death. But it had simply never
occurred to her that she might not be believed. Whatever
would she have to do to convince them?
“Give it up, Sophie,” Nan said. “You know yourself it’s
the best thing for these two.”
“I’m sorry about all that teasing,” Priscilla added, sounding really remorseful. “I don’t know what gets into me. My
father always says there’s a kind of devil inside me that thrives
on tormenting others. But I’m determined to become a better
person, Sophie, and you have to believe me when I say that
IRYLNS will be the best way for me to do that.”
Your teasing and Jean’s jealousy, they’re parts of you,
Sophie desperately wanted to say. You can’t just wipe them
out like mistakes in your calculus homework. You mustn’t—
But there was no point saying it. It would only be her fate,

355

Cassandra-like, not to be believed. What powerful additional
security for the secret keepers at IRYLNS!
“Aren’t you going to congratulate us?” Priscilla said.
“I must go,” said Sophie, piling her breakfast things onto
the tray. She had to work out a way to convince them, but
nothing she said now would change a thing, and it would
make Nan think she was a bad person if she kept on saying
bad things about IRYLNS—and Nan’s good opinion mattered. She needed hard evidence. But how would she get it?
“I’ve got a few things to do before class.”
Then she stopped, inspired.
“If I had to make an excuse to go and see a very eminent
doctor,” she said, “what do you think I should say?”
The other girls looked at one another as if Sophie had
gone mad.
“You don’t need an excuse,” Jean finally said. “You’ve
always got your limp.”
Sophie felt as if she’d been punched in the stomach.
She almost always forgot that she had a limp.
Did everyone think of Sophie as a person with a limp?
Did Mikael?

356

a

T h i rt y - f i v e

N THE SCHOOL LIBRARY, Sophie headed straight for the city

I

directories, the outlines of a plan taking shape in her
mind.

The others would never believe what she said about
IRYLNS. Telling them that she’d actually been there with
Great-aunt Tabitha wouldn’t make any difference—it would
just make her sound like a silly, self-important girl boasting
about her influential relations.
But what if Sophie went back to IRYLNS, sneaked in illicitly, and took pictures of the abuse? Then she could show the
photographs to Jean and Priscilla and persuade them to
change their minds. Sophie might still risk prison or worse,
but she felt she couldn’t not do it. She put out of her head the

357

thought that in another few months, it might be not just Jean
and Priscilla but Sophie herself who would need to be saved.
She’d no hope of getting into IRYLNS through the front
door. They took security seriously there. But IRYLNS stood
alongside research institutes where doctors actually saw
patients. She could steal into one of those and find a way to
slip out the back, reach the garden behind IRYLNS, and get
into the building that way instead.
The city council compiled a really useful directory that
listed every Edinburgh street and its occupants, so that one
could easily find, say, the names of every householder in
Heriot Row, or the professor’s neighbors in back of the school
tennis courts.
Sophie flipped to the entry for Buccleugh Place and made
a list of names and telephone numbers on the flyleaf of her history textbook.
It was never easy to find a telephone at school. Girls were
not supposed to telephone home without permission, so they
had no regular access to one. Where could she find a telephone, and when would she be able to use it?
Just then the librarian appeared and Sophie slammed the
directory shut and blushed. At least there was nothing racy
about what she had been reading, not like that mortifying time
she’d been caught returning an overdue copy of Mesmeric Love.
“Don’t worry, I wasn’t going to look,” said the librarian,

358

smiling at her. “I wonder if I could prevail on you to man the
helm, though, while I run down to the refectory for a cup of
coffee?”
“Of course,” said Sophie, who’d had a holiday job in the
library the summer before. “Is there anything you’d like me to
do while I’m here?”
“Well, you could go through the file and check for overdue books,” said the librarian. “I’ll be back in fifteen minutes.”
Sophie took her place behind the desk, sorted out the
cards for the overdue books, and wrote out the notices. All the
while, the telephone squatted like an alluring toad at the back
of the office.
She wished she’d asked the librarian for permission to
make a few calls. Surely she wouldn’t have said no, and then
Sophie wouldn’t feel such a heel for taking advantage. It might
be days before she got another shot at a telephone, though,
and by the weekend all the doctors’ offices would be closed,
so the phone at Great-aunt Tabitha’s wouldn’t do her any
good. Anyway, she was contemplating breaking into a topsecret government facility. It was ridiculous having scruples
about making a telephone call without permission.
A minute later Sophie had the receiver in her hand and
was asking the operator to put through a call. She let the
phone ring for ages at the Osteopathic Consultancy and then
at the Clinic for Research into Disorders of the Thyroid, but

359

nobody answered. Well, it was only just after eight o’clock.
Most offices didn’t open until nine or even half past.
She put through a third call, fearing that she’d need to
find another telephone later on in the day—the librarian
would be back at any moment—when she was startled by a
young woman’s voice.
“Braid Institute for Neurohypnosis,” said the telephone
receptionist. “How can I help you?”
“You come very highly recommended by a friend,” Sophie
said, trying to sound adult, “and I wonder whether you might
squeeze me in for an appointment.”
She was proud of having used the word squeeze; it seemed
like the kind of thing a woman in her thirties might say.
“We’re terribly busy just now,” said the receptionist,
sounding genuinely sorry. “That is,” she added in a brighter
voice, “unless you’d be able to come in at very short notice.”
Very short notice was exactly what Sophie wanted. She
said as much, then listened to the girl on the other end of the
line flip through the clinic appointment book.
“We’ve got a cancellation tomorrow afternoon—that’s
Thursday the seventh—at four thirty. Would you be able to
take it?”
Sophie felt like doing a celebratory dance right there in
the office. Why, it couldn’t have been better if she’d picked
the time herself!

360

The receptionist sounded delighted when Sophie
accepted the slot.
“You’ll not regret it,” she told Sophie confidentially. “Our
Mr. Braid’s a remarkable man, quite remarkable. And don’t
forget your national insurance card, all right, hen?”
Sophie replaced the receiver in its cradle with relief. She’d
have no trouble getting to that appointment—she’d go along
with the others to tennis practice, pop in to say good-bye to
Mikael (she ignored the feeling of her stomach turning inside
out), and then take the tram down to the university. Since her
appointment fell near the end of the day, it shouldn’t be hard
to arrange to be somehow left behind when the building
closed. The Braid Institute stood right next door to IRYLNS,
and she could easily climb over the wall in the garden and go
on from there.
Shortly after three o’clock the following afternoon, Sophie
wriggled through the gap in the wall into the professor’s back
garden. Mikael knelt by one of the flower beds, a heap of
weeds at his side.
Beside him, the professor’s handsome Great Dane lay
sprawled on the warm flagstones of the garden path, too lazy
to do anything more than raise his head and greet Sophie with
mournful eyes. It was ridiculous how sad that dog could look,
she thought, leaning to scratch the ridges of his harlequin
brow.

361

“Sophie!” said Mikael, scrambling to his feet and wiping
his hands on his trousers. “I was afraid I might not see you
before I left.”
His brisk, careless manner rubbed Sophie the wrong way.
“I can’t stay long,” she said, hating how stiff she sounded.
She had Nan’s camera in her pocket with fresh film in it—Nan
could refuse Sophie nothing now (a haunted generosity of
which Sophie had promised herself not to take advantage).
“I’ve got a doctor’s appointment near the university at half
past four, and I mustn’t be late.”
Mikael gave her a sharp look.
“Anything I should know about?” he said.
She avoided meeting his eyes—oh, why did she have to be
in such turmoil ? “No, nothing,” she said, “just an ordinary
appointment.”
Mikael frowned.
“Then why are you skiving off from tennis practice?
Wouldn’t your school usually send you to the doctor with a
teacher, or something like that?”
Sophie had forgotten Mikael’s quickness.
“All right,” she said, “it’s not just an ordinary appointment, but I’ve promised not to say anything about it.”
“Why can’t you trust me, Sophie?” Mikael said. He
sounded angry, and it turned Sophie’s heart stony.
“I do trust you,” she said, patting the dog’s mastodon

362

skull. “But sometimes the fewer people who know something,
the better.”
Why did she have such a strong impulse to punish Mikael
just now, and how did it come about that not telling him
things seemed the best way to do it?
Mikael looked hurt, then pensive.
“It’s almost as if you want me to be angry with you,” he said.
They went through into the house. The professor was out,
but Mrs. Lundberg stepped out of the kitchen to give Sophie
a kiss, throwing up her hands in despair when she realized that
Mikael actually intended to wear his filthy gardening trousers
outside in the street.
“Back shortly, Aunt Solvej,” he said. “Sophie’s not stopping for tea; she’s got a doctor’s appointment. I ban you from
lifting even a finger in the garden while I’m gone—I’ll have
plenty of time to finish the weeding before tea.”
At the tram stop in Canongate, they checked the
timetable. Sophie had just missed a tram, and it would be ten
minutes before the next one.
She and Mikael looked at each other, neither quite knowing what to say.
“Don’t worry, Sophie,” Mikael said. “You’ll work it all
out. Look, can I buy you an ice cream?”
The unexpected niceness of the suggestion caught
Sophie off guard. Mikael smiled back at her, and some of

363

the tension between them fell away.
“So what about that ice cream?” Mikael said, pointing to
the small shop on the other side of the road.
“I’m not really hungry,” Sophie said, realizing with dismay
that she could hardly bear the thought of Mikael leaving.
“But it’s Luca’s! You can always eat an ice cream from
Luca’s, can’t you?” Mikael said.
It was true that Luca’s ice cream, manufactured in
Musselburgh and sold in shops and kiosks all over Edinburgh,
was smoother and whiter and colder and creamier than anything you could imagine, like something the twelve dancing
princesses might have eaten out of crystal goblets at their
nightly balls.
So Mikael bought two ice cream cornets and they sat and
licked them on the bench at the tram stop, Sophie trying hard
not to jump up every minute to look out for the tram.
“Sophie?” Mikael said.
“What?”
“I really want you to come with me to Denmark.”
Sophie had prepared herself to greet such an observation
with indifference, but she felt a deep stab of regret that she
couldn’t shuck off her responsibilities and go with Mikael to
København. Adults would laugh at the idea of a schoolgirl
having responsibilities, but they’d forgotten what life at this
age was really like.

364

Tears welled up in her eyes and she shook her head with
great vehemence instead of answering Mikael in words. Oh,
if only she hadn’t realized she was in love with him! She
couldn’t shake the feeling of Mikael making this offer out of
something like pity. She would be damned if she’d accept an
invitation chiefly motivated by pity. Better to stay and risk
the consequences.
“I know what you’ll say,” Mikael went on, ignoring
Sophie’s psychic plea for him to shut up. “Your exams. Your
great-aunt. Your school friends. The minister of public safety.
The Brothers of the Northern Liberties.”
As he ticked each item off on his fingers, Sophie painfully
regretted not having told him anything about IRYLNS, in
some ways the most clear and present danger of all. If he knew
about that, he’d insist on her coming with him. If only she
could tell him!
She clamped her lips tightly shut.
“You can change your mind, you know, Sophie,” Mikael
said. “Changing your mind isn’t a bad thing. You’re free to
decide you’re not responsible for the whole world. My mother
will take you in, no question, and there’s a good Englishlanguage high school that’s even on the right tram route. I can’t
imagine your great-aunt would kick up much of a fuss, not if she
thought you really wanted it. I don’t know—I can’t explain,
exactly—but something in you just isn’t thriving in Edinburgh.”

365

With great relief, Sophie saw the tram come around the
corner. She surprised herself by flinging her arms around
Mikael. Then she pushed him away and got in line to board.
But Mikael’s hand rested again on her arm, the stickiness
of the ice cream attaching his fingers lightly to her skin.
“Won’t you go now?” she cried out.
“Sophie, my ship’s the Gustavus Adolphus, sailing on
Saturday at nineteen hundred hours—that’s seven o’clock in
the evening—from pier sixteen at Leith. Will you remember
that? Just in case something blows up between now and
then—”
Sophie winced.
“No, not literally, you idiot. Figuratively. If something
goes terribly wrong and you decide things have changed—that
it’s too dangerous to stay here and you’ll come with me after
all—you can still change your mind, as long as you reach the
ship in time. Don’t worry about the visa. There are ways of
getting around it. My brother will help you if you need it. Oh,
Sophie, just be careful, won’t you?”
“You, too, Mikael,” she said. “Do take care!”
The driver had stopped. If she didn’t hurry, she’d never
make the appointment on time.
She tore herself away from Mikael and up the steps into
the tram.

366

a

T h i rt y - s i x

I

T TOOK HARDLY ANY

time at all to get to Hume Close.

Sophie crossed the road and walked into Buccleugh Place
with a good fifteen minutes to spare, feeling terribly

exposed as she walked past Adam Smith College.
The receptionist inside the Braid Institute took her
national insurance card and showed her where to wait. The
hall outside the waiting room had an exit at the back into the
garden, a heavy door with panels of frosted glass. If Sophie
could just nerve herself up, it wouldn’t be hard to open and
shut the front door as a decoy, so that it sounded as though
she’d gone, and then race down the hall and let herself out the
back door into the garden. And hope she didn’t find herself
trapped there, she added to herself, though there was almost

367

always some way out of a garden.
Just thinking about sneaking around was making her
pulse race so fast she was practically hyperventilating. To calm
herself down, Sophie picked up a sample of the waiting-room
literature, an odd-looking pamphlet called How to Magnetize.
It was not long before Mr. Braid appeared in the waiting
room, his face humorous and weather-beaten, an attractive
contrast to the impeccably polished attire of his navy pinstriped suit and gleaming dress shoes. He shook Sophie’s
hand; if he felt the sticky remnants of the ice cream, he was too
polite to show it.
Inside the consulting room, they established that Sophie
had come to see if he could do anything about her limp.
“In ordinary life,” said the specialist, “mind and body
work together in tandem, with no clear ascendancy of the one
over the other. In the trance state, the mind’s power over the
body emerges in its full force. Under these conditions, the
mind is sometimes able to cure the body of ailments as diverse
as gallstones, ulcers, varicose veins, even broken limbs.”
Broken limbs! How absurd. Sophie stifled the desire to
laugh.
“The magnetic trance makes sense of a host of otherwise
inexplicable phenomena,” Mr. Braid continued, gesturing
enthusiastically in the air. “Surely it’s only an illusion that
humans have a finite and self-contained center of conscious-

368

ness or will—I would venture to say that there is no such thing
as a coherent self.”
Sophie was pretty sure that she had a coherent self, and
she thought Mr. Braid was probably sure he had a coherent
self as well, but she schooled her expression so that he wouldn’t
be able to tell she disagreed with him.
“I am quite sure that we all possess a second self,” the
doctor continued, “a self that lives an independent mental life
and has ways of acquiring knowledge off limits to our everyday self.”
Sophie’s second self wanted to laugh, but she didn’t give
in to the impulse. Some of the most powerful theories of the
twentieth century had elicited laughter, after all, and often
from people who should have known better. Think of how
many jokes one heard about Wittgenstein’s Uncertainty
Principle, silly jokes whose punch lines stupidly made fun of
the Austrian physicist’s incendiary hypothesis that one could
know either the position or the velocity of a subatomic particle but never both at once.
“Well, then, Miss Hunter,” said the doctor, “the order of
the day will be to obtain from your second self an account of
the accident that led to your limping.”
“But I was a very small child,” Sophie protested. “I don’t
remember anything about it.”
“Your mind contains reservoirs of knowledge to which

369

your conscious self lacks access,” said Mr. Braid, settling into
his chair and rubbing his hands together in a gesture that
might have been sinister if he hadn’t seemed so transparently
well intentioned. “We won’t be able to do anything about the
limp until we have learned as much as possible of its etiology,
both physical and psychological.”
Then, when Sophie continued to look skeptical: “Trust
me, Miss Hunter. I’ve been doing this for twenty years, and I
still see new things every day, things that fill me with awe and
gratitude that I am able to pursue this work. We’ll try a spot
of automatic writing first. I’ll hypnotize you and then ask you
to lay out whatever you can remember about the accident and
your body’s own awareness of the physical damage that
remains. Afterward you won’t remember anything that’s happened—”
Sophie hoped this wouldn’t be the case. . . .
“—and I will keep the statement back from you until the
end of your course of treatment, in case the knowledge should
prove traumatic for your conscious self in these early stages of
our working together.”
What wouldn’t Sophie’s conscious self be able to face?
She prided herself on her pragmatism and willingness to face
facts.
“How long is the usual course of treatment?” she asked
the doctor.

370

“It varies from case to case,” Braid said, “but twelve
weeks wouldn’t be at all out of the ordinary. On your way out,
ask Miss Tiptree to schedule your next appointment.”
“Shall we begin?” said Sophie, unable to stop herself from
looking at her watch. Twenty to five. Not bad. If she left it too
much later, there’d be nothing to see next door but girls
spooning mush into their mouths at supper.
“Let me explain exactly what I’m about to do,” said the
doctor. “In the early days, the mesmerist put his client into the
trance state by means of an extraordinarily showy set of passes
in the air. Do you know the sort of thing I mean?”
“Yes, of course,” said Sophie.
“It’s not nearly as flashy as the comic-book version, of
course, but I will use my hands to help you pass into the mesmeric trance—”
Sophie was suddenly much more nervous than she’d
imagined about the prospect of being hypnotized. What if,
when the doctor hypnotized her, she revealed to him her plan
to infiltrate IRYLNS by way of Mr. Braid’s back garden?
“—and then I’ll ask you a series of questions, to which you
will write your answers with the pencil and paper I provide. I
have found,” the doctor added as an afterthought, “that
patients are less disturbed by the idea that their second self
can communicate by means of writing than by the idea of
another speaker borrowing the vocal machinery.”

371

Well, that was sensible enough. Just like a séance. . . . Now
the doctor began to motion with his hands. Sophie waited for
his questions and prepared herself to make some illegible
scrawls on the paper in front of her. Really it couldn’t be too
hard to fake. . . .
“Very good,” said Braid, rubbing his hands together.
“Remarkably good, for your first time. How very glad I am,
Miss Hunter, that you telephoned my office!”
Sophie looked at him with amazement, slowly realizing
that her right hand ached where she’d been clutching the pencil. A heap of pages of semilegible writing lay on the table
between herself and Braid, pages he now swept up and out of
her view before she could decode a single line.
But he’d only just begun! Surely she couldn’t have fallen
into a mesmeric trance without even realizing it?
She looked at her watch and saw that almost thirty minutes had passed since she’d last checked. But that had only
been a few minutes ago!
Braid refrained from laughing at Sophie’s incredulity.
“Everyone’s taken aback the first few times,” he said in a
kindly manner. “Disconcerting, isn’t it?”
“What did I say, though?” Sophie said, leaning forward
and gripping the edge of the table, her knuckles white. “Did I
say anything . . . bad ?”
“Miss Hunter, I assure you that you need never worry

372

about the confidentiality of what passes in this room,” said the
doctor. “All communications between us are privileged—and
when I say ‘us,’ I include your other self, the self that emerges
under hypnosis.”
“So I do have another self? A self that wrote things down
in answer to your questions?” Sophie asked, hardly able to
believe it.
“Yes, and the nature of that self’s responses has already
suggested to me some further avenues of inquiry,” Braid said.
“Can’t you tell me what I wrote?” Sophie begged.
“No, I’m afraid I can’t,” said Braid, “for that might jeopardize the force of the therapeutic intervention later on. But
we have some interesting weeks ahead of us, Miss Hunter, and
I look forward very much to our collaboration.”
He stood and shook hands with Sophie. It was strange to
think that just half an hour earlier, she’d been eager to rush in
and out of Braid’s office at top speed so as to get on with her
real mission.
Well, she would learn no more of her history today.
She made an appointment for the following Thursday and
asked the receptionist if she could use the washroom in
the hall.
“Of course,” said the young woman. “It’s the first door on
the left, toward the back.”
“Thank you.”

373

“Will you be all right letting yourself out?” the secretary
asked.
Sophie looked and saw she was poised to go, scarf tied over
her hair, handbag packed up, keys in hand ready to lock up.
“You see, usually I leave just at five,” the girl continued
apologetically, “and I’ve still got the shopping to do before I
go home.”
“I’ll be fine,” Sophie said, inwardly thanking the god of
illicit investigations for this lucky break.
They left the office together, the receptionist locking the
hall door after them (“Mr. Braid will be there hours longer,”
she explained) and rushing out the front door while Sophie let
herself into the lavatory. She was so nervous by now that she
thought she might be sick, but the sight of the toilet fixture
calmed her stomach, and in the end she simply washed her
hands and splashed cold water over her face.
She peered out into the hallway. Seeing nobody, she raced
down the hall and out the garden door. Thankfully it hadn’t an
alarm system, just a dead bolt that opened quite easily from
the inside. She entered the garden and pulled the door closed
behind her. As it closed, she realized she might have stuck a
bit of cardboard in the jamb to prevent it from shutting all the
way.
Oh well, perhaps it wasn’t locked.
She tried it.

374

Locked.
So that bridge was burned. She’d have to find another way
out when she was finished.
She located a series of footholds on the sturdy wooden
fence that separated the Braid Institute’s garden from that of
IRYLNS next door. Very cautiously, she lifted herself just high
enough up to see over into the garden.
It was completely empty. Taking a deep breath, she pulled
herself up and over the fence, then gracelessly dropped down
to the ground on the other side, twisting her ankle, and stumbled forward. It felt like enemy territory, and the movement of
a tabby cat on the other side of the garden almost made her
scream.

375

a

T h i rt y - s e v e n

OPHIE’S OBJECTIVE ALL

S

along had been to get into the

locked ward. Even just a few pictures of girls like the ones
she’d seen that day in the garden would surely make

Priscilla and Jean take Sophie seriously. The windows at the back
of the building were tiny and high off the ground and opened
barely wide enough to allow a very small person to pass through,
but there was no hope of getting by the guards at the front.
Some gardening equipment lay abandoned near the fence,
and Sophie, feeling like a criminal (she supposed she was a
criminal), dragged a wheelbarrow over to beneath the window, climbed up onto it, and peered inside.
The scene might have come straight from one of the
famous photographs of the alienist Flaubert’s patients at the

376

Salpêtrière in Paris. A host of young women in white hospital
gowns wandered up and down a narrow central ward; others
were visible through the doorways leading to the secondary
wards.
About a third of the patients were in bed, a handful more
in wheelchairs. Those lucky enough to remain ambulatory
looked dazed and unhappy and somehow damaged in a way
Sophie couldn’t explain. She took Nan’s camera out of her
pocket and snapped a picture, but she would have to get
nearer for the photographs to really be any good.
There were no nurses or other authority figures in sight, so
far as Sophie could tell. She’d take the chance and go in.
Crossing her fingers for luck, Sophie hissed a few words
through the window: “Hey! You, there!” Then, when a girl
slowly turned her head toward Sophie: “Yes, you! Look, I
need to get inside. Can you help me through the window?”
The girl’s face showed an utter lack of understanding.
Another girl, though, had stopped pacing up and down and
come near.
“What is it?” she said, her speech slurred.
“I need to get in. And the window’s got one of those security things; the screw’s keeping me from pushing it up from
the outside.”
Some expression flitted across the girl’s face, but Sophie
couldn’t read it.

377

At that point the wheelbarrow tilted beneath her, tipping
her to the ground. After remounting, bruised and rather dirtier than before—thank goodness the camera wasn’t broken—
she found the other girl’s face only inches from her own, her
fingers fumbling with the screw over the sill.
Sophie tried another friendly overture. “What’s your
name?”
The girl looked up and opened her mouth, then closed it
again, her face puzzled and pained.
“Don’t remember,” she mumbled finally, finding words
with difficulty. “Been here for ages. No name. Don’t remember coming here.”
Despite the uncertainty of her fingers, she managed to
loosen both screws and raise the window. She placed her
hands on Sophie’s wrists as Sophie fought to lift herself up
onto the sill. It was a struggle, but she made it in an awful
scrambly way that left her shaky and out of breath. It wasn’t
hard after that to swing her legs over the sill and slide in
through the window.
Inside, Sophie found herself in the midst of a small mob.
The girls thronged around her, congregating from all over the
ward, and for a moment Sophie almost panicked.
Then one of the girls—it was hard to tell them apart with
their identical gowns and cropped hair, here and there a bandage covering the downy tufts—stepped forward and leaned

378

over her, as if to confide something important.
Sophie froze.
“They. Watch. Us,” said the girl, using the pauses to tell
Sophie something important. “Watch. Us. From. Off. Ward.”
She looked inquiringly at Sophie, who caught on and said,
“You have to block me from view?”
The girl gave a slow nod.
She must be heavily dosed with tranquilizers, Sophie
thought. Or else—much worse—could it be massive neurological damage from the surgical procedure?
Sophie wanted to ask them all what had happened, to listen to each and every story so as to go out and bear witness.
But she had, she thought, at most half an hour before the odds
of being discovered would become disastrously high, and all
she could sensibly do in that time was to gather enough evidence to persuade Jean and Priscilla to change their minds.
“I need to see the very worst,” she said now to the girls
pressed around her, speaking softly in case the authorities
were monitoring the ward for sound. “I can’t stay long—I
mustn’t be found here—but I’ve got two friends at school, and
I need to tell them exactly why they shouldn’t come to
IRYLNS. I’ll take pictures of whatever you show me, if you
don’t mind.”
The girls consulted briefly with one another in garbled
sentences she couldn’t understand. Then three of them took

379

Sophie between them and moved her down the ward in a formation like fighter planes escorting a bomber, weaving in and
out to mislead the watchers.
They stopped short next to a bed whose occupant seemed
little more than a narrow, bolster-shaped lump under the covers. Maneuvering Sophie into position, the girl who’d first
helped her climb through the window drew a set of curtains
around the bed and made a series of gestures (easier for her
than speech, Sophie guessed) to tell Sophie she now stood out
of the watchers’ sight.
Movements tentative, Sophie knelt by the bed and put a
hand out to the place where she thought the girl’s shoulder
must be.
The girl in the bed groaned and rolled toward Sophie.
One of the other occupants of the ward pulled down the covers so that Sophie could see the girl’s face.
The girl in the bed was unmistakably Sophie’s former idol
Sheena Henshawe.
Her body was thin to the point of emaciation, and her
arms and neck were covered with sores and rough discolored
patches. Most of her hair was shaved down to uneven stubble,
the remaining strands thin and colorless. A shunt taped to
Sheena’s head drained through a tube into a basin full of pus
by the side of the bed (the smell was almost intolerable). An
IV delivered fluids into her arm, and the bed was surrounded

380

with a frightening amount of medical equipment.
This emptied-out shell of Sheena grunted and tried to pull
herself up into a sitting position. Lacking the strength, she had
to let the other girls prop her up.
Though it might have been more a function of her own
desire than of anything really there, Sophie believed she saw a
glimmer of recognition in Sheena’s face.
“Sheena!” she cried out. “Whatever happened to you?”
Sheena shook her head. “Can’t . . . tell,” she said, her blistered lips hardly moving as she spoke. “Why . . . here?”
“I’m not here to undergo the training,” Sophie said
quickly. “I’m trying to stop my friends Jean and Priscilla from
joining IRYLNS, and I thought if I could tell them about what
really happens here, I’d be able to persuade them not to. Oh,
Sheena, it must be stopped! Look at you. . . .”
The girl shook her head, too weak to answer.
“What happened to you, Sheena?” Sophie cried out.
She didn’t know which transformation disturbed her
more: the real Sheena into the gleaming, perfect secretary that
day on the bridge, or that beautiful, well-groomed mannequin
into the degraded wreck lying before her.
“Emotion . . . overload,” Sheena mumbled. “Seizure.
Surgery.”
Her eyes appealed to Sophie for something Sophie couldn’t
identify. She tried and failed to come up with a tactful way of

381

asking about Sheena’s prognosis. Would Sheena ever get back
to anything like normal health?
As a compromise, she said, “What will you do when
you’re well again?”
She was horrified to see the tears spill out of Sheena’s eyes
and down her rough, chapped cheeks.
“Only thing in the world I ever wanted,” Sheena said, her
words suddenly much clearer. “Best thing in the world.
Serving my country. Can’t do it now. Don’t want to live.”
Sophie stroked her arm and felt a furious surge of hatred
for the people who had done this to Sheena.
“Sophie,” Sheena said, clutching her hand so hard that
Sophie jumped. “This place . . . all for good. Good of others.
Greater good. Good of country. Highest good, IRYLNS.
Friends . . .”
“But don’t you think it should be stopped?” Sophie
asked. “Sheena, look what they’ve done to you!”
Sheena shook her head, pulling herself up a little and digging her nails into Sophie’s arm.
“More important, Sophie. You and the others . . . must
come to IRYLNS. The country needs . . . Serve. You must.”
Then she fell back onto the bed, shattered by the short
conversation.
Sophie’s horror exceeded anything she had ever felt
before. She’d been so sure about this venture, so sure that the

382

girls who’d been destroyed—destroyed not once but twice
over—would welcome any chance to get the word out and
save a few others. And here was the worst thing imaginable,
Sheena Henshawe—Sophie’s hero Sheena—reduced to this
wreck of skin and bone, and yet still rehearsing the most
coherent version she could manage of the message about duty
and service and self-sacrifice.
It was the last thing in the world Sophie had expected,
that she would find IRYLNS’s most pitiful victim and be told
that nothing was more important than giving oneself up for
the cause.
She stared at Sheena and didn’t know what to say.
“I won’t tell the others,” she said finally. It was the least
she could do. She didn’t have the right to go against Sheena’s
wishes, not really. “I won’t say anything at all, if that’s what
you want.”
As a faint smile came to Sheena’s lips, the other girls
who’d clustered around them suddenly froze.
Sophie looked up. “What is it?” she said.
Before she got an answer, though, she heard two familiar
voices approaching the bed.
There was no way to escape discovery.
“Let’s have a look at Sheena Henshawe,” said one of the
new arrivals.
“There’s no chance she’ll be of any further use,” said the

383

other. “Will you send her to the asylum at Rothersay?”
“I think so,” said the first speaker, “assuming she recovers
from the infection. The worst-case scenario is that we’ll have
to place her in a nursing home. They’re not really equipped at
Rothersay for the level of care that girls like Sheena are liable
to require.”
A hand swept back the curtain around the bed, and
Sophie found herself under the eyes of Great-aunt Tabitha
and her friend Dr. Ferrier, the Institute’s director and its most
fanatical supporter.

384

a

T h i rt y - e i g h t

A

and painful interlude in which

FTER A HUMILIATING

atwo burly male nurses hauled Sophie out of the ward
aand down the corridors to the director’s office,

Sophie found herself at the receiving end of a tirade from
Great-aunt Tabitha.
The guards had confiscated Sophie’s film and returned the
camera to her with contempt.
As phrases like “I’ll never trust you again” and “criminal
trespass” rolled off Great-aunt Tabitha’s tongue, Sophie had a
sudden horrifying revelation, something to do with Mr. Braid’s
words about multiple selves.
“The J and H procedure—J and H don’t just stand for joy
and happiness, do they?” she said, breaking in on Great-aunt

385

Tabitha’s speech. “The letters mean Jekyll and Hyde as well. . . .
You split the girls off, into a good self and a bad one.”
Silence followed Sophie’s naming of the two selves in
Robert Louis Stevenson’s tale.
“I suppose Sophie might as well hear the real explanation,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, exchanging a glance with Dr.
Ferrier.
“Oh, yes, she might as well,” said Dr. Ferrier. “I don’t see
how it can hurt now.”
They had dismissed the guards. Sophie wasn’t sure what
her punishment would be, but she no longer thought she’d be
thrown into prison.
“It began when I invented the machinery,” Great-aunt
Tabitha said. “The machine is the Emotional Battery, its logical complement is the J and H procedure, and as you’ve
guessed, the abbreviation stands for something more—something other than ‘joy and happiness.’ Jekyll and Hyde . . . it has
often been said that men are more rational creatures than
women. I believe that men and women alike suffer from having emotions, but IRYLNS trains women to become repositories for all of the destructive emotions experienced by the men
they work for, many of whom are politicians and diplomats
who quite simply cannot afford to have a bad day. Wives have
always known that part of their job is to bear the things their
husbands cannot. We have simply taken the process one step

386

further, fully modernized it, and put it on a technologically
sound basis.”
Sophie was speechless. Aside from everything else, it
seemed so terribly unfair that the women should pay such a
high price for what was after all the men’s problem! Almost
without knowing it, she put her hand up to her open mouth.
Now Dr. Ferrier took over. “Girls who undergo the surgical procedure must be regularly hooked up thereafter to the
Emotional Battery,” she told Sophie, “or else they will be less
than supremely fit to do their jobs. We install a conduit in the
brain that works like the electrical equivalent of the tap one
inserts into a maple tree to drain off the sap to make sugar.
Purged regularly in this manner, all their emotions stored in
the battery, the girls soon become quite incapable of experiencing negative feelings. They make perfect empty vessels,
then, for the rage of the men they work for. To sustain their
peace of mind, we hook them up to the battery twice a week
at a local service center, where the treatment can be administered in a modern and fully hygienic setting.”
Sophie had a very vivid picture of Sheena’s devastated
body; thinking about what had happened to Sheena’s mind
was even worse.
“Sophie,” said Great-aunt Tabitha, her voice softer than
before, “it’s pretty certainly going to come into law within the
next few months that IRYLNS shall have every girl it asks for,

387

the minute she turns sixteen. At that point, there won’t be
anything I can do to keep you out of it.”
“So I’m going to have to come to IRYLNS?” Sophie
asked, feeling like the stupidest person in the world.
“I wish you’d never seen any of this,” said Great-aunt
Tabitha, sighing and adjusting her body in her chair. “You’ve
seen only the worst. There are wonderful aspects to the work
we’ve done here too. Really wonderful! I’d have given anything to spare you this terrible foreknowledge.”
“Anything?” said Sophie. “Then why can’t you—”
Great-aunt Tabitha cut her off. “Anything but break the
law,” she said. “At this point, just when we’re about to expand
IRYLNS on a far grander scale than before, it would be a
public relations disaster if anyone found out that one of the
scheme’s originators had pulled strings to get an exemption
for a relative. And there’s every reason to believe your conversion will go quite smoothly, without any negative impact on
your health. It’s only a very few girls who don’t do well under
our regime. Some of them even get married in the end—
there’s no real reason they shouldn’t. You understand what
I’m saying, don’t you, Sophie?”
Sophie understood.
“Susan, do you think we can handle this without the
police?” asked Great-aunt Tabitha.
“Certainly,” said Dr. Ferrier. “No need for them now—I

388

can see Sophie quite understands what’s required of her. We
won’t see any repetition of this little incident, will we,
Sophie?”
Sophie shook her head.
“I’m going to take you back to school in a taxi,” Greataunt Tabitha said. “Peggy will collect you after school tomorrow, and from now on, there won’t be a moment when you’ll
be allowed out of sight of one or the other of us, except when
you’re at school. I’ll notify your teachers that you need to be
kept under close supervision because of a security threat.
We’ll keep this up through the time when you actually get
admitted to the program at IRYLNS. And within a week of
coming here, you’ll no longer have the faintest desire to
leave.”
No longer have the faintest desire—Sophie thought her
heart might actually stop beating, she was so frightened by her
great-aunt’s calm certainty.
They sat together in silence until Great-aunt Tabitha
moved to collect her things.
“Thank you, Susan,” she said, shaking the director’s hand.
“I’ll look forward to meeting you again under happier circumstances, Sophie,” said the director to Sophie.
Sophie muttered a few words in return, but nobody—not
even herself—knew exactly what they were. The older women
let the lapse in manners pass.

389

“I won’t be sixteen until December,” Sophie said in the
car. The words sounded pitiful, even to her, but it was too late
to take them back.
Great-aunt Tabitha just looked at her. Sophie hung her
head. There was nothing more to say.
Sophie’s great-aunt dropped her back at school, coming in
herself to make sure Sophie wouldn’t be able to skive off.
What she said to the housemistress, Sophie would never
know, but back in the girls’ bedroom, getting ready to lie
down, Sophie thought she’d never survive the others’ idle
chatter.
“Any more tales about the horrors of IRYLNS?” Priscilla
even asked, laughing when Sophie shook her head and got
into bed without saying good night.
As she lay in bed, trying and failing to fall asleep, dreading the prospect of Peggy arriving tomorrow to pick her up as
if she were still a little girl, hardly knowing how to console herself at the prospect of months of virtual imprisonment followed by a transformation in which she would permanently
lose herself, Sophie thought that perhaps she should overcome her scruples and run away with Mikael after all. Would
she even be able to get away to meet him, though? And without a visa, how would she get onto the ship? Knowing what she
did now about IRYLNS, she wondered whether that wasn’t
the reason Scotland regulated travel visas so strictly, much

390

more strictly than any of the other Hanseatic states.
Sophie drifted through the day on Friday and met Peggy
in the front of the school without saying a word. In her bedroom at home, she found the planchette she’d used as a toy
when she was younger, and idly set it up on its little table.
Resting her fingertips on the little rolling platform, she asked
the spirits whether she should try to leave with Mikael.
But rather than moving to yes or no, or spelling out words
by pointing to letters of the alphabet, the planchette simply
meandered over the table.
In a dull stupor, Sophie went downstairs and put a telephone call through to Mikael.
The professor answered, and Sophie exchanged a few
words with him before asking to speak to Mikael.
She thought Mikael might be able to tell something was
wrong, to read her mind and somehow break her out of the
cloud preventing her from exercising proper self-determination.
If he would only say he wanted her, if he himself only felt
about Sophie the way she felt about him, all her difficulties
would vanish and she would go joyfully with him.
But when Mikael came on the line, he sounded distracted.
After thanking her for calling, he fell silent. And then, even as
Sophie cast about for a way to broach the topic of
København—there had to be some fashion in which she could
take him up on his offer without being a burden, there just had

391

to be, and he had said himself that Mr. Petersen might find a
way around the visa difficulty—Mikael cut her off.
“Look, I’m sorry, Sophie, but I’ve got something I must go
and do now, something really important.”
It was as if he’d dug a skewer straight into her eye socket.
Something really important! It wasn’t as though Sophie was
important, of course, not even when her sanity—her life—was
at stake. Some small part of her could smell the self-pity—the
silliness—in the way she was handling all this, but she didn’t
have the energy to change course.
“Best of luck, Sophie. I’m sure it will be all right. You’ll
write me a letter as soon as anything happens about youknow-what, won’t you? And you know you can ask my
brother for help at any time.”
Then Mikael put down the telephone before Sophie could
even say good-bye.
Sophie had imagined she’d be the one to cut their
conversation short, in an understated but noble gesture of
self-sacrifice.
It must be more fun to be the person leaving than the person left behind. Who knew how much longer she would
remain the person she was now, anyway?
Sophie had never felt so alone in her entire life.
Great-aunt Tabitha popped her head around the study
door and gave Sophie a sharp look, making Sophie fear she

392

would never be allowed a moment of privacy again, but she
kept her face still and submissive. There was no point seeming
outwardly rebellious.
“You’ll be ready to go first thing in the morning, won’t
you, Sophie?” said Great-aunt Tabitha.
“Go where?” Sophie said. Surely not to IRYLNS, not yet?
“It’s the annual outing of the New Town Women’s
Spiritualist Association,” her great-aunt said. “I expect you to
come with us so I can keep an eye on you.”
“No!” said Sophie, feeling for the first time as if she might
break down and cry. She hadn’t been dragged on one of these
trips since she was quite a small child; she always stayed at
home with Peggy instead. Her great-aunt knew how selfconscious it made Sophie to trail around after the idealistic
middle-aged ladies who made up the cohort. “Please, Great-aunt
Tabitha, please don’t make me go. . . .”
But Great-aunt Tabitha was adamant.
“You’ve forfeited the right to be treated like an adult,” she
said. “How can I trust you, Sophie, after you broke your word
not to pry? No, I want you under my own supervision when
you’re not at school.”
Seeing there was no chance of her great-aunt relenting,
Sophie went upstairs and packed her overnight bag. At first
she put in just the bare essentials—toilet bag with toothbrush
and flannel, pajamas, clean underclothes. But the valise

393

seemed to sit there and reproach her.
Something grew in her as she stood there in the middle of
the room, a feeling so unfamiliar she wasn’t even sure at first
what it was.
Sophie was furious.
She was absolutely enraged!
She felt like one of the avengers in a Greek tragedy. How
dare Great-aunt Tabitha paper over the violence being done
to hundreds of girls in the name of patriotism? Did she not
care about them at all? How could she be willing to sacrifice
Sophie?
It came to Sophie in a flash that she had to leave, she
couldn’t not leave. She supposed she would honor Sheena’s
wishes by not telling the others about IRYLNS. But she, Sophie,
was not bound to immolate herself for the greater good.
She had the right to make her own choice. And she chose
not to destroy herself.
It was amazing how much calmer Sophie felt now. She lay
down on the bed and began to think about what to do.
She could slip out in the middle of the night, lie low somewhere until the late afternoon, and then meet Mikael at Leith.
But she didn’t have a visa. Without one, they wouldn’t let her
aboard. And Mikael was angry with her, or else why would he
have cut short their conversation like that? The last thing she
wanted was to force her company on an unwilling partner.

394

She had to find a way of getting an exit visa, and then
make her own plans to escape. Mr. Petersen would help her.
She would go and speak to him first thing Monday morning.
With his Nobel connections, he would almost certainly be
able to get her a visa and a safe place to go to, perhaps even in
Stockholm rather than Købnhavn so that it wouldn’t look as
though she were chasing after Mikael, and then everything
would be all right.
Now that she’d come to a decision, the idea of waiting
even until Monday seemed almost unbearable, but it wouldn’t
do any good to fuss. Still, she added to her bag a few other
things she felt funny about leaving behind, just in case she got
a chance to escape this weekend after all: her passport, the
beaten-up leather slippers that had once belonged to her
father, a photograph of her parents on their wedding day, the
small soapstone elephant named Horatio that usually lived on
Sophie’s bedside table. She crammed all her money into her
purse and tucked it out of sight at the bottom of the case. It
would be silly not to have it with her if some opportunity for
flight presented itself. As an afterthought, she tucked in her
chemistry textbook.
She got a surprisingly good night’s sleep, the best one
she’d had for ages. Decision-making as a remedy for insomnia—now, there was a thought. If only she could speak to Mr.
Petersen right away!

395

a

T h i rt y - n i n e

T

HE VEHICLE HIRED FOR

the expedition was a bright

maroon charabanc, its seats covered in a lurid bottlegreen leather substitute. A green-and-yellow-striped

fringed canopy had been raised to protect the ladies’ complexions from the Saturday morning sun. As president of the New
Town Women’s Spiritualist Association, Great-aunt Tabitha
had designated Heriot Row for the morning rendezvous, and
as the driver leaned on the hood of the charabanc smoking a
cigarette, she scanned the horizon for stragglers.
The ladies of the NTWSA were scheduled to arrive at
the Nobel dynamite factory by midmorning—Sophie was
particularly dreading this part of the trip, as it brought to
mind her parents’ untimely deaths at the factory’s Russian

396

counterpart—then take a tour of the facilities, to be followed
by a late lunch. In the afternoon they would pick wildflowers
in the countryside, spending the night at the Ayrshire
Temperance Hotel and visiting Culzean Castle and the
Electric Brae the next day before returning home in time for
Sunday afternoon tea.
As the last few ladies arrived, Peggy ran out the front door
and pressed a packet of barley sugar into Sophie’s hand.
Tears came to Sophie’s eyes. Only Peggy ever remembered
that Sophie got carsick.
“Thank you, Peggy,” she said, and wished the housekeeper a nice weekend, though the words seemed quite inadequate to her feelings.
Peggy snorted at the idea of herself having a nice weekend, but she stayed outside and waved at Sophie from the
front doorstep until the bus turned the corner.
As they drove out of Edinburgh to the main road that ran
west to the coast, Sophie found the movement of the charabanc distinctly sickness inducing. She popped a piece of barley sugar into her mouth and sank down low in her seat. She
would have been quite interested to talk to Miss Grant
again—she might know more by now about the minister and
Nicko Mood, mightn’t she?—but Miss Grant sat in the front
seat, sequestered in conversation with Great-aunt Tabitha.
Once they reached the main road, Sophie stopped feeling

397

so queasy, and when Miss Gillespie passed around the
inevitable Kelvinsulated flasks of warm milky tea, Sophie
accepted a cup and a shortbread biscuit. There was plenty to
look at on the way, and she was surprised by how quickly they
reached the tiny coastal station where they would board the
train for the very last part of the journey to Ardeer.
The Nobel factory lay on an industrial estate served by a
private road, but a narrow-gauge railway ran all the way in to
the gates of the factory, where the private train station admitted workers and a few select visitors.
Sitting in the railway carriage as they traveled toward the
compound, Sophie looked out over the isolated coastal landscape and remembered Alfred Nobel’s notorious loathing for
this place. He had written of Ardeer to his brother, in a letter
reprinted in the leaflets the train conductor gave them with
their tickets:
Picture to yourself everlasting bleak sand dunes with
no buildings. Only rabbits find a little nourishment
here; they eat a substance which quite unjustifiably
goes by the name of grass. It is a sand desert where the
wind always blows often howls filling the ears with
sand. Between us and America, there is nothing but
water a sea whose mighty waves are always raging
and foaming. Now you will have some idea of the

398

place where I am living. Without work the place
would be intolerable.
But Sophie found it rather beautiful.
It was no accident, of course, that the factory had been
built in such a desolate place. The English Explosives Acts of
the 1860s made it impossible to build dynamite factories south
of Hadrian’s Wall, but Scotland welcomed them, so long as
they were built far from populated areas and in accordance
with the provisions of the Carriage and Deposit of Dangerous
Goods Act. The Ardeer factory was now owned and operated
by the Nobel Consortium, the sophisticated transnational
holding company that managed what had once been Nobel’s
personal empire.
They got off the train at a platform lacking even the most
basic railway-station amenities—no newspaper stall, no flower
seller, not even a coin-operated chocolate machine—to find
stringent security measures in place. Guards with Alsatians
patrolled the barbed-wire perimeter, and the security officer at
the gatehouse checked each woman’s national identity card
against the names on the prearranged list of visitors.
Fortunately Great-aunt Tabitha had telephoned ahead to add
Sophie’s name to the list, or she would have been left under
the supervision of the guards while the others took their tour.
They were all asked to deposit their bags in the gatehouse,

399

along with any personal items made of metal, which led to
great indignation on the part of two ladies who had to retire
and take off their steel-boned corsets and another one who
didn’t want to put aside her cigarettes and lighter. Though
smoking was not at all the thing in Great-aunt Tabitha’s circle,
this lady was an old-fashioned Decadent who wore vegetabledyed handwoven scarves and smoked a special mentholated
tobacco to clear her airways. She left behind her smoking
paraphernalia only after a serious dressing-down from Greataunt Tabitha. They would be searched again, of course, before
being allowed to enter the buildings where nitroglycerin was
actually produced.
“We’ve got a very special lecturer for the occasion,” said
Great-aunt Tabitha as she herded the ladies away from the
gate to the building where the tour would begin. “He’ll be
here any moment now. Sophie, I think you’ll enjoy this bit of
the tour, I don’t know why you’re looking so sullen.”
In the minutes that followed, Sophie’s great-aunt checked
her watch a few times, irritation growing.
When their guide finally appeared, Sophie almost fell over
in shock. It was Mr. Petersen!
He greeted Great-aunt Tabitha with a firm handshake,
apologizing profusely for keeping them all waiting. Great-aunt
Tabitha introduced him to all the ladies and he shook everyone’s hand, including Sophie’s.

400

“Nice to see you, Sophie,” he said quietly.
Sophie couldn’t help the surge of pleasure that rose in her
heart at finding him here. Now if only she could snag him for
a few minutes of conversation, she could tell him she’d
decided she must leave and ask for his help. It was progress,
distinct progress!
“Mr. Petersen,” Great-aunt Tabitha told the others complacently, “is a research chemist in the employ of Mr. Alfred
Nobel. He has kindly agreed to show us about today, and will
take questions afterward.”
“The Nobel Consortium produces more than half the
world’s dynamite,” said Mr. Petersen as they walked toward
the first building. Oh, he was in his element here, all right! If
ever a person loved talking about explosives, it was Mr.
Petersen. “Dynamite is used most frequently for the purpose
of demolition, as in mining and tunneling. It’s also used in
bombs, warheads, and mines, but not in guns, as the rapidity
and intensity of the blast would shatter a metal barrel. By the
end of the last century, it had become illegal to manufacture
nitroglycerin and dynamite in Europe and the Americas, and
the production of dynamite has since then been almost exclusively the charge of the Hanseatic states.”
“Isn’t it awfully dangerous, though?”
The words came from Miss Grant, whose calm confidence
made the question sound almost mocking.

401

“Well, it’s true that nitroglycerin’s immensely volatile,”
said Mr. Petersen, “but we take every possible precaution.
And the compound we call dynamite’s actually quite safe: it
burns rather than exploding when it’s set on fire, and aside
from deliberately detonating it with caps and fuses, the only
way to ignite it involves compression and a high degree of
heat. All the explosives manufactured here are tested for stability in two subsidiary departments known as India and
Siberia; in India, as you might guess, the explosive material is
subjected to extreme and protracted heat, whereas in Siberia,
the temperature is kept very cold.”
“But there must be some risk?” said Great-aunt Tabitha.
“It’s an immensely powerful explosive, after all, isn’t it?”
“Pound for pound, the explosive force of Dynamite
Number One is four times that of gunpowder,” said Mr.
Petersen, looking solemn, “and it’s also much denser, so that
the same volume of explosive ends up being over seven times
as powerful.”
Most of the ladies shivered. Sophie thought they were
enjoying this measured flirtation with destruction.
Half an hour into the tour, Sophie was so stunned and
impressed by what she was seeing that she’d temporarily forgotten the troubles pressing down upon her. The factory was
self-contained, with steam provided by a central boiler house,
and electricity and compressed air produced at the on-site

402

power station. Though the four-hundred-acre industrial compound was mostly open to the air, the clustering of tunnels
and tramways and pipelines gave parts of it the semienclosed
feel of a railway yard. It was quite extraordinary to think that
only seventy years earlier, this had been a barren waste of sand
dunes stretching down to the sea.
There were more than three hundred buildings, many of
them with their own chimney stacks, and Mr. Petersen enumerated some of their functions: the acid works and acidrecovery plant, the mills for processing ammonia and potash
and kieselguhr, the steam- and powerhouses, the departments
for washing and carding and bleaching the fleecy fiber that
would be nitrated into guncotton, the pulping mill and box
factories, all connected to one another by the rather sweet little narrow-gauge railway.
The workers wore color-coded coveralls so that the factory superintendents could see at a glance whether a worker
was out of place—dark blue for the runners and carriers, light
blue for workers assigned to the smokeless powder factory,
scarlet for the nitroglycerin house—and the pattern of the colors made the scene look like a modern painting when Sophie
squinted a little. There were lots of other things to look at too,
including a pond that was blown up once a week by a safety
officer to destroy the dregs of nitroglycerin that drained into
it and an armory attached to a shooting range where they

403

tested explosives for rifles and shotguns. Sophie stopped
being sorry at having been made to come and started—amazingly—actually to enjoy herself.
At the acid works where the constituent parts of nitroglycerin were made, they learned that whereas glycerin—a natural
byproduct of soap making, in which fats were boiled with
wood ash or some other alkali—was quite safe to produce,
nitric acid was extremely dangerous. It was manufactured in
enormous steel retorts, six feet across and bricked up like
ovens, from oil of vitriol shipped by canal from Laurieston
and then combined with nitrate of soda. The acid was subsequently forced in the form of a suffocating reddish gas
through an elaborate system of pipes to condense in jars on
shelves. The liquid would then be pumped by compressed air
into tanks at the top of the nitroglycerin hills, artificial grasscovered embankments (mostly conical, often sixty or seventy
feet high) built to contain accidents.
The factory compound contained four of these hills, each
with two separate nitrating houses, frail-looking white shingled cabins. The liquid nitroglycerin would flow back down
the hill to the processing rooms, propelled only by the force of
its own weight so as to minimize the risk of accidental detonation.
Security at the nitroglycerin hut was much tighter than
anywhere they’d been so far. A guard at the entrance checked

404

their visitor’s passes for a second time, and a female searcher
examined each of them.
Mr. Petersen told them that even workers who came in
and out of the building three or four times a day would be
searched every time they passed through the door. Sophie
thought him naïve for believing this—it was human nature to
become lax—but she hoped everyone had been checked
properly today, at any rate. Thinking about it made her feel
slightly sick, her parents’ fate at the forefront of her mind.
Several of the other women seemed to share Sophie’s worries.
“Are you really sure none of these workers break the
rules?” one of them asked.
The female searcher laughed. “It’s hardly in their own
interest to break the rules, now, is it?” she said. “They’re the
ones who’ll be blown up if they do. There’s a long list of prohibitions. The young women aren’t allowed to wear pins in
their hair, metal corsets, or metal buttons; you can see they’ve
all got their hair plaited and the ends fastened with elastic. A
few years ago, a band came to play at a factory dance, and one
of the musicians lit up a cigarette without thinking. There was
practically a riot! I thought the girls would tear him to
pieces—they had him on the ground in a flash, with his arms
pinned so he couldn’t endanger anyone.”
Once everyone had been checked, they stepped into

405

rubber overshoes provided by the company.

NO SHOE THAT

TOUCHES THE GROUND OUTSIDE MAY TOUCH THE FLOOR OF A
DANGER DEPARTMENT,

a sign warned, and Mr. Petersen

explained that it was because the grit might produce friction
and spark an explosion.
At the center of the nitroglycerin hut stood two lead cylinders, each five feet in diameter and six feet deep, sunk into the
floor and protected with dome-shaped tops, the lead pipes
curling in and out of them. By each tank, a scarlet-clad man
watched the thermometer while sitting perched on one of the
strangest contraptions Sophie had ever seen, a one-legged
stool that would topple to the ground if the watcher relaxed
his attention even for a second. Mr. Petersen explained that
the special stools had been designed as a safety measure to
stop the watchers from falling asleep and missing the kind of
temperature fluctuation that would merit an evacuation.
What really caught Sophie’s imagination and made her
skin crawl was the sheer volume of the liquid nitroglycerin.
Thousands and thousands of gallons of it ran throughout the
building in pipes that spewed out waterfalls of nitroglycerin,
cream-colored streams shooting out of lead gutters into enormous tanks where the explosive rose to the surface to be
skimmed off by young women wielding gigantic aluminum
ladles like washbasins with handles. From there it was poured
into tanks to be rinsed, first with cold water and then with

406

warm water mixed with carbonate of soda.
One of the guards who’d checked them in appeared and
took Mr. Petersen aside for a quick word. When he came
back, he looked worried, though not excessively so.
“Will you excuse me, ladies?” he said. “I must take a telephone call. Many apologies.”
Fortunately the women of the NTWSA were so thoroughly immersed in learning about working conditions and
the inequalities of pay between men and women that they
hardly minded his going, particularly when one of the managers offered to take the next part of the tour.
“Sophie, would you mind coming with me?” Mr. Petersen
said to Sophie while nobody was listening.
“If you like,” said Sophie, suddenly very nervous.
What was all this about?

407

a

F o rt y

T

HE GUARD LED THEM

around an obstacle course of

hills and outbuildings to a place called the communications room. It struck Sophie as an awfully fancy

name for a hut with a telephone switchboard, until they got
inside and saw the row of telephone operators, girls as slick
and professional-looking as one could imagine.
“Our telephonists are trained by the General Post Office
in Glasgow,” said the guard, sounding very proud.
But Sophie thought they had that look, the look that said
IRYLNS, and she shrank away from their glossy sameness.
“Your call should come through in about ten minutes,”
said one of the operators, giving Sophie and Mr. Petersen an
impersonal smile. “Perhaps you’d like to wait in the lounge

408

next door. Can I fetch anyone a coffee?”
She showed Sophie and Mr. Petersen to the small lounge
opening off one side of the shed, then brought them each a
cup of coffee.
“I must admit this was a ploy on my part,” said Mr.
Petersen once they found themselves alone together.
“What do you mean?” Sophie asked.
“I didn’t lie when I said we needed to come here to receive
a phone call,” said Mr. Petersen. “But I’m afraid I was a bit
cavalier with the truth, Sophie. The telephone call’s not for
me. It’s for you.”
Sophie felt the blood pound in her ears.
“It’s not—,” she began, then couldn’t think how to say it.
“That is—”
“What?” said Mr. Petersen, setting down his coffee cup
and looking at her with concern. “What’s wrong, Sophie?”
“It’s not a telephone call from a dead person, is it?” she
asked.
Mr. Petersen looked startled.
“Why would you think I’d put you on the line with a dead
person?” he said, sounding rather wary.
“It’s just that I seem to have had an awful lot of spirit communications recently,” Sophie confessed. “I thought this
might be another one.”
Mr. Petersen did a double take.

409

“You mean the drawing that came over the pantelegraph
wasn’t the only one?”
“Far from it,” said Sophie. It struck her that she could
speak to him now almost as one adult to another. No trace of
that painful crush remained. “At least the others made a bit
more sense. The drawing—well, let’s just say I don’t have a
clue as to who sent it or why.”
A little old lady in a flowered coverall came in and cleared
away their cups, giving the table an aggressive wipe.
“We’ll have to look into this,” said Mr. Petersen. “I want
to hear more about it, but now simply isn’t the time. Sophie,
assuming the operator is able to put the call through, you’re
about to receive a person-to-person call from Mr. Alfred
Nobel.”
“Alfred Nobel?” said Sophie, now more perplexed than
frightened. “You’re pulling my leg, Mr. Petersen, aren’t you?
When people say Nobel, they mean the company, not the man.
If Alfred Nobel were alive today, he’d be over a hundred years
old. And in any case, alive or dead, what could he possibly
want with me?”
The charwoman had come back in during Sophie’s
speech—she must have been cleared by security, or Mr.
Petersen would have prevented Sophie from saying anything
in front of her—and she now surprised both Sophie and Mr.
Petersen by looking up from polishing the side table and

410

saying, “Oh, he’s not alive, dearie, not really. They say it’s his
brain, sitting in a very superior jam jar somewhere in the
countryside in Sweden!”
Mr. Petersen gave her a repressive look and she subsided,
but not before a picture flashed into Sophie’s head of a
brain in a jar, rigged up to a speaking trumpet from which
the pronouncements of Alfred Nobel were broadcast to his
underlings.
“I suppose the truth’s not so far off,” Mr. Petersen
admitted.
Would he have said anything if the old woman hadn’t
brought it up?
“Alfred Nobel exists in a kind of limbo,” the teacher continued. “He is highly selective these days about what business
he attends to, but there are a few things he won’t let go of,
including his dream that one day weapons will have become
so advanced that two armies may mutually annihilate each
other in a second. At that time, of course, the civilized nations
will recoil with horror and disband their armies, which will in
turn lead to world peace. Here’s the thing, Sophie: The scientists who work for him are probably only months away from
creating precisely the explosive he’s dreamed of, a bomb so
powerful that the world’s great powers may abjure war for
once and for all.”
Sophie had never quite accepted Theodor Herzl’s famous

411

proposition that the man who discovered a terrible explosive
would do more for peace than a thousand of its milder apostles, but Mr. Petersen certainly seemed to believe what he was
saying. Could it be true? Why was Mr. Petersen telling her
about it now?
“What does all this have to do with me?” she asked. “Me
in particular, I mean, not me as a person who in general might
like there to be world peace?”
“I’ve been privileged to serve as one of Mr. Nobel’s personal assistants,” said Mr. Petersen. “He has sworn an oath
that he won’t die until certain conditions have been fulfilled,
and my job is to help bring about those conditions, for Mr.
Nobel is tired of life, Sophie, or rather of the half-life he now
has. Without your help, nothing can go forward.”
“That’s ridiculous!” Sophie said.
“Sophie, what do I have to say to persuade you that your
potential to affect the course of events in the Hanse is simply
enormous?”
The girls and boys who experienced untoward events in
storybooks always pinched themselves to make sure they were
awake. Sophie gave herself a hard pinch now—somehow it
was almost impossible to give oneself a really painful pinch—
and found it altered nothing.
“Why me rather than anybody else?” she persisted.
“There’s nothing special about me.”

412

“I was sent by Mr. Nobel to teach you and to protect you,”
Mr. Petersen repeated. “Also to persuade you that you must
leave Scotland for the next stage of your education.”
“You were sent?” Sophie said, seizing on the part of the
pronouncement that made the least sense of all. Leaving
Scotland, now, well, that sounded like an extremely sensible
idea. . . . Was he really going to help?
Mr. Petersen sighed.
“Sophie, I really must apologize to you. Because of Miss
Rawlins’s poor judgment, you’ve already gathered that I
obtained my position at school under false pretenses. I’d been
asked to do whatever was necessary to get the position, at the
behest of my employer, Mr. Nobel.”
“Wouldn’t you have been more useful to him doing your
real job than messing about teaching us chemistry?” said
Sophie. Something about the way he spoke of Mr. Nobel
annoyed her; it was almost worshipful. “Why did he want you
in Edinburgh?”
“Why do you think?”
“To help the police prevent any more bombings?” Sophie
guessed.
“At least you’ve given up the idea that I was the éminence
grise running the Brothers of the Northern Liberties! You
know, I was on the verge of telling you all this that day weeks
ago before we were caught in the blast from the Canongate

413

explosion, but I thought the better of it.”
It all would have been much easier if he’d told her
everything then, but there was no point regretting it. Sophie
didn’t believe in looking back and wishing things had gone
differently. If only she had known Mikael’s real last name,
she would have realized much sooner that Mr. Petersen
could be trusted. All this put her in mind of the most urgent
question. “Mr. Petersen, do you think you can get me an
exit visa?”
“It may not be necessary,” said Mr. Petersen, looking mysteriously pleased with himself. “The main reason Mr. Nobel
sent me to Edinburgh was to persuade you to come with me
when I leave the country.”
“Me?” Sophie asked, by now completely stymied. She
hadn’t even explained yet about IRYLNS, and here he was
anticipating her request! “Why would he care about me? How
did he even know I existed?”
“I still can’t tell you that, Sophie. But the telephone call
we’re waiting for will reveal more. You’re about to talk to Mr.
Nobel himself. It’s a very great honor—he hardly communicates with anyone outside the organization these days.”
At that moment one of the operators appeared and beckoned to Sophie to follow.
She looked back at Mr. Petersen as the young woman led
her toward the main room, but he simply settled down more

414

comfortably in his chair, crossed his arms across his chest, and
smiled.
“Go on, Sophie,” he said. “It’s just a telephone call. It
can’t hurt to talk.”

415

a

F o rt y- o n e

W

HHEN THE FOLDING DOOR

closed and she found

aherself alone in the mahogany-lined telephone

booth, Sophie felt a wave of claustrophobia so

intense she thought she might actually pass out. She leaned
her forehead against one side of the booth—an electric light
had come on overhead when the doors closed—and tried to
collect her thoughts.
It was just a telephone call. What was she afraid of?
She picked up the receiver and held it to her ear.
“This is Sophie Hunter,” she said into the mouthpiece, hearing nothing but a mild hissing on the line. “Is anybody there?”
“Sophie,” a voice whispered. “I am so very glad that we
are finally in touch with each other.”

416

Nobel’s voice sounded familiar, but she couldn’t think
from where. Had she heard a speech of his on the radio? As
she cast about for the memory, he continued to talk.
“I do not have much strength, and so we will not speak
long. There is much, in any case, that I cannot say to you until
we meet in person. My enemies have a long reach, and even a
secure telephone line presents risks. When you come to me in
Sweden, we will be able to talk freely.”
The country’s name gave her the clue she needed. She was
so surprised, she blurted the words right out.
“You spoke to me already! Yours was the spirit voice that
came through Mrs. Tansy that night in Heriot Row. You told
me to be careful and to keep my own counsel, and you promised me a journey over water! How—? Why—?”
“I had my own reasons for contacting you in that way,”
said the voice, sounding wearier and less hopeful than anything Sophie had ever heard in her life. “Reasons I mustn’t
reveal until we meet in person. I spoke to you that night under
quite peculiar circumstances. Obviously I am not dead,
though I find myself in an equivocal state of embodiment
these days. One of my agents—indeed, it was your Mr.
Petersen—paid Mrs. Tansy a substantial sum to ingratiate herself with your guardian, serve as the medium for that night’s
séance, and make sure you were involved from start to finish.”
“That was why she asked for me to come and see her

417

checked beforehand!” Sophie said, the pieces of the puzzle
falling into place.
“You were known to be skeptical about the manifestations
of the spirit world,” said the voice. “I thought that would be
the best way of inclining you toward belief. The medium had
no idea, though, that I actually meant to use her body as a vessel through which to communicate with you.”
“But I still don’t see what you wanted with me!” Sophie
said, almost more confused than before.
“My life’s work has been to give the world peace,” said the
voice. “Fifteen years ago, we were on the verge of making
what I’d dreamed of, a weapon so powerful that the very
threat of its use would cause grown men to quake in their
boots: the holy grail of deterrence and the necessary precursor, or so it seemed to me, of world peace.”
The voice fell silent. It was still hard to think of it as
belonging to Alfred Nobel; Sophie was trying not to concentrate on the whole “brain in a jar” end of things.
“What happened then?” Sophie asked.
“A tragedy,” said the voice. “The work had been conducted in the utmost secrecy in an enclave within a Russian
munitions factory. For security reasons, there were no
records outside the facility of the key mechanism; even I
myself had only a vague idea as to how the thing worked.
And then the factory blew up, destroying all records and

418

killing its creator, along with many others.”
“Fifteen years ago,” Sophie said slowly. “Was that—”
The voice cut her off. “Yes, Sophie. That was the factory
explosion that killed your parents, and your father was the
inventor of the miraculous weapon. All these long years, I
have believed there to be no way of recovering what was lost.
But recently I learned that a second set of plans survived the
blast. We must lay hands on it before it can be used by the
wrong people, people who wish to dominate the world rather
than give it peace.”
Sophie’s head whirled with a million questions. She didn’t
know where to start.
“I will tell you more,” said the voice, “when you arrive at
my estate. Petersen will instruct you about the journey.
Meanwhile, I ask you to give him your complete confidence.
Au revoir, Sophie.”
“Wait!” Sophie shouted.
But the voice had gone.
When the operator came on the line to ask if she needed
to place another call, Sophie put the receiver back in its cradle
and slumped onto the shelf at the side of the booth, head in
her hands.
A knock came at the door.
Sophie opened it partway and saw Mr. Petersen peering
through the gap.

419

“Well?” he said.
Sophie shook her head and glared at him. “I can’t believe
you’ve been keeping all this from me,” she said.
“I was afraid you’d feel like that,” said Mr. Petersen. “All
I can do is apologize and say—”
But at this juncture they were interrupted by the same
guard who’d appeared to summon Sophie and Mr. Petersen
for the telephone call.
They could see at once that something was wrong.
“Sir?” he said, his face pale and sweaty.
“What is it?” said Mr. Petersen, sounding annoyed.
Sophie crossed her fingers and prayed there hadn’t been
an accident. Surely they would have heard the explosion?
“We’ve got a, well, a situation,” the man said.
“A situation?”
“Well, what I’d call a situation, sir.”
“Can’t you be more specific? What kind of a situation?”
“There’s an intruder in the dynamite house.”
“What sort of intruder?”
“We don’t know yet,” said the guard, “but it doesn’t look
good. The ladies had just got to that spot on the tour, so we’ve
got a high civilian presence even beyond the workers.”
Mr. Petersen turned to look at Sophie. “Every bone in
my body’s telling me to get you away safely out of here, but
I’m going to do you the courtesy of treating you as an adult.

420

Do you want to come with me?”
Sophie nodded.
They raced outside and hopped into one of the carts for
transporting people and goods. En route, Mr. Petersen told
Sophie what to expect in the dynamite house, a long wooden
cabin where liquid nitroglycerin soaked into the porous
siliceous earth called kieselguhr to become dynamite. The
mixture was transported in a wooden box on a handcart
known as a bogie to the mixing area at the other end of the
building. There the young women would give the boxes
another stir and then tip the blend into smaller boxes with
brass sieves in them, rubbing the dynamite through small
holes in the sieve. The loose, crumbling, coffee-colored dynamite went next to the cartridge houses, where the workers
pulled pump handles to force rods through hoppers, jamming
the dynamite down brass tubes at the bottom. A parchment
square was wrapped around the bottom of each tube, folded
off at the lower end, and tamped down. Each three-inch cartridge had its top folded over and was then dropped through
a slide in the wall, where it rolled into a box of finished cartridges. The five-pound boxes would be grouped into fiftypound wooden cases and taken by bogie down to the beach,
where the narrow-gauge lines ran straight to the sea. From the
jetty at the southeast end of the peninsula, the cases would be
loaded into boats and then into the company’s own steamers

421

for shipment all over the world.
Still a few minutes short of their destination, Mr. Petersen
showed no sign of stopping his bizarre account of how dynamite was manufactured.
“Why are you telling me all this?” Sophie said finally.
“Oh, gods,” said Mr. Petersen. “I’m sorry, Sophie. I suppose rambling on like this is the way I calm myself down in
times of trouble. What I wouldn’t do right now for a cigarette!
But obviously that’s out of the question. . . .”
“What are we going to do when we get there?” Sophie
asked.
“Whatever we can,” said Mr. Petersen, suddenly sober.
Inside the dynamite house, they could see at once that the
situation had escalated. This wasn’t a simple question of an
unidentified intruder. The unexpected arrival—of all people
in the world!—was Nicko Mood. He had a gun in his hand,
his clothes were disheveled, and in short he looked remarkably like a man about to blow up hundreds of people (including himself) without a second thought.
“Sophie Hunter!” he said when he saw her.
On the other side of the room, all the workers and lady
visitors stood with their hands on their heads.
Mr. Petersen pushed Sophie behind him, but Mood
wrenched her arm almost out of her socket and dragged her
to his side.

422

Great-aunt Tabitha looked on dispassionately as he held
his gun to Sophie’s head.
“It’s still possible for you to escape with your life,”
Sophie’s great-aunt told Mood. “If you commandeered one of
the ships at the jetty, you could be away in no time. Even if you
don’t give a fig for the rest of us, surely you’d rather live than
die?”
“It may be hard for you to believe, Tabitha, but I have
nothing left to live for. The deal you cut with Joanna leaves no
place for me. She has forced me to write a letter of resignation,
and made me promise to retire from the public eye. Life as I
know it is over, and with my career ruined, I don’t know that
I care much for the little bit of living that’s left to me. I might
as well take a few of you with me when I go.”
Mr. Petersen was making faces at Sophie while Nicko
looked in Great-aunt Tabitha’s direction. His gestures and her
own common sense told Sophie they should try to keep the
man talking to spin things out as long as they could. It would
take Mr. Petersen quite a while to come back with help.
As the teacher crept away, Mood fell silent.
“What I want to know,” Sophie said hastily as Nicko
Mood began fiddling with his gun (it had just occurred to her
that a bullet puncturing a tank would be enough to set off an
explosion), “is why you thought you’d be able to get away
with the murders on top of everything else. When you hired

423

the Veteran to kill Mrs. Tansy, you left a trail of evidence that
any halfway decent investigator could have uncovered. How
did you think you’d ever get away with it?”
Nicko looked angry, but at least he stopped waving the
gun around.
“The plan was flawless but not foolproof,” he said. “The
Veteran was supposed to frame Nobel’s man for the medium’s
murder, but he flubbed the business, as he fouled up everything he put his dirty little hands to.”
So that was how Mr. Petersen’s knife had ended up at the
hotel!
“We had set up all the evidence to implicate Europe in the
terror attacks,” Nicko said. “All I had to do was wait for a discreet interval to pass, and the minister would have had the
whole government in the palm of her hand. But your wretched
great-aunt has foiled me! Joanna will stay in office, and I will
serve as scapegoat.”
“One of you was always going to have to pay the price,”
said Great-aunt Tabitha, coming forward and giving him a
scornful look. Her courage was heartening. “How did you
think you would get away with it?”
“Once the Veteran was found dead in his cell,” said
Nicko, “all traces of our part in the affair were gone.”
“Nonsense!” said Great-aunt Tabitha.
Nicko bristled, and Sophie wished her great-aunt would

424

approach the conversation with a bit more tact. If the man got
really annoyed, he was capable of blowing them all up at any
moment—or of shooting Sophie in the head!
“Miss Grant and I had already assembled a dossier,”
Great-aunt Tabitha continued, “and you can be assured that
we would have been able to demonstrate your involvement in
the murders as well as the bombings. I don’t know why you
thought the minister wouldn’t cut you loose at the least sign of
trouble; it was bound to happen. Of course I believe her when
she says that she had no idea at the time what you were doing
out of that misguided impulse to protect her.”
Miss Grant took over the narrative. “It was only after
Tabitha witnessed the attack on Waterloo Day that we really
became suspicious again and started to dig around,” she said.
Her words seemed to cut into Nicko, who visibly slumped as
he listened. “The less said about the minister, the better—but
you’d left your fingerprints all over the business, metaphorically speaking.”
“All I needed was a little more time!” Nicko cried. “I
almost pulled it off!”
He tucked the revolver under his arm—Sophie wished she
thought she could get the gun away from him, but it wasn’t
worth the risk, not with the chance of a stray bullet blowing
them all to kingdom come—and felt in his pocket for his
cigarette lighter. He flicked it on and held the flame up high.

425

The women of the NTWSA and the dozen scarlet-clad
young women who worked in the hut gazed at him with
horror.
Out of the corner of her eye, Sophie saw Mr. Petersen
moving toward them from about twenty feet away, silently but
frantically gesturing for her to keep Mood talking. Fanned out
behind him were a half dozen guards.
“How did you manage to get past the searchers,” Sophie
asked, desperate to fend off the explosion, if only for a few
more seconds, “without them finding the gun and the lighter
and taking them away from you?”
“It was child’s play,” Nicko boasted, preening. His
responsiveness to flattery was the only thing that helped
Sophie hope they might after all escape with their lives. “I
showed them my identification from the ministry—it hasn’t
yet been taken away from me; Joanna gave me a week to
straighten out my affairs. And that’s precisely what I’m here to
do. I’m not sorry, either, Sophie, to take you with me as well
as your wretched great-aunt; you and your little friend gave
me considerable anxiety, and it was only a matter of time before
you’d have had to be put out of the way.”
Mr. Petersen and his men slunk a little closer.
Sophie crossed her fingers and prayed. All things being
equal, she really would prefer not to die in an explosion.
“Those searchers are extraordinarily careless,” Nicko

426

added with satisfaction. “I can’t think why they don’t get
properly qualified people to do the job.”
“Don’t you have any qualms,” Sophie asked, trying very
hard not to look in the direction of the guards, “about taking
all these innocent people with you? What about sending away
some of the women who work here before you blow us all up?
None of them ever did anything to hurt you.”
“Why should I want to save any of them?” said Nicko,
looking genuinely surprised. “A few factory girls are no great
loss!”
And at that moment one of the young women simply
threw herself forward at him, four or five others instantly following, yelling as they went. In the blink of an eye, they had
knocked him to the ground, and he vanished (so did the
lighter!) beneath the heap of flailing limbs.
Everything happened next in a blur. Mr. Petersen and his
men could do nothing without risking Mood letting off a bullet that would send them all to their deaths. They rushed up
and simply stood in front of the heap—with all the girls, it was
like the picture of Orpheus and the Maenads in Sophie’s book
of Greek myths.
A minute later, Mood lay supine on the floor, a woman
holding down each of his arms and legs, while the girl who’d
first thrown herself on him had jumped up and was waving the
extinguished lighter and gun in the air.

427

“Give those to me,” said one of the guards, struggling to
keep his voice calm.
He took them and left the building, his deliberate pace
more than anything else reminding everybody what a close
shave they’d just had.
Two other guards handcuffed Mood in special plastic
manacles and dragged him away with them. Sophie had to
look aside as he wept and pleaded with the officers to let him
go. He must have gone a bit mad in the end, she realized. Only
a madman would have thought he could successfully orchestrate such a complex plot. Mr. Petersen went with them to
escort Mood to the vehicle that would take him to jail.
Great-aunt Tabitha strode over to the girl who’d saved
them—she had an amazingly pretty pink and white complexion, the result of breathing nitroglycerin every day—and
pumped her hand.
“A quite remarkable effort,” she said. “It’s not necessary
for me to say how very much we are in your debt.”
Then Great-aunt Tabitha turned to Sophie. “I suspect you
know rather more about all this than I imagined, but I won’t
inquire as to how that came about,” she said.
“Is everything going to be all right?” Sophie asked, still terribly worried about the consequences of the minister’s politicking. “Surely the minister must be brought to justice as well; it
can’t have been only Nicko Mood who plotted those deaths!”

428

Great-aunt Tabitha looked quite triumphant. “The minister wants war, I want peace, but we’ve agreed to set aside our
differences and work together in the short term for Scotland’s
good. There won’t be any more money flowing in the direction of the Brothers, and as a token of her goodwill, the minister has accepted my candidate to replace Nicko Mood. Ruth
Grant will make a superb chief of staff. . . .”
Miss Grant to work for the minister?
Looking at Miss Grant, Sophie underwent a startling realization: Miss Grant had been looking forward to this moment
for months. She’d planned to get Nicko’s job all along!
It rubbed Sophie the wrong way to think of the minister
surviving unscathed. But at least surely now they’d be able to
abolish IRYLNS. After pulling off this triumph of investigation and politicking, Miss Grant and Great-aunt Tabitha
could do anything they wanted.
“You’ll be able to do away with IRYLNS!” Sophie said.
But instead of giving Sophie the ready affirmative she
expected, the two women exchanged significant looks and
smiled.
“Do away with it?” Miss Grant said. “Why ever would we
do that?”
“IRYLNS is one of the country’s most precious resources,”
Great-aunt Tabitha added. “We need every weapon we can
get.”

429

“But at least you’ll stop the bill that says IRYLNS has the
right to claim any girl once she turns sixteen from being
passed into law?”
Their silence made it clear that neither woman meant to
do anything of the sort, although Great-aunt Tabitha had the
grace to look slightly ashamed.
Sophie found herself speechless.
Mr. Petersen appeared now to tell them that Nicholas
Mood was safely in custody.
“Sophie, the most important thing is to get you out
of here,” he said then. “None of this is necessarily going to
prevent Scotland from continuing on a collision course with
Europe, and meanwhile the risk that you might be sent to
IRYLNS is too great to chance your staying here.”
“You know about IRYLNS!” Sophie said. “But how?”
“We have our ways,” said Mr. Petersen, making a wry
face. He had taken Sophie slightly aside, though Great-aunt
Tabitha and Miss Grant were close enough to listen in.
“Sophie, you must leave the country, and now’s the ideal
chance,” he said. “You’ve got more than enough time to meet
Mikael and sail with him to København. There’s a driver waiting
for you outside the gates as we speak.”
“How will I get out without a visa?” Sophie asked. It was
all happening much too quickly—she’d only just decided to
leave, and already they were conspiring to send her away with-

430

out further delay. She had a sudden powerful urge to drag her
heels. Wouldn’t she get to say good-bye to Peggy first? And
what about her friends? Who would protect them from
IRYLNS if Sophie just left?
“We’ve got a plan,” said Mr. Petersen.
“Couldn’t I stay until after my exams?” Sophie said, not
liking the plaintive note she heard in her own words but
unable to suppress it. “Then I could say good-bye to everybody first. Do I really have to decide right now?”
After looking around to make sure nobody but Miss
Grant could hear their conversation, Great-aunt Tabitha
unexpectedly joined her voice to Mr. Petersen’s.
“Sophie, you must leave at once,” she said firmly.
Sophie looked at her with enormous surprise.
“If Mr. Petersen whisks you off now and makes you disappear, I’ll be able to deny knowing anything about it,” Sophie’s
great-aunt said. “The longer we wait, the riskier it becomes.
Seize the day. If you stay, I can’t promise I won’t hand you
over to IRYLNS.”
She leaned over and kissed Sophie’s cheek.
All Sophie’s energy was focused now on not crying.
Her eyesight was blurry as Mr. Petersen led her out of the
building and across the narrow-gauge tracks, back toward the
gatehouse at the main entrance.
Just before they reached it, Mr. Petersen turned to Sophie.

431

“We’ll speak again before long,” he said.
Sophie stared at him. “Aren’t you coming with me now?”
she asked.
She didn’t understand it. They’d been walking for ages
without him saying anything. If they weren’t to go on together,
his silence became not surprising so much as completely infuriating.
“I can’t,” said Mr. Petersen. “I’ve got loose ends to tie up,
and we can’t afford to have you waiting around while I take
care of them. The commander you met that night in the Castle
will be here within the hour, and once he gets his hands on
you, it’ll be impossible to spring you.”
“Oh,” said Sophie, feeling somewhat bereft.
“Don’t worry,” he said. “I’m handing you over now to
somebody who will take extremely good care of you.”
They reclaimed Sophie’s bag from the guard and passed
out of the compound into the sandy flat area in front of the
gatehouse. There she looked at Mr. Petersen, and he looked
back at her, and both of their faces expressed a shared sense
of unfinished business.
Sophie waited to see whether he’d say anything else, but
he didn’t. And she wasn’t about to say anything herself.
After a few minutes, a Crossley roadster pulled up in front
of them. Mr. Petersen shook hands with the driver, then
turned to give Sophie an awkward hug.

432

“Have a safe journey,” he said. “I’ll be in touch.”
In a daze, Sophie fumbled with the door and let herself
into the passenger seat.
“Thank goodness you’re all right,” said the driver.
“Hostage situations are always touch and go. I was extremely
relieved when Mr. Petersen radioed to let me know you’d survived unscathed.”
The driver was Miss Chatterjee.

433

a

F o rt y- t w o

HE HISTORY TEACHER’S unexpected appearance as get-

T

away driver made Sophie feel confused as well as
relieved. It was a better thing, of course, to be handed

over to someone familiar than to a complete stranger. But
what was Miss Chatterjee doing here?
The teacher took a left turn onto the feeder road that
would take them to the highway leading east back to
Edinburgh and the port of Leith. “Surprised to see me?” she
said.
Sophie just nodded.
“I must make my confession,” Miss Chatterjee went on,
politely ignoring Sophie’s distress. “Mr. Petersen was not the
only teacher at the Edinburgh Institution for Young Ladies

434

who served two masters. Like him, I have been on the payroll
of the Nobel Consortium for some time. Indeed, the
Consortium paid for my education and set me up in
Edinburgh more than ten years ago. It is very much the
Consortium’s way to prepare for all possible eventualities, taking the longest view.”
Sophie turned and stared at her. This was utter betrayal,
worse—much worse—than learning the truth about Mr.
Petersen. Was that what Miss Chatterjee had meant the night
she warned Sophie not to think of her as a hero?
“I can imagine how you feel,” said Miss Chatterjee when
Sophie didn’t say anything. “I wish I could have told you
before, but the Consortium is quite strict about us keeping
our identities concealed. If I had let you in on the secret, I
would have been recalled to the central office in Stockholm,
where I could have done you no good.”
Sophie was tallying up all the clues she’d missed: Miss
Chatterjee’s lovely clothes, well beyond what one might purchase on a teacher’s salary; the elevated circles she moved in;
most of all, the air she had of life being interesting and important. She remembered Priscilla’s canny observations about
Miss Rawlins and wished she’d thought of asking her about
Miss Chatterjee. But the thought of Nan and Priscilla and
Jean, and not being able to say good-bye to them, made
Sophie start crying in earnest.

435

Miss Chatterjee offered a silk handkerchief, and Sophie
wiped her eyes and blew her nose and generally tried to pull
herself together.
“The day the headmistress called a special meeting for all
the teachers,” Miss Chatterjee said when Sophie had collected
herself, “it became clear that things were in a parlous state.
Her news—that Parliament was certain to take virtually all of
you girls for IRYLNS—made us see that you were in even
graver danger than we had anticipated. Neither Mr. Petersen
nor I was quite sure what happens at the Institute, but enough
stories have trickled out that we thought we’d better come up
with a plan to get you out of danger. In that sense, all this business with the minister and her assistant just precipitated things
a little sooner than we expected.”
Sophie remembered overhearing Miss Chatterjee ask on
the day of the coffee spill whether the decision to send the
girls to IRYLNS was really a matter of protecting the girls or
just of promoting the interests of the country. That must have
been the day they decided Sophie had to be rescued.
“You didn’t send me a little metal toy iron by way of the
medium, did you?” Sophie asked. “As a kind of warning?”
Miss Chatterjee gave her a blank look, and Sophie wondered whether the medium had given Sophie the warning of
her own accord. Many secrets must have gone to the grave
with Mrs. Tansy; as much as she had disliked the woman in

436

life, though, and resented her for getting Sophie mixed up in
the whole business to begin with, Sophie still felt she owed her
something.
“Miss Chatterjee?” Sophie asked.
“What is it, Sophie?”
“What can be done about the other girls? Can’t you stop
Jean and Priscilla from going to IRYLNS?”
Just then a radio receiver in Miss Chatterjee’s handbag, on
the floor by Sophie’s feet, now began emitting short sharp
bursts of speech.
“Would you mind passing me the radio?” Miss Chatterjee
asked.
Sophie dug around in the bag and found it. It was one of
the new transistor ones, like Priscilla’s.
Both Miss Chatterjee and the person at the other end
spoke in code, so Sophie couldn’t follow most of what they
said, but there was an ominous change in Miss Chatterjee’s
body language. She didn’t drive any faster—she probably didn’t
want to alert whoever might be watching—but she looked
suddenly much tougher than before.
“Sophie, it’s bad news, but nothing we can’t deal with,”
she said after signing off. “Apparently our old friend
Commander Brown has cottoned on to the fact that a crucial
witness has left the scene. He’s put out an all-points bulletin
and instructed the police to mount a series of roadblocks.

437

We’re still miles away from Leith, but we’ve got to hide you
right away so that if the car’s stopped, they won’t see you.”
Sophie didn’t know how to respond.
“Don’t worry,” Miss Chatterjee added. “We planned for
this contingency, and the risk is minimal.”
The word risk made Sophie’s stomach hurt, but she
thought she’d rather know the details than not.
“What’s the plan, then?” she asked.
She knew Commander Brown wouldn’t kill her, but his
finding her would surely initiate exactly the series of events
she most wanted to avoid, beginning with a serious interrogation in the Vaults and almost certainly ending with matriculation at IRYLNS.
“Well, let me put it this way,” said Miss Chatterjee. “How
do you feel about small enclosed spaces?”
Five minutes later Miss Chatterjee pulled over at a spot
where the road got wider and opened the boot of the car to
show a steamer trunk—quite a large one, though it didn’t look
big enough to hold a person, which was part of the point. It
had a false bottom and breathing holes, and Miss Chatterjee
assured Sophie that there was really plenty of room for her
inside.
When she saw Sophie’s doubtful look, she sighed. “Yes, I
know it’s awful, and I wouldn’t like it much either,” she said.
“But I borrowed it from my friend Harry, who’s a stage magician

438

and twice your size, and he gets inside it every night.”
She showed Sophie the safety latch that she could use to
let herself out if she accidentally got stuck in the hold of the
ship, rather than in Mikael’s cabin as planned. She would have
ended up in the trunk sooner or later, even without the roadblocks, Sophie suddenly realized, for this was how they
intended to get her on board ship without the proper visa.
“What about Jean and Priscilla?” she asked urgently.
“You must tell them they can’t go to IRYLNS!”
“Don’t worry about them,” said Miss Chatterjee, handing Sophie a flask of water. “Your job now is to protect
yourself. We can’t afford to lose any more time—get into the
trunk!”
Despite her conviction that a police car might come into
view at any moment, despite her horror at the idea of being
taken into custody, despite her fear of IRYLNS, something in
Sophie rebelled at the thought of shutting herself up in this
awful cramped box.
“Do I really have to?” she said.
“You must,” said Miss Chatterjee.
The sky had become cloudy and overcast.
“Hurry up, Sophie!”
The unfamiliar note of anxiety in the teacher’s voice provided the necessary spur. Sophie reminded herself that she
didn’t dislike small dark spaces, but climbing into the trunk

439

still made her feel as if she were going voluntarily into her own
coffin.
“If things go as they should, I won’t see you again for a
long while, so I’ll say good-bye now,” said Miss Chatterjee.
“Sophie, it’s been a pleasure teaching you. And I swear to you
I will deliver this trunk into the keeping of your friend Mikael
on the Gustavus Adolphus if it kills me. Mr. Petersen was most
precise in his instructions!”
The top of the trunk closed over Sophie and she found
herself in pitch blackness, clasps shutting loudly over her
head.
Would Sophie escape? What would happen to Jean and
Priscilla?
Within five minutes these concerns looked trivial beside
the need to prevent herself from being sick.
Sophie had already felt nauseated sitting in the front seat
of the car. It turned out that the motion of the car as it affected
her now was about a hundred times more sick-making than on
an ordinary car ride. She wished she’d thought to retrieve
Peggy’s barley sugar from her bag before Miss Chatterjee had
tucked it in beside her in the trunk’s secret compartment, but
there was hardly any space to move about in. Besides, even the
slightest movement made being sick that much more likely.
The car twisted and turned, it sped up and slowed down,
it even stopped a few times for long enough that Sophie would

440

have been absolutely terrified had all her attention not been
engaged in the desperate struggle not to throw up.
It seemed an eternity before the car came to a halt. The
engine stopped and Sophie heard the passenger door open
and close again. She thought she wouldn’t even mind if
Commander Brown was outside and about to order the car
searched, so long as she never again had to endure such a ride.
Someone opened the boot and the whole car shook.
Sophie hoped the last little bit of movement wouldn’t trigger
actual vomiting. She was only barely holding on. Aside from
the sheer unpleasantness of it, the sudden sound and smell of
a person throwing up inside the trunk would let the authorities know that something was very wrong.
The trunk somewhat muffled the sound of their voices,
but Sophie was relieved to hear Miss Chatterjee negotiating
the fee with a porter rather than, say, explaining her actions to
a police officer. Then the trunk was heaved out of the boot of
the car and slotted onto some kind of handcart. Someone outside thumped the trunk a couple times; it might have been
Miss Chatterjee bidding Sophie farewell.
She could hear the shrieks of gulls and smell salt air even
through the dark masculine scents of the trunk, but it continued to be a great effort not to be sick as they rolled up the
steep gradient of the gangplank and she began to feel the quiet
movement of the ship.

441

Had there ever been such a test of the power of mind over
matter?
It seemed an interminable wait, with lots of jerking
around and sudden sharp yaws and pitches in unexpected
directions, before Sophie’s trunk finally came to rest on a flat
floor. She heard a boy’s voice saying “That’s for your help”
and an older man thanking him and then the sound of a door
opening and closing.
The top of the trunk opened now, and though Sophie was
still trapped beneath the false bottom, she couldn’t help letting out a groan of relief.
The next thing she knew, Mikael had lifted up the decoy
shelf above her and leaned down to help her out.
Her arms and legs were incredibly stiff, but Sophie struggled out as fast as she could.
“Thank goodness,” said Mikael. “I’d begun to be afraid—”
Sophie cut him off.
“Where’s the basin?” she gasped.
“Right there. Sophie, you must tell me everything! What
happened—”
But though superhuman fortitude had helped so far,
Sophie couldn’t hold it in for another second. She doubled up
and to her great shame and mortification began to be sick into
the porcelain basin on the washstand.

442

a

F o rt y - T h r e e

F

OLLOWING A DISCREET

interval involving towels and

large quantities of warm water (storybooks never said
anything about the crying and vomiting part of having

adventures), Sophie and Mikael crept up to the top deck of
the merchant steamer for a breath of fresh air. The ship was
still at anchor, shortly to depart.
Sophie still felt extremely queasy, but as her stomach was
now completely empty, she thought there wasn’t much chance
of being sick again. She sipped small mouthfuls of fizzy
lemonade from a bottle, having rejected with a shudder
Mikael’s offer to procure some brandy (supposed to be good
for seasickness) from one of the stewards.
“Are you sure it’s safe for us to be on deck like this?” she asked.

443

They were quite alone, for the weather had taken a definite turn for the worse and everything more than about fifteen
feet away was wreathed about with the cold mist called the
haar.
“We’re quite safe,” Mikael said. “For one thing, the police
haven’t a clue where you are. For another, as soon as you came
on board ship, you passed out of Scottish sovereignty. Miss
Chatterjee visited me yesterday afternoon to give me all the
paperwork I’ll need if anyone questions your right to be here;
the Danish embassy has accepted her application on your
behalf for asylum, and I’ve got that and a proper ticket for you
as well. We won’t have any difficulties.”
The word asylum had a harsh sound, but there was nothing to be done about it. They sat in the deck chairs, wrapped
up in blankets to protect them from the cold damp fog.
“I’m awfully glad you’re here, Sophie,” Mikael said.
“Everything will be fine from now on.”
“I don’t have much luggage. . . .”
“That’s all right. There’s a small commissary on board.
And my mother will fit you out properly once we’re in
Denmark.”
“Your mother doesn’t even know me!”
“Sophie, you’re looking awfully green again. Are you all
right?”
As it started to rain, they raced back down to the cabin

444

just in time for Sophie to be sick for a second time.
“I’m afraid I’d better lie down,” she said. “I’ll tell you the
whole story later on.”
“That’s fine,” said Mikael. “I won’t bother you; I’m sure
resting will make you feel better.”
She lay down on the nearest bunk, and he sat on the opposite one to watch over her. It was strange to think of sharing a
cabin with him, and even stranger to contemplate living
together with his mother once they got to Denmark.
“I almost didn’t come,” Sophie said after a minute.
It was a more confessional statement than she would usually have made, but she was feeling so sick and sleepy that the
usual mechanisms of self-censorship seemed to have stopped
working.
Mikael didn’t say anything.
“When I telephoned you yesterday evening,” she continued, “I was sort of on the verge of changing my mind, if only
you’d tried to persuade me, but you sounded as though you
didn’t even want to talk to me. I swore not to make a fool of
myself by going where I wasn’t wanted.”
She was distracted by a funny sound coming from the
heap of luggage in the corner of the cabin. She turned her
head and saw a wicker basket fall to the ground.
“The ship must have embarked,” she said, though she
hadn’t detected any obvious change in its motion.

445

Mikael followed her eyes to the basket and started laughing.
“You know, I had a very good reason for not being able to
talk yesterday,” he said. “There was something really important I had to do, I told you that. Look at the scratches!”
He leaned over to show his hands to Sophie. They were
covered with puffy, sore-looking red scrapes.
“I’ll let him out now,” Mikael added. And to Sophie’s
amazement, when he unfastened the clasp on the basket, a
huge black cat leaped out.
“What’s that cat doing here?”
“It’s Mrs. Tansy’s cat. Don’t you remember? That was
what I had to go and do last night when I couldn’t talk on the
telephone.”
And Sophie had been so sure that Mikael cut their conversation off like that because he was angry with her. . . . It was a
good reminder not to jump to conclusions.
“I took that landlady at her word when she said she’d put
the cat on the street. And even though Blackie here’s a tough
customer, I didn’t fancy his chances with those terrible kids.”
Sophie didn’t have the energy to make a joke about the
originality of the name. The cat didn’t seem to mind one way
or the other. It stopped racing around the tiny cabin long
enough to press its muzzle against Sophie’s outstretched fingers. After a minute or two of sniffing around the bunk, it
curled up next to her and began to lick its hindquarters.

446

“Well, will you look at that?” said Mikael, sounding more
than a little piqued.
Lying on top of the bed, the cat’s warm body pressed
against her side, part of Sophie still couldn’t believe she was
about to leave behind her entire life in Scotland.
Though she had learned things in the past few weeks that
completely changed her view of the world, there were still an
awful lot of mysteries to be solved.
Nobel’s motives remained an enigma. What did the
Swedish industrialist want with her?
Why had Mr. Petersen been so cagey about the curious
technical drawing that appeared over the pantelegraph, and
had it anything to do with Nobel’s missing plans?
What had really happened to Sophie’s parents? Would
Nobel be able to fill in the story for her, or would she have to
live with the gaps?
She was surprised how little it took to reconcile herself to
missing the exams. The thing that really gave her a pang,
strange to say, was the thought of missing the appointment
with Mr. Braid the following week. What a pity! She was curious, most curious, to know what her second self had written
under hypnosis. Would the doctor keep the pages quite safe
until she could come back and find him again?
Though it was galling not to know the answers to any of
these questions, there was still something comforting about

447

having questions one cared enough to ask. Surely everything
would come right in the end. If only she could know in
advance that Jean and Priscilla and Nan would be safe. . . .
“Sophie!” Mikael said, breaking into her thoughts. “Do
you want to come out on deck with me now? Surely the fresh
air will do you good.”
Sophie’s legs felt like cotton wool, and Mikael had to drag
her up several steep staircases, but she was glad she’d come.
The haar had cleared a little, and they could just about make
out the shore.
As they watched, the foghorn blew and the crew lifted
anchor. The ship began to make its way down the Firth of
Forth to the open sea.
Though the ship was really moving away from shore, it
looked as though the land was receding from the ship. The
country vanished in a mist that made it hard to believe
Scotland even existed, as if all life up till now had been a
dream, and this the awakening to a new day.

448

A u t h o r ’s N o t e

I

HAVE ALWAYS BEEN

in love with the idea of north. In the

summer of 2000, I took a long-awaited trip to St.
Petersburg and found myself absolutely in thrall to the

sheer beauty of that northern landscape, the magic of Russia’s
imperial past, and the heartbreakingly shabby grandeur of the
present-day city’s buildings and parks. I was surprised,
though, by how much St. Petersburg reminded me of
Edinburgh, a city I visited regularly as a child, since my
Scottish grandparents lived just a few miles outside of it in a
town called North Berwick. The similarities between the styles
of building and ways of living, the visual quality of those long
evenings of summer light, the closeness to the water, and the
lingering Enlightenment presence: all these things made me

449

feel as though I had entered a strange secret northern world
with the feel of a Hans Christian Andersen fairy tale.
Over the next few years, I went to Tallinn (in Estonia) and
Stockholm, then to Copenhagen (or København, as it is
spelled by the Danish), and I began to dream about what it
would be like to live in an alternate universe in which these
northern cities, so strongly united by culture and geography,
were also politically connected. What if the medieval northern
European trade alliance, called the Hanseatic League, had
found a second life in the modern era, due to calamitous
developments in European politics? This world would have
split off from our own when Napoleon beat Wellington at the
Battle of Waterloo on June 18, 1815.
What would it be like, I asked myself, to be a fifteen-yearold girl growing up in a Hanseatic-identified Scotland that
was still being run along the principles of the eighteenthcentury period known as the Enlightenment, with its passion
for rationality and science? At a time when the world—as it
did in our own version of 1938—seemed to stand on the brink
of total war?
As in our own world, the 1910s in Sophie’s world saw a
Great War; here, though, it lingered on into the 1920s and
ended with England falling to Europe. Now the countries in
the Hanseatic League, including Scotland, are able to hold out
against the Europeans only because they also happen to be the

450

world’s premier suppliers of top-quality munitions, which
Europe needs. This is the legacy of Alfred Nobel, the Swedish
chemist and industrialist whose invention of dynamite in 1867
changed the landscape of The Explosionist’s Europe even
more decisively than it changed our own. (The real Alfred
Nobel lived from 1833 to 1896—assuming he was born in the
same year in this world, he would be almost ninety-five years
old, though the old lady at the factory hints to Sophie that
Nobel only survives as what she calls “a brain in a jar.”)
Nobel’s name is best known today for the awards he
funded, including prizes in Physics, Physiology or Medicine,
Literature, and Peace, for one of the paradoxes of the dynamiteur’s life was that he was also a devoted pacifist. The Nobel
factory at Ardeer where the novel’s final showdown takes
place really existed, and the abandoned buildings of the dynamite factory can be visited to this day.
The world I imagined comes out of real places and real
history but also out of fairy tales and counterfactual paths not
taken. The people in this world are preoccupied with technology (everything from electric cookers to high explosives) but
also with spiritualism, a movement our own world largely
abandoned in the early twentieth century. Sigmund Freud is a
radio talk-show crank, cars run on hydrogen, and the most
prominent scientists experiment with new ways of contacting
the dead.

451

Some of the same figures are prominent in this world’s history as in our own, in many cases for roughly the same reasons
(the scientists Kelvin and Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell
are mentioned, for instance, as are the psychologists Pavlov
and William James). But in this world, Wittgenstein is a physicist rather than a philosopher, and Harry Houdini (born in
1874) is still alive—in fact, he’s the real owner of the trunk
used in Sophie’s escape.
In general, I have relied very extensively on actual historical sources. In our world, we can’t talk to spirits—but some
of the most respected scientists of the late nineteenth century
devoted a great deal of energy to trying to show that we could.
Most valuable of all to me were memoirs of Scottish life in the
1920s and 1930s, including Muriel Spark’s autobiography
Curriculum Vitae and her brilliant novel of education The
Prime of Miss Jean Brodie.
Technology developed quite differently in this world than
in our own. The fuel cells that Sophie learns about during her
driving lesson would have been unobtainable in the real-world
1930s. On a more peripheral note, the transistor technology
that’s alluded to several times was only invented in our own
world in 1947–48 but seems to have been discovered here in
the early 1930s, perhaps because the continual threat of war
proved such an effective spur to scientific inventiveness.
Transistor technology is also required for the aerial assault

452

drone to which Great-aunt Tabitha is likened—a point first
noted by my father, whose background as a native Scot with
an engineering degree has made his advice particularly indispensable to me while writing The Explosionist.
My enormous outright breach of the unofficial rules governing alternate history concerns Arthur Conan Doyle’s
Sherlock Holmes stories and Robert Louis Stevenson’s tale of
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Both writers were born in
Edinburgh—Stevenson in 1850 and Conan Doyle in 1859. It
has often been observed that Stevenson’s tale of double selves,
though it is set in London, casts more light on Edinburgh.
Meanwhile, though Sherlock Holmes also resides in London,
Conan Doyle based his most famous character on Dr. Joseph
Bell, one of his medical school professors at the University of
Edinburgh. The story of The Explosionist is so deeply
indebted to these tales that it seemed to me they had to have
shaped the imagination of my fictional characters as well as my
own.

453

About the Author
JENNY DAVIDSON is a professor of comparative literature
at Columbia University. She has written an adult novel and
several books of nonfiction. THE EXPLOSIONIST is her
first novel for teens. She lives in New York City.
You can visit her online at
www.jennydavidson.blogspot.com.
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive
information on your favorite HarperCollins author.

Credits
Typography by Larissa Lawrynenko
Jacket art © 2008 by Mark Tucker/MergeLeft Reps
Jacket design by David Caplan

Copyright
THE EXPLOSIONIST. Copyright © 2008 by Jenny Davidson. All

rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been
granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read
the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be
reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage
and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether
electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented,
without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader December 2008
ISBN 978-0-06-183042-6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

