For Dad, and it's way overdue.

I will make one song out of the utter void-—
Not about me or anyone,
Not about love or youth,
Made of nothing else at all.
Merely found while sleeping on my horse.
Could I have been born at a good time?
Not happy, or angry,
Not foreign, or native,
Unable to be anything else at all.
Transformed by her, the power who lives in the high mountains.
People have to tell me
Whether I am asleep or awake.
My heart is so mauled by grief,
I'm not ready to face a mouse,
I swear by St. Martial.
I am sick and I feel death coming.
Or so I am told. I know what doctor I need.
Sometime I will seek Doctor I-don't-know-who-that-is,
You will know which doctor I found, the right one if I heal,
The wrong, if I sicken.
I have a friend named I-don't-know-who-that-is,
I swear oaths that I've never seen her,
She has never healed me nor sickened me,
She has never given me any reason to care.
Thus no Frenchman or Norman has had to come and see me.
I have never seen her. I love her with all my strength.
I deny that she has ever healed or sickened me.
But when I see her, I am healed,
And, sick at heart, I say to my friends, "I don't know who that is.
I know a prettier, kinder, worthier one."
I don't know where she lives,
The mountains? The plains?
I fear to speak of any pain from her,

And the fear itself hurts.
I knew the pain I would feel if I stayed,
So I rode this way.
I have made this song. Really, I don't care.
I will send my song to someone—
Who will send it to other some ones—
I don't know who that is, that my song will reach, in Anjou,
Who will have, in her sweet secret treasure-box,
The key.
—Guilhem IX, Count Of Pottou, Duke of Aquitane

Part One
So I Rode This Way

1

On Söderblom, there is almost never a still puddle, however small, because
waves form so easily in the low gravity. That, and the never-ceasing winds,
make the sea restless beyond any other in human space.
The waves are big and slow. It makes some people ill to watch. Me, I
thought the waves were soothing.
The bright light of two of Söderblom's moons, both high overhead, and
the scattered light from the warm sea, erased all but the brightest stars. I
could have read by that light, easily. I could have sat there all night,
comfortably—sand, air, and water were all at room temperature, and in low
grav-ity, buttocks don't tire from sitting in the sand. I could have undressed
and walked into the sea for a swim, unashamedly. In Hedonia, nobody
would have cared, or noticed. I could do almost anything here.
I sat on the low rise, looking across the silver-gray beach at the big black
waves. They marched onto the shore like a slow procession of idiotic
monsters.
Self-pity is an unattractive emotion that leads to unfortu-nate behavior.
It can cause me to drink heavily, pick quarrels, go to bed with the first
willing partner, or sit on a beach feel-ing sorry for myself
It was the night after the afternoon of my divorce. Like most divorces, it
had been overdue, and had involved betray-als of trust, not all of them by the
married people. Shan—my friend, boss, nearly a second father—had not
only known of Margaret's affair; he had ordered her to continue it, because
the Office of Special Projects had been gathering intelli-gence on her lover.
And it had all been for nothing. Despite dozens of OSP operations,
Briand had been the first world ever totally lost to the rest of humanity. If
anyone was still alive there, it would be decades before we could contact
them.
Set against the total loss of a planet, Shan's failure as a friend didn't look
so big.
Well. I wouldn't be seeing Shan for a while, anyway. I was on a

stanyear's paid leave. Margaret and I had come to He-donia, here on
Söderblom in the Eta Cassiopeia system, to try to heal our marriage. We had
struggled along for about forty unpleasant days, some promising, most not,
until the day just past, when, still sullen and angry at breakfast, we had
talked idly about what we might do that day, taken a walk on the beach,
stopped for lunch . . . and at lunchtime, Margaret had said, emphatically, that
she was now sure nothing could be worked out. "It's just time, high time, so
let's get it over with, Giraut."
We agreed that I would stay on in the house we were renting, and
arranged a room in a hotel for Margaret. After tonight, she'd be springing
back to Caledony to visit her family for a while.
We hired an adjudicator to divide the common property, which took him
something like ten minutes-like any peo-ple who value convenience,
Hedons take care of their bu-reaucrats and reward efficiency. The
adjudicator's settlement gave the common property to whoever bid the
highest for it and the cross-compensations came out about even. We hooked
up to a brain reader to prove we weren't crazy or ly-ing. Then we signed the
papers and shook hands. One hour after lunch, it was all done.
If I didn't go near Margaret's hotel till sometime tomor-row afternoon, I
could avoid running into her. It was cow-ardly, but at the moment I wasn't
worrying about fine points of gratz and enseingnamen.
With two nearly-full moons overhead, and the other one close to new,
the tide was unusually high. Each wave seemed to lay up onto the beach,
then drag itself down, in a swirl of rasping white noise.
This might be a good place to bring a woman for a long conversation
about life and art and meaning, perhaps with a bottle of Hedon Gore, the
local deep-red wine. I was slightly, distantly pleased that I was thinking of
bringing a woman here. Perhaps my first sign of life?
I watched more waves. The two moons sailed farther down the slate
night sky, toward the sea in the west, leaving a belt of blackness, jeweled by
the few visible stars, along the tops of the trees that lined the eastern horizon
behind me.
My com chimed. I pulled it out of my pocket. "Yes."
"Giraut, this is Paxa Prytanis. Piranesi and I ran into Mar-garet, and she
told us the news. We were wondering how you're feeling and if you'd like to
come by our place in the next few days for a Service of Consolation."
The Service of Consolation is the Hedon tradition of mark-ing the end of

a relationship with a quiet evening in which the friends of the grieving
person feed him a good meal and fuck him silly. I had heard that, normally,
Hedons only did a Ser-vice of Consolation for a close friend, and we'd really
only known each other since the Briand mission. But maybe because e
Piranesi Alcott and Paxa Prytanis were married OSP agents, they understood
and wanted to help. Or maybe the Hedon definition of close friends was as
elastic as their con-cept of marriage, which specifically disavowed
monogamy.
I had been not-answering for a long time. "Uh, it's just that it's terribly
soon for me to think about it, but it's a very kind offer, and I'll call you back
in a day or two."
"Don't fret about it too much. Just accept. There's no sense being
primitive and feeling bad for one second more than you need to."
"Primitive" is a dirty word to Hedons. They sometimes say it where I'd
say "moral," sometimes where I'd say "self-de-feating." To them, all three
concepts are the same.
"Well, then, I accept. I think I might like it very much."
"We'll do our best to make sure you like it very much."
She didn't purr it seductively, as a woman might anywhere else. Being
Hedon, she used the same tone she'd have used to assure me that she had a
good recipe for duck à l'orange, or that the guest room bed was
comfortable.
"I'll keep that in mind," I said, "really. And it made me feel much better
that you called. We'll get together for some-thing or other within a few days.
Que merce, que gratz."
She laughed merrily. "I already invited you to a Service of Consolation,"
she said. "You don't need to seduce us with your sensual language. Though I
suppose any Occitan is in-corrigible, about his language and about
seduction."
"That's what makes us Occitan," I agreed. "Thank you, again, for
calling."
Then Piranesi got on the com, and I had much the same conversation
with him that I'd had with his wife, perhaps with somewhat less sexual
undertone. After I hung up I no-ticed I really was feeling better. I walked
along the beach in the double moonlight—so bright I could see
colors—casu-ally looking for mimic-seals, the Hedon contribution to
engi-neered wild species. They're highly intelligent perpetual pups, bright as

chimps, madly playful, and genetically wired to be very affectionate to
people. I thought I might enjoy throwing a stick for one, but none turned up.
Not long before dawn, I climbed a dune and sat looking out over the
deep-green salt marsh to the east, with the sea at my back, to watch Eta
Cassiopeia rise.
If I wanted, I could stay in Hedonia forever, drifting from one
meaningless amusement to another. I was a wealthy man, even for our
wealthy age. In addition to the ordinary standard living allowance from my
home culture, I had two ample pensions: I had put in something more than
twelve stanyears' service with the Council of Humanity, as an artis-tic
affairs diplomatic specialist, which had been my normal cover, and exactly
the same amount of time with the office of Special Projects, my covert job
for Shan.
Since the Briand disaster, the existence of the OSP was now public, and
there was talk of abolishing it, publishing its records, and perhaps inflicting
various punishments on its past agents, but I doubted that I had done
anything that would merit more than a few minutes of neuroduced pain or
fifty stan days in the dullhouse. Even if the Council repu-diated all of the
OSP's former obligations, my Council pen-sion alone would still be more
than I could spend.
Aside from my three regular checks, I had royalties from my music. As
part of my cover in artistic affairs, I had per-formed and composed all over
the Thousand Cultures. My composing and performing careers were still
reaping the benefits of all that free travel and publicity. Many recordings and
songs were still earning very nice piles of money, and if I wanted to return
to it, I could probably restart my musical career, get back to composing
regularly, and—after enough practice—back to performing. Even though
my last few re-leases had sold mainly to completists and eccentrics, every
new release pulled the early, popular recordings back into vogue. I might
pick up a concert booking or two, or even a small tour, on my own.
I could have a perfectly nice life drifting back and forth between Hedonia
and Nou Occitan, composing and touring if I wanted to, or pursuing little
affairs with Hedons (who had a wonderfully rational ability to know the
difference be-tween fun and love), or just getting drunk every night.
Or I could try to collect on the promise that I had ex-tracted from Shan,
and go back to work for Shan's organization, one of six sections of the OSP.

So far as I knew, the OSP did the only interesting work in all the Thousand
Cul-tures: by whatever means available, they held humanity to-gether, all
1228 cultures on thirty-three extrasolar planets, minus the 102 on Addams
that had yet to build a springer.
Now also minus two cultures on Briand. Two cultures out of touch with
humanity for decades to come. Given the pre-cariousness of their artificial
ecology, and the deadliness of the quarrel, probably no one was alive on
Briand now, but we couldn't know for thirty stanyears, till a starship
carrying a springer could reach them.
Probably half of the OSP's field personnel had been in-volved in that
hideous mess, and the OSP had—not without justice—ended up holding the
bag for it. So perhaps the OSP would not survive the Briand scandal, or if it
did, it might not survive in at all the same form.
But surely, even if the OSP were abolished, its function would still be
necessary. Though the Second Renaissance had begun seventy stanyears ago
in the Inner Sphere, with the springer doing what gunpowder, the printing
press, and celestial navigation had done before, those of us from the outer
systems had learned of it barely twenty stanyears ago, and the adjustment
was still bewildering.
Seven hundred stanyears of basic research, some of it not applied in five
centuries and some of it never applied at all, was pouring out of the libraries
and databases, and every sort of technology was being allowed, in a
continuous up-roar of change unlike anything since the Industrial Age. The
number and variety of new things, and things done better, by machines,
aintellects, geneware, and nanos, was exploding. Humans could have more
of what they wanted for less effort than ever before.
The one thing a machine couldn't do better than a human being was to
reconcile differences between human beings and bring them together—not
that people were good at it, but we could sometimes do it. In promoting
human unity be-hind the scenes, the OSP negotiated, cajoled, bribed, and
threatened, as needed—defusing centuries-old ethnic ha-treds, removing
trade frictions, teaching tolerance through dozens of artistic and religious
front groups. When we neded to, we overthrew a local tyranny, launched an
artistic movement, fomented a new religion, crippled a popular movement
with a scandal, or introduced a new trade good to disrupt markets, all
supposedly to promote tolerance, flexibility, and xenophilia. Often we won;
sometimes, we lost. On Briand, we'd had our first total loss.

Forty years of success on the average, though, was not a bad record,
considering our inexhaustible, always-in-motion, and relentlessly inventive
opponent: the mixture of afflunce with simple human bloody-mindedness.
In the twenty-ninth century, most humans had far more capability than
judgement or ideas. The OSP tried to make sure that they didn't hit on war,
glorinatalism, totalitarianism, jihad, dis-commodi, genocide, neopredation,
or any of the other so-cial evils that make life impossible to keep it from
being boring.
No question, I did love being in the OSP. But after that betrayal of
Shan's, it might never be the same. Assuming Shan wriggled off the hook of
blame for the Briand catastro-phe, did I want to work for him again? And
could my deci-sion even be rational at all? By the end of a stanyear of doing
nothingan experience I had never had as an adult—I might be too bored to
stay out.
M'es vis, all things in time. There were still 331 stan days until that
promise came due, if he kept it, if he were in any position to keep it. The
only thing I was sure of was that sometime in the next few days I would com
Piranesi and Paxa, who were both physically gorgeous, and accept the of-fer
of a Service of Consolation.
Meanwhile, I only wanted to sit and look east into the salt marsh in front
of me. Eta Cassiopeia, refracted and smeared by Söderblom's dense air into
a dim, friendly blur, was about to come up. Maybe, after watching the dawn,
I'd walk some-where and have a quiet breakfast. Then I might spring to
somewhere to wander around for the day. Söderblom had fourteen cultures
scattered through its temperate zones, but so far I'd stayed entirely in
Hedonia. Maybe I'd skip over to Texaustralia for some whooping, brawling,
and excessive drinking—an approach to a broken heart very like my own
Occitan tradition. Or perhaps I'd spend a few days in Hub-bard City and let
them try to clear me, or sit on the rocks among the Dine, sharing my story if
anyone asked, listening to anyone who came by. There was Freiporto, the
next most famous place on Söderblom after Hedonia, but the combi-nation
of crassness and wildness there offended me estheti-cally even if the
freedom was remarkable.
Really, I had nothing but options.
Something moved in the corner of my eye. A man was coming up the
beach toward me. He wore a baggy black jumpsuit, and he walked like he
was in a hurry to get some-where, which was un-Hedon-like. Maybe another

tourist?
He was tall and thin, older, but not old. His vigorous stride hitched
slightly, suggesting some chronic pain in a leg or hip. His head was up and
alert, with a practiced way of looking for a threat. That was a habit he
couldn't have gotten here—the western shores of Hedonia are safe as a
nursery. And the neighboring cultures along the coast—Thetanshaven to the
north and Bremen Beyond the Sky to the south-—were both about as
peaceful and safe as you could hope for.
He pulled off his black watch cap and used it to wipe his face. A shock
of white hair emerged, crosslit by the rising Eta Casiopeia and the last
sinking moon. I knew him.
"Shan, I told you to give me a stanyear."
Shan stopped as if I'd pointed out a poisonous snake at his feet. No
matter where you go, everyone in the Thousand Cultures seems to think that
we Occitans are flighty and vi-olent. Ver, Senher Deu, it makes me feel like
breaking heads.
"I would give you a stanyear if I had a stanyear to give you," he said,
quietly, his face expressionless as it so often was. "If you like, though it
wastes time, I shall begin with as many apologies as you feel you deserve."
"There's not enough time till the end of the universe."
"True. No doubt. I will rely on your curiosity about what would cause
me to come here on this fool's errand and an-noy you."
"I'm not going to ask but I'll listen if you tell me."
He held still for exactly three big slow whooshes of the waves down by
the shore. The precision suggested to me that he was timing himself by the
waves—a trick to make himself wait longer than he thought I could be
comfortable. I suppose it must have worked on many people in the past. Me,
I just stood there, hated him, listened to the waves, and thought about how
typical it all was: with a big favor to ask, first he had to play games.
At last, on the trough of the third wave, he spoke. "I have a job for you if
you want it. Possibly vital to human unity, and it has to do with the survival
of all the smaller, more iso-lated cultures out in the outer parts of human
space."
"Now you're going to tell me that I'm the only person who could
possibly do it," I said, bitterly. I knew how Shan thought, and what he
thought of me.
"I was," Shan admitted. "Telling you that often works. The truth is there

are about ten or twelve of the OSP's agents who could also be helpful. I am
contacting them too. But I do think your particular style of operations might
be very helpful, and I will feel more optimistic with you involved than I
would with you sitting here recovering.
"This new situation is related to Briand, and to the cur-rent political
troubles of the OSP, only because our present weakness has made it
possible for a truly stupid idea to gain momentum in the Council of
Humanity. If this particular pack of fools is not thwarted, you can forget
whatever most attracts you about Wilson, or Nansen, or Söderblom, or any
of the other outer worlds except Addams or poor wrecked Briand. I'm not
exaggerating at all."
A big wave rolled in with a squashing sigh. Eta Cassiopeia had crept
higher. Through the high, thick atmosphere, its amber light gave the whole
beach a glow that would have been ridiculously sentimental if any lighting
designer had done it.
Shan took a step closer to me, the way you might with a big dog you
didn't trust. "I will give the full details to you, and to several other agents
who are temporarily on leave on Söderblom, tonight at hour ten, in the
Crucified Whore, which is a tavern in Freiporto, on Walpurgisnacht Street.
Go in and say you're one of my friends and they'll guide you to the right
room."
"What if I have other plans?"
"You don't, or at least none that you've discussed on any
communications link up till the last fifteen minutes or so. But if you come
up with some, well, then don't come, and there's an end to it—I'll see you
when the stanyear is up. Otherwise, I trust your curiosity to bring you my
way; that's part of why I came to see you in person."
"What's the other part?"
"I thought you might need to express some anger before you could think
about accepting the offer."
I nodded; he knew me. "Then you know I'm apt to be there."
"I do. And thank you." He hesitated a moment, but clearly there was
nothing more for either of us to say, so he merely reiterated, "Crucified
Whore. Walpurgisnacht Street. The tenth hour. Ask for me. They'll show
you where. Try not to be late."
He turned and walked away without bothering to say good-bye.
Too empty and sad, I had nothing to say, either. Once, I might have

chased him down the beach trying for a hint about what the mission would
be.
I still loathed boredom and uselessness and inactivity, but now my only
hope of more interesting times was coming from the man that, out of the
fifty billion or so alive, I most detested.
The irony was enough to make a scrap of a song start in my head. I
willed myself to remember it.
Shan was a good hundred meters down the shoreline. The daylight had
changed completely from dawn to early morn-ing. I shouted after him, "I
guess I'll be there."
He turned around and shouted back, "Don't worry about meeting
Margaret. She's coming to the meeting in Utili-topia, two days from now."
Not knowing what else to say, I shouted "Thank you," but I don't know if
he heard it over the big, slow wave that hissed up the beach then. Whether he
did or not, he waved before turning and walking away as briskly as he had
arrived.
I watched until he disappeared around a tall rock pile, then pulled out my
computer, unfolded it and smoothed out the creases in the piano keys,
plugged in the earphones, and sat down and worked out the first two verses
of "Never Again Till the Next Time." Much later, it was going to make me
even more ridiculously well off. At the time, though, it was a pleasant thing
to think about on a sunny beach in early morning, a catchy melody with a
lyric that seemed to come very naturally, in a paradise that I was already
looking for-ward to leaving. Que seretz, seratz, as we used to say when I
was a jovent back in Nou Occitan.

2
Freiportese say that everything comes with ten stories, eleven of which are
true. That didn't make much sense to the rest of us, but neither did
Freiporto, whose economy de-pended completely on Freiporto's being a
perfect place to lose track of an illegal shipment, irregular funds transfer, or
inconvenient identity.
It was one of fewer than a dozen cultures that wasn't of the three major
types. Most cultures were founded as "eth-nic"—their living space had been
purchased by some group of people who did not wish to be blurred off into
oblivion in the Great Assimilation that began the Inward Turn, almost six
hundred years ago. Ethnic cultures were places like St. Michael, New
Buganda, Trois-Orleans, New Connaught, Nieuw Antwerp, and
Texaustralia, which took to the Con-nect—the whole process of rejoining
with humanity via springer—without much social stress. As long as you
traded freely and refrained from violence, after all, the Interstellar
metaculture only cared about your taste for gumbo, icons, or scarification
insofar as it could sell them.
The next most common type were the esthetic cultures, the ones founded
by rich eccentrics to create some imagi-nary place they might have wanted to
live—the lost Tamil Mandalam and Yaxkintulum of Briand had been such,
as was my home culture of Nou Occitan, as were Nova Roma and
Starhattan. Most of them were collapsing fast under the im-pact of Connect,
but a few of the least assimilated cul-tures—such as my own—were
esthetic.
Least abundant, and most annoying to the OSP, were the utopias, the
cultures created to fulfill some theorist's idea of the good state—Margaret's
home culture of Caledony was one of those, as were Hedonia and
Thetanshaven on this world, and most of the nastier dictatorships like
Thorburg, Fort Liberty, Novy Leningrad, Pure, and Égalité.
Regardless of their charter and design, all cultures, whether ethnics,
esthetics, or utopias, had started out the same. In the 23rd or 24th centuries,
during the Great As-similation, a starship, crawling out to one of the

thirty-three habitable worlds within the distance that could be reached with
half of light speed and unreliable suspended anima-tion, had set down its
cargo of ninety-six adults fresh from suspended animation (minus five to
twelve deaths en route). They had moved into a town constructed in advance
by robots somewhere within the territory that the Council assigned to
them-by law, a contiguous patch of 650,000 square kilometers of
more-or-less comfortable and temper-ate land. As soon as the nurseries and
schools were set up, the ninety or so adults began decanting the million
frozen embryos they had brought with them, raising the resulting infants
into the culture.
In Freiporto things had gone very differently. You could have looked on
Freiporto as a market-anarchist utopia, or as an esthetic culture that
idealized the untrammeled rule of the strong as the highest purpose of
society, or as an ethnic culture whose purpose was to preserve twenty or so
differ-ent persecuted minorities known for their mercantile acu-men and
individualist aggression. All of that had been implied in their charter, but
anyone who had looked care-fully at that charter should have smelled a rat,
or ninety-six rats to be precise; it defined Freiporto as an absolute
democ-racy, so when the ninety-six thawed out, they voted the charter void
and made "do what you want if you can" the only permissible law of the
culture. In the early twenty-fifth century, when it took nineteen years for a
radio message to reach Earth and would have taken about fifty years for a
punitive expedition to come out and compel obedience to the original
charter, there was nothing to stop them.
The ninety-six had concealed their traces well, but de-spite their many
different backgrounds—Straits Chinese, Russian Jews, Texas Viets, Thai,
Igbo, Jamaican, Bangala, and Corsican being only the most prominent—they
all were younger sons and daughters of families that had amassed great
wealth in the gray area between legitimate business and organized crime.
Freiporto was the perfect place for their old family businesses, a place
where everything and anything could connect sub rosa.
Originally the million frozen embryos had been decanted into hereditary
slavery. After a brief war with the other thir-teen cultures on Söderblom,
two centuries ago, back in the pre-springer days, Freiporto had been forced
to emancipate its slaves. Most of the old slave population moved out, but a
few stayed on in the wide variety of criminal enterprises, regulation-free
businesses, and no-tax operations that kept Freiporto going as merely a

nasty corner of a remote, under-populated planet.
Then Connect made Freiporto one of the trade hubs for all of humanity.
The descendants of the original adult group, and the more vicious and clever
former slaves, were now tightly intermarried, probably the wealthiest
extended fam-ily in human space. Anything or anybody who needed to
dis-appear went to Freiporto.
All this was why, before going, I strapped on a neural dart gun, a
neuroducer epée, and a couple of belt knives, and put on a lightweight
helmet. I could still be shot, and anyone with a weapon-grade laser could cut
me in half but at least I would be too much work for the average petty
robber.
The Crucified Whore didn't have a springer. A bar where people meet to
discuss criminal matters would be a poor place for people to pop in and out
of instantaneously. The nearest public springer on Walpurgisnacht Street
was about four hundred meters from it.
I checked my gear once more. I was surprised to be feeling so good. The
man in the mirror was smiling, bald spot hidden under the helmet, no gray in
the shoulder-length hair that hung below it or in the mustache and goatee.
I'd stayed in shape. Only a certain caution in the eyes-and the fine spray of
spidery crow's-feet around them, my memento of Briand's blazing
sun-indicated my real age.
I was still more than a match for any toszet I'd ever faced in a duel. I
wasn't relying on the quick reflexes of youth any more, I was taking care of
myself, and I was used to fighting with real weapons and doing real harm, a
distinct advantage against those who had fought only with neuroducers set
for hallucinatory damage.
Deu, I was looking forward to this.
Enseingnamen? Romance? An end to ennui? An extra-fast recovery? I
could be happy about any of those.
I checked the clock. Ten minutes till fifth hour here-coming up on sunset
in Söderblom's eighteen-hour-forty-minute day. Freiporto was five time
zones east, so it was time. I told the springer controller the number, took a
last glance at the thick yellow sunlight pouring in through my window, and
stepped through the pitch black of the springer into midnight on
Walpurgisnacht Street.
Immediately somebody bumped me and felt for a pocket.
I drove an elbow back, didn't connect, pivoted, threw my left arm out in

a clothesline block, and barely grazed the back of the brat's head. He looked
like he was about ten, but it's hard to judge age from a back that's moving
away from you that fast.
In the brief contact, he had checked the tops of two pockets in my tunic
and two in my breeches, and found all of them sealed, besides briefly
touching the hilt of my epée and thus realizing I was armed. If I'd been a
split second later, my arm would have swung through empty air, and the
street would have been entirely empty. The local talent was re-markable.
I walked past taverns, whorehouses, drug parlors, armorers, and neural
mod shops, with the occasional warehouse—-those looked like prisons,
with high walls, barbed wire, and usually a guard or two. Since the coming
of the springer, many of them had had their doors and gates walled up.
The street wasn't crowded, but the places along it were- mostly open,
mostly crowded, and mostly noisy. You were safer under the protection of
the landlord than out in the street, so people moved from one place to
another quickly. I walked fast myself. People avoided me by three meters or
so, looking away. Locally that was the polite thing.
The Crucified Whore's sign has to be the single most vul-gar vu in
human space. Against two moons and a few very bright stars twinkling in
the purple sky, it dared me to see how ugly it really was. I passed under the
leering, wriggling figure, into the tavern itself
No one drank at the bar—after all, no one came here to be seen—but
robots rushed back and forth between the en-closed booths and the taps.
Five humaniform robots, naked, with lifelike skin and hair—legal in
Freiporto—stood in a display case along the back, switched off and
immobile, be-neath a price list that began with "Robot and bedroom,
compliant with orders" for a merely ridiculous price and worked its way up
to "Robot, your scenario, terminate with murder" for an outrageous one.
I was disgusted but not for the reasons most people are when they see a
humaniform. Most people think sex robots are creepy. For me, robots in
general are creepy, since one of our main strengths against the aintellects has
always been that we can be mobile while unhooked from the system. The
ability to go offline and attack the computer an aintel-lect was running on
saved us in 2749, and although people say that nothing like the Rising could
ever happen again, and it hasn't in eighty years, I say it wouldn't have to be
like the Rising to be pretty bad, and humaniform robots provide far too
many opportunities to the aintellects.

I had been staring at that case of robots for a full minute or more. I
shook off my disgust and turned to the bar.
"Help you?" the bartender asked. She was at least human, a petite
ash-blonde, wearing not much. By the way she car-ried herself and watched
the room, I guessed she was armed, with backup under the bar.
"I'm here for Shan's—"
"Oh, another one," she said, grinning. I don't think I'd ever seen
implanted teeth that were quite that long, or that sharp, before, and I
wondered why she had chosen that mot-tled yellow color. "Back that
way—" she gestured with her thumb "—door on the left, go ahead and walk
in. Shan commed to say he'd be half an hour late. We have a drink and
sandwich special tonight. Or maybe you'd care for some fellatio? There's a
combo special if you want all three."
I bought a special, but not the combo special, and took my Reuben and
stout back to the room she had specified; there were about a dozen people
there, chattering about old war stories. One way you could tell it was an
OSP gathering, or a gathering in Freiporto, was that they were all sitting
with their backs to a wall, so that the room had the curious effect of being a
place where an in-the-round performance was about to happen.
"Giraut!"
I turned and saw Piranesi, by himself, sitting at a table for four. "Paxa
will be along in minute or two—she had something to grab first," he said.
"You look good for a fellow who must be miserable. There's a seat open
here."
I sat down in the corner with him, peeling off my helmet and dropping
my epée into it. "Well, this helps. Isn't it per-fectly Shan to have the meeting
in a place like this, right at midnight?"
Piranesi shrugged. "Our sky is virtually never dark, and we say 'the tenth
hour' anyway, so 'midnight' doesn't have the connotations it would
elsewhere."
"For the real romantic, the facts either cooperate with the story, or they
get out of the frame," I said. We clinked glasses. "Another round for
humanity."
"And one more for the good guys," Piranesi said, amiably. He had
steel-gray hair that might have turned that color when he was twenty or
when he was sixty, a deep lined tan, eyes so blue that they tended toward
violet, and the dimpled chin that Industrial Age actors favored. We drank.

"No He-don will ever make much of a romantic. 'Facts are the step-ping
stones in the ford to pleasure.' "
"Who said that?"
"Me, just now. But I've said it many times before, so it probably sounds
like I'm quoting it. Every so often, when-ever I'm back in Hedonia for
enough time between mis-sions, I teach FFM class in the schools."
"FFM class is—?"
He smiled. "I thought it was in all the guidebooks that cover
Hedonia—usually with a long discussion of how de-plorable it is."
"I never read guidebooks. I prefer to know my way around."
"Ah. Well, it stands for Freedom From Morality. We don't think healthy
amorality happens naturally."
"But you're not amoral," I pointed out. "I would trust you to keep your
word any time. You don't steal. I've never known you to harm anyone except
enemy soldiers in time of war."
He laughed. "I didn't say 'immoral,' I said amoral. You re-ally didn't read
your guidebook. A person who has a com-pulsive need to break moral
commandments is as much a prisoner as the person who feels bound to obey
them. And the human brain is hardwired to produce moral command-ments.
That's why we think you have to train young people to keep them from
developing morality and blocking their pursuit of pleasure. I teach it
because—"
"It gives you an outlet for your sadistic urge to confuse children," Paxa
said, coming in behind him and sitting down. She leaned across our small
table, grabbed me, and kissed me on the mouth, somewhere in intensity
between friendship and a proposition. "How are you feeling?"
"Better than I might have expected, worse than I could have hoped.
Anyway, mos companho, on this particular evening, I am gladder to be with
you, and here, than I would have been to be with anyone else, anywhere
else."
Paxa raised her glass, and we had another toast. Conversa-tion had died
completely, and we had settled into eating our sandwiches, when Shan came
in.
He was wearing something that seemed to have de-scended from Asian
peasant dress-loose black tunic and pants like a martial-arts gi and a baggy
coat over them. His expression was serious. He went directly to the podium.
"I've walked through springers onto nine different planets today," Shan said,

"and if that's not a record, I don't know that I want to meet the person who
holds it. I am sorry that I was so late; too many questions to answer at the
last meet-ing. I imagine there will be plenty at this one. Let me catch you up
with our current situation.
"Despite all our current difficulties, it looks as if the OSP will probably
survive, though we'll be an above-ground of-fice with more public
supervision, under a different name. It was probably high time to go public.
So that will be all right, ultimately, and is only peripherally related to what
I'm going to tell you about.
"Unfortunately, a truly ridiculous issue has come bubbling up from the
depths of the Cultural Legacy Management Committee of the Council of
Humanity. The committee, by the way, is commonly abbreviated CLMC,
commonly pro-nounced 'Clumsy,' though I suggest you avoid that around
the committee or staff.
"Until the Briand affair, we had two OSP agents—one of whom, Caron
Czesckonatividad, was chair—on CLMC. The Briand affair led to a purge
of known OSP agents from the Council of Humanity and its subcommittees.
"We'd always managed to keep a number of things that would be trouble
for the Thousand Cultures bottled up in the committees. Now something
has gotten loose, and it's big trouble. Technologies that would make
possible the com-mercial exploitation of psypyx recordings, for
entertainment, are coming on line, and CLMC is seriously considering
li-censing the psypyx archives for that purpose."
The twenty OSP agents in the room made enough noise for a hundred,
and within a second or so most of us were crowded around Shan, shouting
at him. He held his hands up as if we were going to beat him, and when we
had calmed, he said, "It is going to take a major effort to stop this
completely stupid idea. I am sure most of you are painfully aware that the
idea would be unpopular—"
"I can promise that if the Council of Humanity even starts to move
toward using the Hall of Memories in Noupeitau that way," I said, "we
Occitans will destroy our springers and secede."
"The same goes for Chaka Home," a tall, thin darkskinned man said, "and
without asking I know that every other culture on Quidde would join us."
"Same for Trois-Orleans," a short, middle-aged woman added. "You
might finally achieve genuine unity and peace on Roosevelt; all hundred and

eleven cultures would declare jihad on Earth, and we'd be right in there
with them."
The psypyx was the nearest thing to immortality yet achieved; it was a
whole-brain recording. If you died, your personality could be coaxed out of
the psypyx and into con-tact with another brain, usually a friend or relative
who could wear your psypyx for a couple of years. While you were
re-acquiring the skill of functioning as a consciousness in a living brain, a
clone of you could be tank-grown to the age of four, with the brain blank,
so that you could be trans-ferred from your friend's brain to your clone, and
over a pe-riod of decades, you would then migrate completely out of the
psypyx and into the clone brain—at which point, the re-sult had your DNA
and your memories (up to the point where the recording was taken) and was
effectively you.
Some cultures banned the psypyx, some encouraged it, some were
indifferent to it—but you could be pretty sure that no one of the billion or
so people who had had a psypyx recording made, in any culture, had ever
done it to be used as an artwork, simulation, or game.
Research into a certain, effective re-graft method had only really begun
in the Second Renaissance. For centuries humanity had lived with only
about a five percent chance of successful restoration. Even now, with
success rates over ninety-five percent and rising fast, the procedure could
fail while you were being grafted onto your friend, or while you were being
re-grafted into your child-clone body, or even later as the body aged. And if
you had been recorded two hundred years ago, you usually had no friend or
relative to wear your psypyx and start the process. Most of those billion
recordings were stranded in storage. In most cultures, their storage and
maintenance was in care of the public—and ap-parently, what the public had
care of, the public might de-cide to sell.
When people had quieted, Shan said, "The Sol system has fifty percent of
all human population, and the Inner Sphere, which is more and more like
Sol as time goes on, and tends to vote with Earth and the other solar worlds
more and more, is seventy percent of the remainder. The outer cul-tures may
be on a majority of human planets, and take up nearly all of human space by
volume, but they're only about fifteen percent of the total human
population. Furthermore a quarter of the outer culture population is on
Addams, which still hasn't built a springer or begun Connect.
"Nearly all people in the Sol system work for the mini-mum seven years

of their lives, and then spend the better part of a century continuously
running direct-to-brain simu-lations. Much of the Inner Sphere is moving
rapidly toward the same system for coping with endemic boredom. A new
source of entertainment would make the entertainment sec-tor—two-thirds
of the economy all by itself—much more profitable, increasing tax revenues
and the value of every-one's trust fund. The books would balance better
and the Sol system, and the eight planets in the six Inner Sphere sys-tems,
could expand services and do more maintenance on everything.
"So, essentially, we're talking about an improvement in the lives of
about forty-two billion people, at the negligible price of converting copies
of about a billion temporarily stored dead people into entertainment.
Chances are the Council will vote for this every bit as easily as the Romans
decided to impose Caesar-worship in Judea, as easily as the British decided
to tax tea, as easily as the Southern Hemi-sphere Organization decided that
silly old temple in Kyoto could be replaced with something more practical.
''At least this stupid idea is a badly timed stupid idea. The Inner Sphere is
going down the same road as Earth and the other five Solar worlds, but it's
still not there yet—there's still not even one Inner Sphere world with much
more than three billion people. They still have elbow room and some real
work, and they aren't living their whole lives in the box yet.
"And no one's equipped for a big war. Any secession will be peaceful,
and Earth would be left with only the Alpha Centauri and Epsilon Eridani
systems, for a grand total of three extrasolar planets staying with Earth,
twenty-eight breaking away, and Briand and Addams doing whatever it is
they'll do, since both planets are beyond anyone's influence. That's 330
cultures sticking with Earth, 104 who knows, and 794 breaking away, if you
prefer to count cultures."
No one said anything. If the situation was as he described, the whole
mission of the OSP—to which we'd given most of our lives—was doomed.
"There is hope." His tone was mild but firm. "If we can cause the
Council to decide not to allow this, and at least to -believe that their reason
was respect for minority rights . . . well then maybe the precedent will be set
and the next time will be easier. So this is one we have to win, right out in
the open on its merits—novel as the experience is for most of us."
He paused, I think for a chuckle from the crowd, but only a dense, heavy
silence filled the pause. I was not the only person he'd hurt with all his
double and triple dealing dur-ing the Briand crisis.

Shan licked his lips, looked down, looked up, and gestured at someone
behind us. A moment later, a robot brought in a big tray of sandwiches,
coffee, tea, and snacks. ''Anything you ordered earlier is on the expense
account. Most of you will shortly receive orders to go to your home culture
for a pe-riod of at least six months. Your job there is to stir up as much
opposition to the plan as you can. Unofficially, I wouldn't mind a few
'unfortunate incidents' that 'got out of hand,' especially in front of any
sympathetic people from Earth, the other Sol System worlds, Dunant, Passy,
or Ducommon."
I was thinking how I'd enjoy half a stanyear back in Nou Occitan when
Shan added, ''All right, then, everyone except Piranesi, Paxa, and Giraut is
free to go. You three, we'll take a table in the other room and have a caucus.
Don't worry, it won't run long, I'm due on Cremer in three hours and I hope
to squeeze a nap in before that." He smiled at me, and for a moment it was
almost like the old days. I looked at him and smiled back. You are a liar
and I can't trust you, I thought, making sure I remembered that.

3
We took a bathroom break. Piranesi and I settled into the enclosed booth
with fresh cups of "dragon punch," the local stimulant-relaxant mix, warm
thick purple wine thinned with something like black tea, plus dashes of
some synthetics -on both the up and the down side. It had a wallop to match
its aftertaste, which would have been unacceptable in a cough syrup.
They served it with cups of hot strong cinnamon water. My first sip of
dragon punch, before I knew that the cinna-mon water was a palate-clearer,
was brutal. "Yargggh. Has to be native to Freiporto."
"Yep. Definitely an acquired taste," Piranesi said. "If you get the
cinnamon water to your mouth fast enough, you'll barely taste it, so it will
be almost all right. As for enjoying the taste, start at birth, and you can fully
enjoy it by the time you've got a long gray beard. But it's great when you
need to be awake and uninhibited, and after a while the cinnamon will numb
your mouth. No good for sex because it has you constantly peeing, unless
that's your idea of a good time. They call it 'dragon punch' on the menu to
avoid its real name, 'slavewater.' In the bad old days there was a
physiological specific in it to make it addictive—a different one for every
household—so that running away would make you sick." Piranesi
shuddered and took a sip himself "But if you have work to do . . . especially
creative work . . . it'll help you do it." He knocked back the cup in a hard
gulp, opened the little door within the door of the booth, and set it out-side
to be refilled; a moment later, having rinsed his mouth with the last of his
cinnamon water, he set that cup outside, and closed the small door behind it.
"Oh, good, I've burned my tongue. The slavewater will taste much better
now. You know, there aren't many military families among the He-dons, but
mine is one of them. It leads to an odd apprecia-tion for some things that
most people find nasty. Slavewater, violence with style, and the pleasures of
being tired and freshly clean after a day in the field."
"You'd like Nou Occitan. You have to come and visit."
"I've told Paxa that any number of times. She's got a dis-like for a

culture where women are treated as trophies—or that's how she describes
it."
I sighed, took another sip of slavewater, and immediately grabbed the
cinnamon water again. "That's not totally fair, but it's not totally unfair,
either."
"Like most generalizations," he said. "I'll get her there sooner or later.
She loves the music, and the language, and the art. But she's, not, uh, the
type to tolerate being . . . "
"The almost-victim of a would-be rapist," Paxa said, opening the door
and sliding in. "At least that's what some-one had in mind for me to tolerate.
Stupid bastard kicked in the front door of the stall in the women's, while I
was on the toilet."
Piranesi knew his partner too well to ask, so I did. "You're okay? He
didn't hurt you?"
"He made it about one step closer before I had the neuro-ducer pulled,
and he was reaching for my head. He was al-ready not wearing pants. I
would call that overconfidence. So I set the neuroducer to third degree burn,
and applied it to the obvious. He'll hallucinate that I burned that off with a
torch. While he was rolling around screaming, I imprinted him with loss of
his tongue, vocal cords, legs, arms, eyes, and ears, in that order, very much
one at a time, and I took a while about the eyes. Kept the ears on till the last
so he could hear everything I had to say to him. Dragged him into the men's
room and tied him to the sink with his butt wav-ing in the air. In this town
he'll be a public convenience for two days before the management of the
Crucified Whore gets tired of it and calls an ambulance."
Shan came in, closed the door behind himself sat down, und said,
"There's a refill waiting on the door." Piranesi opened the small door and
brought it in. "Paxa, the man you tied to the sink looked very
uncomfortable. I know you, and I'm sure he had it coming, but may I remind
you that we don't want to call a great deal of attention to ourselves?"
"Is that why you picked this nasty little den?" I asked.
"Well, it avoids having media send anyone who has enough reputation to
make a good hostage, and since those arr exactly the people that big stories
are reserved for, it will slow them down. Now, as I said, I've got a specific
project for the three of you. And a good reason to use you for it. Be-fore
you accept I should add that there may be some dan-ger—there's enough
prestige and power at stake for someone to play rough. The subject does stir

up some strong passions."
"Surely most of the passion is on our side," I said.
Shan shook his head, his expression bitter. "Many Earth people
desperately want something more exciting for their entertainment, and most
of them believe in an unalienable right to try everything. 250 years ago the
'right to consume' groups got permission to go rampaging through the
archived cultures, producing a great quantity of schlocky fake art, with
exactly such arguments. And nowadays half of the Earth voters will tell any
polltaker that the right to consume is the fundamental human right. You
have to keep reminding yourself when you're dealing with them, that many
of your ideas and values are as archaic and dead on Earth as, oh, gravitas, or
chivalry, and try not to appeal to feelings they re-gard as quaint." He
shrugged, seeming to say, What can we do? After a moment, he went on.
"You will go to Earth and testify at the Council of Humanity. You'll also be
doing con-tact work with many different groups, trying to create a cli-mate
that's as favorable as possible for the reception of what you're going to say.
"Now, it's clear that my organization is never going to be fully
acceptable to the Council again, at least not while I still am in charge of it.
So although I have much the most experi-ence at politicking with the
Council of Humanity, the oper-ation will have to run out of another OSP
group. The Board fell into quite an argument about which of the other five
groups should take it on—everyone agreed the job was im-portant but no
one could make themselves want to take it.
"Eventually it settled on Dji's group. So, Giraut, Piranesi, and Paxa, you
will be working for Dji, on loan indefinitely, on a political campaign trying
to stop the commercialization of psypyxes from gaining the support of the
Council. You've all had enough experience to be able to help Dji and his
people out, and you're all very much assets—I'd be using you if I were
running the campaign. Now, you haven't es-caped me completely, because
Dji wants me to nod in fre-quently. All the same, no matter how involved I
am behind the scenes, you answer to Dji, and you take your orders from
him—clear?
"Good, then. The reasons for choosing you all should be immediately
clear. Piranesi and Paxa are the only two He-dons who are regular OSP
agents, which is to say, who have a solid knowledge of what is going on.
There are probably more petitions to commercialize Hedon psypyxes than
for the psypyxes of all the other cultures combined. I'm afraid your culture's

image is overpowering its reality, at least in the market."
"But won't experiencing all their pleasures through the mask of a Hedon
attitude spoil all the fun?" Paxa asked, brushing the blonde hair away from
her cheeks and taking a sip of slavewater.
"It would if that were how they were going to commer-cialize. The
process that creates salable psypyxes produces a copy of the personality with
reactions and memories, but no will of its own. As to whether or not that is
a conscious be-ing, well, we'll be arguing that it is, in the Council courts
and in dozens of cultural courts. The neuroscientists' best guess is that the
psypyxed personality being used in a game, or as entertainment, must feel as
if it were in a dream controlled by somebody else, experiencing everything,
unable to wake up, unable even to say 'Stop' or 'That hurts.' "
"Deu aja merce," I muttered.
"Exactly," Shan said, nodding vigorously. "The kind con-sideration of
God is about the only hope available to the personality trapped in that
situation. This whole technology stinks of the ground it grew in. They
misused psypyx copies from people who donated a copy to science. We
know those people thought 'for research' would mean 'to improve re-covery
technique,' not 'to enrich merchants.' In their devel-opment process, the
commercial interests have already sent a few tens of thousands of
personalities into all sorts of madness."
"This only gets more horrible," Paxa said, shuddering.
"Right. As a matter of fact, we're seeking a sympathetic jurisdiction in
which to bring criminal charges against the researchers; it's another angle of
attack.
"But back to your part of the job. Dji's group, including you, is charged
with trying to explain, as clearly as possible, to CLMC, to the Council, to
the media, ultimately to all people of Earth, how it would feel to live your
life according to a demanding cultural norm, like the Hedon or the Occi-tan
one, and then have to dream it over and over again for-ever—reduced to
pornography. Paxa and Piranesi, your testimony will strike against the
exploitation of Hedon archives, which is exactly what these companies
would most like to exploit. Clear enough?"
They nodded.
"Giraut, your task is easier and harder. As a creative artist, from a whole
culture of creative artists, you will tell them that fundamentally the
experience of creating art is not available to passengers, and that you won't

be able to work if you have somebody always mentally looking over your
shoulder."
"Ver; tropa vera." I said. Always, when a situation began to make me
tense, I slid back into Occitan.
"But there's testimony you'll be giving that is even more powerful. You
are aware, no doubt, that recovery technique has improved tremendously in
the last few years? They've been able to reach older and older psypyxes,
including some that didn't recover successfully when it was first tried. So
we are going to present testimony from someone who was recorded, and
died, long before this proposal came foward. Since we don't have nearly
enough time to grow a clone body, the recovered personality will have to
testify through a wearer—in this case, you."
"Raimbaut," I said. "You think he can recover this time."
"We do. It's perfect, Giraut. Thanks to your achievements as a musician
and composer, you're a minor celebrity. So you'll be newsworthy, as a
public voice for the cause. I as-sume you don't object to fame?"
"It sells recordings." I tossed down the last of my slavewa-ter before
noticing that I had already had the last of my cin-namon water. Paxa slid
hers over to my hand, and I took a quick, mouth-clearing sip. "You're right,
Raimbaut will be perfect. A bo toszet, a good human being, a loyal
friend—but not a special talent, just a private, shy ordinary fellow. He
couldn't possibly have intended to permit bored Earth people to pretend to
be him." That thought crystallized. "Why isn't this whole business an easy
win? Nobody in the psypyxes could even remotely have intended themselves
to be turned into commercial resources."
"For the same reason we're filing suit against the people who did the
original research." Shan sighed. "The other side is arguing that what is in a
psypyx is not a person, and legally speaking, only people can have
intentions."
"How can they say a personality stored in a psypyx is not a person?" Paxa
asked. "What else could it be?"
"Well, remember, the psypyx is uncommon on Earth," Shan said.
"Practically all Earth people spend practically all their lives in the box,
consuming direct-to-brain entertain-ment. Why would they want to do it all
over again? So they don't imagine the life of a person being stored in the
psypyx. That's hard to imagine when you haven't had much of a life, directly.
To them, what's in that psypyx is data. And songs and film and holo and

poetry are all nothing more than data, true? And don't we exploit data all the
time? Psypyx files are even recorded in exactly the same format as the
experiences generated by professional experiencers. And we don't have hosts
enough to revive everybody, anyway. That data will just sit there for
centuries, inert. Why not make some money from it?
"That's why we have to persuade at least some of the peo-ple of Earth to
stop thinking of our dead friends as 'data,' and our stored friends as 'dead.'
We want those poor souls, dreaming in their concrete boxes, to see the
people in the psypyxes as dead stored people, not so different from
themselves. Hence, the plan is, we introduce lots of Earth people to a few
articulate, concerned dead people, and formerly dead people, and
dead-people-to-be."
"It's a better plan than I could have thought of," I admit-ted. "What are
the chances that it will work?"
"On our side, we have one strength: we're right. The other side has
people's self-interest, ignorance, and boredom, plus our weakness due to the
scandals."
"Don't we also have their discomfort about sending hu-man souls into
eternal screaming nightmares for the sake of casual amusement?" Piranesi
asked.
Shan shook his head sadly. "Wait till you spend some time with Earth
people."
***
Supposedly it's healthiest to run at a speed at which you can hold a
conversation; I know of no evidence for this, but like never going in the
water for an hour after eating, never throwing a hat on the bed, and never
wearing high heels in a vacuum dome, it seems to be ineradicable as a
be-lief. So as Piranesi and I ran on the beach and the sun crept up toward
noon, he kept a pace at which I could talk to him comfortably, and he could
run figure-eights around me com-fortably.
"So who is this Raimbaut you'll be wearing?"
"Hmm. Well, as I said, a bo toszet. One of my best friends when we were
jovents together, in Noupeitau, fifteen or six-teen years ago."
"Jovent is like teenager, adolescent?"
"Either a young man or the time of first manhood." We turned up a slope

toward the low ridge, and I concentrated on breathing for about twenty
paces. As we leveled off to run along the ridge, I explained, "In Nou
Occitan, Youth is personified, a being who becomes the companhon of a
boy for a few years before turning him into a man. Or the boy is Youth's
avatar. Not, mind you, that you can safely call him a boy. The jovent is also
the age at which you can carry weapons outside the practice rooms; it's the
age of consent for sex, and for drugs and alcohol without parental
permission; it's when most of us fight most of the duels we'll ever fight."
"So you become a jovent at fourteen, fifteen . . . ?" He turned back down
toward the water; if he'd been running by himself, he'd have zigzagged the
whole way. I was in better shape than nine-tenths of people my age, but that
is no consolation when your running partner is from the top one percent.
"There's not really an age for it. It's a set of standards for physical and
neurological maturity. Growth plates, bone mass, corpus callosum, things
like that. Some boys become jovents at ten stanyears, some not till sixteen.
And then they stay as long as they want. So in a jovent tavern, you might see
a ten-year-old draw his epée on a thirty-year-old, fighting over the favors of
a seventeen-year-old."
"Sounds like a fun way to be an adolescent."
"It's a fun way to be a male adolescent," I said. "Paxa has a point about
Occitan culture. But, yes, if you're a glib male athlete, your jovent is a great
time to be alive. Trying to do everything, be everything, fight everything, and
fuck every-thing you can. Brawls, wild nights, daring escapades, and the
most powerful and astonishing sorts of adventures—or it looks that way
during your jovent. Actually the average jovent is pretty stupid."
"You mean that the time of being a jovent is stupid, or do you mean that
individual jovents are stupid?"
I shrugged. "That's why the concepts can't be disentangled." Now we
were splashing through the shallow water's edge, and again, I was running
out of breath. We trotted on in silence for a while, as Eta Cassiopeia
climbed up above the land to our left, and the sea retreated from our feet to
the right.
Raimbaut had died—really died, not merely hallucinated himself into a
coma, as he had done so many times before—in a dueling accident. Duels in
Nou Occitan are fought with the neuroducer epée—a light touch on the eye
makes you think you have been blinded, a hard slap on the arm makes you
think it has been severed, and a firm thrust to the heart convinces you that

you're dead and sends you into a coma.
Police everywhere use neuroducers as riot weapons, be-cause in small,
infrequent doses, the risk of permanent injury is small. It was the weapon
Paxa Prytanis had used on her would-be rapist, and unless the Crucified
Whore had finally sent him to the hospital, he was no doubt still tied to that
sink by arms that he thought he no longer had, hysterically unable to see or
hear, believing that his legs and genitals were also gone.
Getting the use of your "wounded" parts back, or getting rid of the pain,
required a long time under re-hypnosis in the hospital, and it didn't always
work fully. By the time he was twenty-one, Raimbaut had lost many duels,
with many thrusts to the heart, including one to me when we were both
fifteen. One evening, backing me up in a group quarrel, he had died of
"hysterical distortion of the heart"—too many strips of cardiac muscle fiber
refused ever to relax again, so they couldn't restart him.
I still felt bad about that brawl. It had been stupid to al-low Raimbaut to
be involved in it at all—hysterical distor-tion of the heart is produced by the
same process in muscle fiber that produces "duelist's eyebrow" and "loser's
grin," both of which Raimbaut had had, prominently, for a couple of
stanyears before the accident. We should have known it wouldn't be safe for
him. Now what was left of Raimbaut was a recording of his personality
made eight days before his death.
Raimbaut had been the first real death among our circle of companho.
Next had been Marcabru—a tostemz-toszet, a bully, a lunatic, a drunk, so
careless of his life and himself that he had had no fresh recordings for six
years before the day he fell out of a tavern window and fractured his skull
on the pavement below. His old psypyx presumably still sat in the Hall of
Memories, stuck about two stanyears after Raimbaut had died and shortly
after my return to Noupeitau (and a very ugly fight that I would as soon
forget had ever happened).
As for the rest of us, Aimeric had returned to his home culture of
Caldeony, on Nansen, where he was Prime Minis-ter at the moment, like his
father before him. Rufeu had continued as a jovent for a very long time,
verging on a to temz-toszet (what other cultures called a boy-man, a Peter
Pan, or a puer aeturnus—the literal meaning might be put into Terstad as
"always just a guy" or "forever a fella"). At the age of twenty-six, he had
fallen while rock climbing (I've al-ways wondered how much of an accident
that was—he had had a recording made only that morning) and was now in a

six-year-old body; legally an adult, absolutely the most deca-dent, saturnine
prepubescent it had ever been my pleasure to encounter. Once he was fully
installed in his new body, had some reach, and had practiced his combat
skills back into existence, he'd move back to the Quartier des Jovents, I felt
sure.
Johan had become a respected professor of Romance Languages at the
University in Noupeitau. He had always been the scholar among us, by
disposition as much as by his small size and slowness with the epée. He and
I had no contact with each other; he believed that my clash with Marcabru
was what had sent my one-time best friend down the dark tunnel of
depression to his death, and regarded me as little better than a murderer.
What I knew of him, I heard through Rufeu. I heard nothing at all about
Johan's younger brother, David, who had hung around the companho,
except that he was also a professor.
Bieris was a farmer's wife in Caledony, known for her paintings, and
about as happy a person as anyone I had ever known. Happiness had always
been as much a part of her as her keen eye and her dexterity with the brush.
"I wonder which ones of the old companho Raimbaut will want to get in
touch with." I had slowed to a brisk walk, and Piranesi was trotting all
around me, doing the cool-down for his run. I had been explaining about the
Occitan tradition of the companho, the group of lifelong best friends that
formed in school and was in many ways more important than family.
"No doubt he'll be unhappy about what happened to Marcabru, and he
may want to talk to Johan, which might be awkward, and otherwise the
people he'd want to see are all your friends too. So it seems to me that you
have two awkward issues: what happenened to Marcabru and that Johan still
holds that grudge. Do you feel responsible for Marcabru's death?"
"Well, possibly my humiliation of Marcabru did turn him toward his
death," I admitted. "Nevertheless he chose to be-come a drunk, stop
renewing his psypyx recordings, and fight everything that moved. I was
brutal and unkind to him, out of spite and anger. I'm ashamed of it. But he's
the one that decided to ruin himself as a human being, and put him-self
where he was bound to die in some foolish accident."
Piranesi said, "If Raimbaut's not too judgmental, you should be all
right—it would probably be a waste of time to worry about it."
"You know, Hedons are among the happier and more ra-tional people
I've ever met. Nearly everything here makes sense."

"Sai-lo, companhon," he said. It was one of his ten or so phrases of
Occitan. As always, his vowels were too pinched and he pronounced "nh"
and "n" alike, sort of a bastardized nasal hum. "A quote from the Hedon
philosophy: 'he who says an obvious thing to people who already know it
will be reverd as a sage.' " He put on his final kick, accelerating up toward
his house.
I gave up, settling into an easy walk, and muttered, "Well, your accent
sounds funny."

***
We had agreed that we'd do the Service of Consolation that
afternoon . I was becoming steadily more nervous about the whole thing;
when you come down to it, as the saying goes, you can take people out of
their home culture, but you can't take the home culture out of the people. In
Nou Occitan, sex with another man's entendendora is the sure way to
humiliate him into fighting you, and sex be-tween one companhon and
another is what you do while you're hoping some day to be old enough to
have an entendendora. And having sex with a couple is . . . well, there really
wasn't any expression for it, at least not among mos companho. The Terstad
word "perversion," though, might have captured it nicely.
I showered, and afterward, as I was toweling off; Paxa came in, wearing
nothing but a thin, short robe. She handed me a small glass of some warm,
sweet juice that I hadn't had before, and said, "This one you drink before the
service. You won't need clothes for it, so don't dress. Now, drink it all down
and follow me."
That at least settled the question about whether dressing would have
been bad form. I drank the juice in two long swigs. Still naked, I followed
her up the open wooden stair to the loving room—almost all Hedon houses
have one, sep-arate from but adjoining the sleeping room, with a cleaning
room and an excreting room connecting both of them. The Hedon idiom for
"none of your business" is "upstairs." I had been to this house several
times—Piranesi and Paxa were the kind of natural hosts who have you over
every day if you let them—but this was my first time upstairs.
All the surfaces in the loving room were warm to the touch, but the air
temperature was comfortably cool. Light came from piped-skylight floor

sconces with mirror rotors, so that sunlight flowed up the wall and spread
across the domed reflective ceiling in flickering swirls. In this room, if you
normally looked good naked, you would look great naked.
The center of the room was an enormous bed in three sections, each as
big as a double bed: one knee-high, one waist high, and one that sloped
gently upward between them, all covered with taut, soft tan fabric.
"Stretch out on the middle section, on your stomach, head upwards,"
Paxa said. I did.
Piranesi came in with a bowl of warm oil; looking back, I saw that he
was naked too. "Eyes front," he said. "You don't want to miss the show."
The music started. It was slow, random-tone, faux-Orien-tal, like most
Hedon music is. Art in Hedonia tends more to-ward pleasant amusement
than clear statement. It isn't a place where anyone throws paint, shouts
poetry, or smashes guitars.
Paxa knelt on the upper section, in front of me, swaying slowly to the
beat, not quite dancing. "We, your friends, have gathered here because you,
our friend, are in need of conso-lation. Share the pleasures of melancholy
and anticipation; melancholy for what will not be again, anticipation for
re-newal and regrowth." She reached under her gold-blonde hair, slipped the
robe from her shoulders, and let it drift to the floor. "We remind you that
you are desireable. We re-mind you of pleasure."
She had small, firm breasts with delicate pink nipples and almost no
areolae. Her flat hard stomach barely swelled be-low the navel, and her
runner's thighs indicated that she would have two balls of hard muscle
instead of buttocks. She had been born with, or chosen, evenly gold-brown
skin, absolutely hairless below the neck and perfectly smooth. In Hedonia,
where youth was so central to the culture, that sort of look was fashionable.
I tried not to feel like I was being in-vited to molest a child.
The tension or the little shudder must have been notice-able, because at
once Piranesi was pouring the warm oil over my back and massaging it into
my skin, his big strong hands working the muscles loose. I could no more
have remained tense than I could have flapped my arms and flown away.
"We ask that you release your discomfort," Paxa said. Pi-ranesi's hands
moved down, concentrating on my low back, thighs, and buttocks. This was
getting more and more pleas-ent.
Paxa knelt closer to me, her knees far apart. "Reach for-ward," Piranesi
said.

I did. Paxa took my hands and began guiding them over her body. She
had neither the sort of body I had been raised to like, nor the sort I had
grown to like, but it was a very fine one of the sort it was.
With my arms extended, my shoulders and upper back were forced to
relax more, and Piranesi added more warm oil and kneaded more firmly.
"Let me guide," Paxa said. "Let me position your hands and move them for
you."
It was interesting, and nice, but nothing special. Piranesi's hands moved
down. He pressed my buttocks apart, and a moment later his thumb slipped
gently into me and began pressing against my prostate. His free hand
massaged the light spot in the muscles around my tailbone.
He was good at it; it would have stiffened a rag doll. In a minute or so, I
was about as ready as I'd ever been. Gently, the two of them turned me over,
and Paxa straddled me. My type or not, she was beautiful, and highly skilled,
and it didn't take long before I came.
Then they oiled me on the front, and said more vague and meaningless
things about recovering and renewing and heal-ing. With all the nice
physical attention, they made me ex-cited again, and this time Paxa took a
turn on the bottom.
After that second time, there was another rubdown, and a sponge bath to
remove the oil. They spoke and chanted an endless plethora of sentences that
used "relationship," "growth," "renewal," and "pleasure," over and over,
some of it in time with that random set of odd noises that they used for
music. The oiled touch, the gentle sounds, and the indirect light, quickly put
me to sleep. My last thoughts were about Raimbaut, whom I would be
wearing; and then that to un-derstand Raimbaut, you had to understand all
of us com-panho; and from that thought, I slipped so seamlessly into the
memory of how the companho formed, that I could not, afterwards, have
said which parts I recalled, and which parts I dreamed.
***
For a long time I believed, contrary to evidence, that had it not been
for Marcabru, I would never have had any friends at all. In many ways this
belief was foolish, for Marcabru probably cost me as many friends in the
long run as he caused me in the short run. But when I was a small boy I was
sure of it.

The Occitan culture is not as single-minded and devoted to pleasure as
that of Hedonia, but Nou Occitan is still very much a culture of pleasure,
and within such a culture chil-dren are often loved, and cared for with great
affection, if for no other reason than that many people do enjoy caring for
children, and children enjoy being well-cared for. But chil-dren are never
abundant because to care for them well re-quires the efforts of a very large
part of the people who genuinely like children, plus the assent of many who
don't.
So Nou Occitan had a low birth rate, abundant care to the point of
spoiling available for the few children who were born, and (because after a
few years of raising a small child, most parents wanted substantial time off)
an extensive tra-dition of boarding schools for ages eight and up.
I went to St. Baudelaire's in Noupeitau, where both my parents had gone,
and three of my grandparents too. As schools went, it had a middling
reputation, good but not great.
Like most Occitan children, I had been thoroughly pam-pered and
coddled. My parents had encouraged me in nearly everything. This was part
of the Occitan system for produc-ing creative artists; first the person must
feel special and en-titled, and associate that with creative work. The next
step would be to make us feel lonely, isolated, and misunder-stood, and
would not be nearly as much fun, but through the centuries, in many
different civilizations, creative artists have been drawn from people who are
hurled from a loving Eden into a cold, bleak, savage Looking-Glass Land.
The process is brutal but it creates the drive that leads people to find and
train their talents.
Of course, for people who have little talent to train, the process creates
only extreme, deep, lasting unhappiness. Oc-citans talk about our artists
with pride, and we ignore our suicide rate with cultivated disinterest.
At eight stanyears old, all I knew was that my mother was being what my
father called "ridiculously sentimental," my father was choking with some
mysterious respiratory prob-lem, and both of them were trying to get rid of
me forever. I clung to them, cried, and was sternly told by my father that no
one in the family had ever gone to a day school—that was for weaklings and
mama's boys. Within minutes my mother asked if I'd rather go to day school.
I manfully-but-blubber-ingly refused it.
My small trunk containing all of my personal possessions was placed at
the foot of my bed, the shirts, short pants, and jackets of my school

uniforms were hung neatly in the closet and the dresser drawers were stuffed
with clean, neat socks and underwear. It was time for my parents to go. We
went back down to the broad cobblestone courtyard. I clung to my mother,
then to my father, then to my mother, like every child there (except a few
bold ones who were running in circles, shouting and whooping).
After the parents left, the teachers came out, shouting di-rections, calling
each of us by name, assembling us into groups. They then marched us to the
dining hall and gave us bread, soup, sausages, fried potatoes, and pudding in
quan-tity—the only meal at all to a child's taste we had all term.
From the dining hall we were then taken to the exercise field, where they
had us all run a few short distances and a couple of middle ones, recording
our times but not telling us much of what any of it meant. They showed us
different pieces of sporting equipment, asked us to demonstrate sim-ple
moves, and took more notes. They asked us to do odd lit-tle tests like
standing on one foot with a dumbbell held in front of us. Last, they took us
to the swimming pool, where they made each of us swim a couple of laps,
to see who knew how to swim and who did not, and probably also to get us
all at least slightly clean.
They marched us back, gave us a snack, and let us all brush our teeth and
comb our hair. At last they put us to bed as early and as tired as possible.
(Homesickness tends to strike after dark, so they weren't going to let us see
too much night for the first few weeks.)
At dawn the next morning, the housekeepers in the hall shouted us
awake. I dressed hastily and ran into the hall to follow the mob to the dining
hall. They put us in a long line for food and told us that we could sit as we
wished and talk or move as we wished but that in one hour there would be
no more food, so we had best eat.
"They try so hard to sound mean," the boy behind me said.
I looked back. He had jet black hair and pale blue eyes. His skin was
almost pallid. He had a big, merry grin.
"Sounds enough to me like they mean it," I said.
"Then I guess you better do what you're told."
"I don't know if it sounds that much like they mean it."
"Well," he said, "if we're both smart enough to keep our heads down,
then I guess we won't know how serious the threats are until the first poor
idiot breaks the rules."
That took no time at all. A boy at the front of the line de-manded to have

his eggs prepared in some special way that, probably, only the boy's mother
knew. Told he could not have that, he shouted at the cook.
A tall, thin man with a narrow, rodentish face, wearing a bright red
traditional costume, appeared from a side door and strode rapidly through
the crowd. He grabbed the boy by the collar, and dragged him into the open
area in the mid-dle of the room. The boy seemed to be too startled to resist.
With one hand still gripping the boy's collar, the man pushed him down so
that he was kneeling on the floor.
"This boy is ne gens," he said.
I certainly knew the term. My mother used it for anything she didn't want
me to do that wasn't actually criminal or dangerous—but here, apparently, it
was criminal. "It is ne gens to insist upon special treatment from the staff of
this school," proclaimed the tall, thin man. "I am Donz Peire Sanha Johan,"
he said, "And I am the headmaster here." He looked around at all the new
children. "You will call me Donz Sanha Johan, or you will call me donz.
You will use one ex-pression or the other in every sentence that you speak
to me.
I am the only, the final, the ultimate judge of what is gens and what is ne
gens.
"There is no reward for doing what is gens. That is expected from
anyone with even a trace of merce, qratz, or enseingna-men. Therefore
there is no need to reward it. But!—" I seemed to hear an organ chord crash
with a mixture of sorrow and mounting horror as he looked around the
room—"there are some here, I deeply regret to say, who do not have the
merce, or the gratz, or the enseingnamen, which they should have. And
there are those who have it only sporadically." He spoke the last word with
deeper, nastier sarcasm than I had ever heard before; even worse than to be
ne gens, was to be gens only now and then, or without full volition.
The boy was crying now. "It is also ne gens to cry when you are
punished," the headmaster said, firmly, without rancor, but in a tone that
suggested that he was explaining some-thing to someone unusually stupid.
"It shows a lack of ense-ingnamen, for you should not fear physical pain. It
shows a lack of gratz, for you do not appreciate the correction which your
superiors are taking the trouble to provide for you. And it shows a deep lack
of merce, for when you have so offended everyone around you, your
atonement is needed to make them feel better after the offense. Everyone
here—" He looked around, obviously daring any of us to disagree—"was

disgusted by your behavior toward our assistant cook. That is not the way to
treat someone who waits upon you. Now." He grabbed the miserable boy by
the back of his head, sink-ing his fingers into the long, curly red hair. "This
is what hap-pens to those who are ne gens."
Donz Sanha Johan nodded to one of the older boys, who rushed off with
a cheery smile, and came back a moment later carrying a small stool. The
headmaster bent the boy over the stool, then drew a thin rod, not bigger than
a pen-cil, from his pocket. He clicked it, and with a loud pop, a thin,
translucent line extended about half a meter from it, ending in a flickering
red tip.
It was a neuroducer epée.
"Hold the stool by its rungs. Put your chest down on the seat," the
headmaster barked at the boy.
Though sobbing, the boy gripped the stool to his chest, bent almost
double.
With the tip of the epée, slowly, seeming to take forever about it, the
headmaster drew a large X on the boy's but-tocs. The boy clenched his teeth,
and though tears poured from his face, he managed not to open his mouth to
shout. But the whine that did escape was probably more horrifying to the
rest of us than a scream would have been.
By the end of the term, all of us would discover person-ally that the
neuroducer on the headmaster's epée was a special one for the purpose—set
not to simulate a razor sharp blade in its sensations, but merely to induce a
tingle like, sunburn. Objectively it may not have been much, but the
majority of us had never really been punished for any-thing before.
Witnessing the punishments probably changed us as much as real pain
could; we lived in terror, felt powerless in the face of authority, learned to
hate it for its arbitrary cruelty, and felt all the more alone for our hate and
fear. Some of us were on our way to the sense of spiritual isolation needed
for the arts; most would merely feel alone and unwanted for the rest of their
lives.
The boy, now sniveling and keening, was sent to the back of the line and
told that he could have breakfast—if any were left—after everyone else.
Donz Sanha Johan looked around and said, firmly, "Now, there is one
other rule concerning punishments, and it is the most important of all.
Anyone who teases this toszet, anyone who makes him feel any shame,
anyone who causes him the slightest discomfort in addition to what he has

already received, anyone who mentions it when it would hurt his
feelings—will receive double whatever punishment the offender received.
This rule applies to every punishment. If you are confined to the school
grounds for two days, and someone makes fun of you for it, he will be
confined for four days. If you poke fun at someone who received five stripes
on the back, your back will receive ten. There are no excep-tions at all to
this rule. It is even applied to your teachers. So, remember that although we
are strict, here, and our punish-ments harsh—once they are over, they are
absolutely over. Is that clear?"
We all nodded, dumbly, afraid to be noticed.
He looked around and said, "A room full of bobbing heads. Now, this is
ne gens."
For a moment we all froze, thinking that he might punish us all. But he
shook his head and said, "I can see that much correction will be needed. For
the moment, we'll be merci-ful in this matter. Let us try again. The correct
answer is Oc, Donz Sanha Johan. Is this clear?"
"Oc, Donz Sanha Johan!" we all said, in loud unison.
"Let me stress that. 'Ja' is a vulgarity, however common it may be. 'Oc'
is the proper word when speaking to your su-periors. Is that clear?"
"Oc, Donz Sanha Johan!"
"There is hope yet," he said, looking around the room. "You may now
talk among yourselves again."
The boy behind me said, "Well, I think you win the argu-ment. That
didn't look like pretending to me."
Realizing that this might be one of those mysterious com-panho that my
father had assured me I would acquire soon, I said, "My name is Giraut."
''I'm Marcabru."
"I'm from Elinorien," I said. It was a little town on the west coast, where,
right now, I desperately wished to be, but I didn't say that.
"And I'm from Noupeitau," Marcabru said, "but my parents are on a long
fall vacation in Terrbori, so that I won't have anywhere to run home to, they
say. They say I won't have the proper experience unless I'm all by myself"
"Letting you find your own enseingnamen," I said, making the standard
remark about a standard practice. "Que merce."
"Ja." He nodded vigorously. I thought there might have been tears in his
eyes, so I immediately followed the rules my mother had taught me for
polite conversation—always ask about the other person, and start with what

they like to do, t hen what their favorite school subject is, then what their
favorit anything is, then where they stand on any controversy. "What do you
like to do?" I said.
"At the moment," Marcabru said, smiling, "I would like to eat breakfast."
"Ja," I agreed. "The line looks long, doesn't it?"
He'd obviously been given some rules for having a con-versation, too,
because the next thing Marcabru said was a complete non sequitur. "Last
year my father started me with epée."
"My father started me with it too. I don't think I like epée as much as I
like ki hara do."
"Oh, my art is nisabo. But I've only been doing it for a lit-tle while. I
don't even have a rank yet."
"Ki hara do has all kinds of belts," I said. "I'm an orange belt. They said
they'd have ki hara do here and I'm signed up to keep studying it. Will they
have nisabo here for you?"
"Ja, but it's still the epée that I really love."
It all seemed like the first few pages of a language book, as if we might
suddenly give each other directions to the post office or talk about whether
this was the line for tickets, but at least we were managing to talk, and I
didn't feel nearly as alone. After a long, awkward pause, he revealed that our
mothers must have taught us the same rule book—he asked, "What subjects
do you like?"
"Poetry and music. Those are the only two I really like."
"You're going to be a trobador" Marcabru said, grinning. "This will be
perfect!"
"Why?"
"Because I intend to be a great brawler, and there will be someone to
chronicle my deeds."
I laughed. "Well, if you supply the deeds, I'll supply the songs."
We both laughed. Long before we reached the head of the line, we had
established that although we didn't rank everything the same, we liked many
of the same things in games, entertainment, and food. We could each make
the other laugh. For two small, lonely boys, that was more than enough to
start a friendship.
Marcabru and I were best friends within two days, and for the rest of the
term we were inseparable. We ate together in the dining hall every meal. We

watched each other's backs against bullies. We lied to protect each other
from authority. We chose each other whenever we were team captains. We
chose desks next to each other in the study room. In short, we did everything
that vers companho do.

4
I awoke in Piranesi and Paxa's guest room, slightly over a full day later.
My freshly laundered and folded clothes were in a pile on a side table; I
dressed quickly, wondering how I could have slept twenty hours.
Experimentally, wondering if the Service of Consolation had worked, I tried
thinking about Margaret. I missed her, I wished I were going to see her again
soon, but I wasn't miserable and it seemed like a problem I could ignore for
the moment. So, maybe.
I emerged from the guest room to a wonderful smell, so unexpected that
I had to think for a moment. "Pescaroz!"
"Well, as near as we can manage," Piranesi said. "That's the problem
with surprising someone with his native dish—you can't ask him what's
authentic. But we think it's impressive, and you can always have the fun of
correcting us."
I approached the stove and looked at the dish cooking there. "Not a
problem at all, I can tell," I said. "You're going to poach the fish in the same
mix you used for stir-frying the cabbage and peppers?"
"That's what your mother said when we commed her," Paxa said. "But
we didn't ask her and the instructions in all the cookbooks we can dial up
are ambiguous; when does the lemon go in, and how?"
"Quarter it, squeeze it over the fish, and stir fry the peels with the
vegetables," I said. "Looks like you're nearly done."
"Now that we know what to do, yes." She handed the veg-etable pan to
Piranesi and said, "Stir, love." He kept it swirling around as she plopped the
fish into the white wine and broth, squeezed the lemon over it, covered the
fish pan, and tossed the peels into the vegetable pan, which she took back
from Piranesi without missing a beat.
"Now, go sit down at the table while I throw all this to-gether—Piranesl,
pick up the salad and shake up the dress-ing, Giraut, carry in those three
bottles of wine if you would—there we go."
The meal was everything needed for an excuse to get pleasantly drunk
and gorged. The pescaroz was accompanied by heavy brown bread, tomato
salad, and Hedon Glass—-their thin sparkling white wine that tastes faintly

of flowers and honey, and hits like aquavit.
As she finished dinner, Paxa said, "And this completes the ceremony."
"Deu, I hadn't realized we were still in it."
"That's part of the point," Piranesi said seriously, dipping a piece of
bread in the juice still on his plate. "People don't know they're still
recovering, either, and the time of recov-ery can include some of the best
times of your life."
"Lovely way to make the point."
"We think so. That's why we wrote it that way."
My head was warmly, pleasantly fuzzy, but I managed to say . . . "What
did you . . . I mean . . . who, no why—what?"
The question must have been clear from context. "The Service of
Consolation is a Hedon tradition," Piranesi said, grinning at me. "That much
is perfectly true. And yours was completely traditional. The tradition is, we
make up what-ever we think would be good for the person. Usually sex is
good for broken hearts, which is how the ceremony earned its reputation.
But the actual mandate is that your friends do whatever they think might
break up your personal grieving cycle, before it gets all stuffed full of guilt
and morality and turns into addictive depression."
I stretched out, took a sip of the icy clear wine and let it sting my tongue,
and then brought a bite of fish to my mouth, letting it melt until I had to
swallow. I followed that with a chewy bite of dark bread, and another sip of
wine. "Well," I said, "thanks for sharing . . . and I think your idea of what to
share is lovely." \
***
I felt my mouth forming the words, "I think he's beginning to wake
up."
I had been dreaming of Raimbaut sitting across the table from me at
Pertz's table, laughing. I became aware that I could see Paxa and Piranesi in
front of me, and that I was sit-ting up.
My cotton-dry mouth was forming words differently, but I had enough
control to slur "I'm here."
"I've been awake for about half an hour. Paxa and Piranesi have
explained what has been happening to me," my mouth said, perfectly clearly.
That time I clearly had a sensation of Rimbaut controlling it, like a streak of

cool metal running painlessly behind my eyes.
"That's good," I said, my mouth still far behind my mind. As they had
told me it would, the anesthesia was hitting me, in my brain, but not
Raimbaut where he lived, in the psypyx at the base of my skull.
•Can you hear me if I just think in words?• he asked, without speaking.
•Yes,• I thought back. •For right now, I'd rather that you'd tell them what
I say, than try to say it myself I don't seem to have much fine motor control.•
"Giraut will talk through me until he gets fine motor con-trol back,"
Raimbaut said. My mouth still felt far away.
"The aintellect that supervised the operating room said it was going to be
at least three hours before you were all the way back, Giraut," Paxa said.
"Meanwhile," Raimbaut said, "while your neuroblok wears off, I've been
practicing, and I think, if your kind friends will help us, I can walk us back
to your apartment, if you wish." •It might give us some privacy for working
out how to share the body.•
•Good idea. I'm terribly tired. Am I allowed to fall asleep? I can't
remember.•
Raimbaut looked up at the ceiling—to me, it looked as if the ceiling
swung down toward me—and said, "Giraut wants to know whether he's
allowed to fall asleep."
A flat voice from the ceiling said, "Certainly. As long as the pyspyx,
emblok, and geeblok are not disconnected at any time, he can do whatever
he wants, although he is strongly advised against the consumption of
alcohol or any central nervous system depressant."
Raimbaut snorted, a sound I rarely made anymore. It felt very odd in my
nose. "Well, Giraut," he said, aloud so that Paxa and Piranesi could hear
him, "I hope that you've changed, because I will be a little disappointed not
to be able to have wine for two years."
•Ja, ver; tropa vera,• I thought at him. I fell asleep, and perhaps because
he was probing in my memory, or perhaps because the past was on my mind
more than usually, I dreamed I was back at school, again.
***
One day, in poetry class, we were working on complex scansions
and the difficulty of sustaining emotional force across them. It was not a

very sophisticated discus-sion—how could it be, when eight-year-olds were
conduct-ing it?—but Donz Maines, a nice older man whose hair was always
in a mess, was being very serious about it. He was drawing pictures on the
board and trying to coax us to say, for ourselves and in our own words,
exactly what the prob-lems were with complex scansion. We were not
getting very far, but it wasn't for Maines's lack of effort.
Tentatively, a very small boy in the front row said, "The more of your
brain is counting the scansion to make sure it is perfect, the less of your
brain there is to feel with."
"I feel with my fingers," said a large boy in the back, very loudly. I
cannot remember his name anymore. He was a bully who would go home
halfway through the term, due to homesickness. "What a stupid answer, you
raw piece of shit."
The small boy turned very red.
Donz Maines drew his epée, set it with a bang that rever-berated in the
suddenly silent room, walked up the aisle, put an X on the chest of the bully,
doubled it, and closed the epée with another echoing bang.
The bully stared at him stoically—most successful bullies tolerate
physical pain well.
As the teacher returned to his desk, the bully hissed at the small boy,
"You got me notched, you raw piece of shit. I'll get even with you. We're
going to fight tonight after dinner."
I don't know what got into me. Maybe the thought that if people could be
harassed in poetry class, one of the parts of the day that I lived for would
lose most of its savor. Maybe I liked the little toszet better than I liked the
bully. Or maybe I liked the idea of beating up this particular bully—for
some reason I was sure I could.
"You can fight me first," I whispered to the bully.
He blew me a kiss.
In Occitan, I told him that when he was born, his mother called the
proctologist.
Donz Maines's hand landed on the back of my neck. He paraded me to
the front of the room and gave me four X's on my chest.
The tiny boy in the front row gazed at me in awe. The bully never came
around to collect on the fight, the faint pink cross on my chest faded within
a few days, and, by bearing with an unfair punishment to protect the smaller
boy, I had achieved some reputation among my classmates for gratz and

merce; Marcabru seemed to be proud of me.
The next day, at breakfast, I was there earlier than Mar-cabru, and the
small boy I had intervened for the day be-fore shyly approached the table. I
invited him to sit down. Making use of Mother's all-purpose questions
again, I learned that his name was Johan, and I was his first friend. A few
minutes later Marcabru came along and became his second.
Johan was quiet and shy, but his loyalty ran deep, and there are
advantages to having a friend who is smarter than both of you put together. I
think he was amazed, all his life, that anyone ever even wanted to be his
friend. Certainly, of all of us, he was always much the most loyal.
Three is a small companho; four or five companho are thought to form
the ideal sized unit. So I suppose we were all of us looking for another
companhon.
Rufeu was added to the group when we needed a fourth for the pairs
dueling tournament. Given Marcabru's ambi-tions and predilections, it was
simply impossible that we would not be entering it, even though normally
students waited until they were nine or even ten. We needed two pairs to
enter, and though Johan and I together would be fodder for the older, bigger
boys, Marcabru was well-drilled enough and fast enough to have a
chance—with the right partner—to beat any other eight-year-olds we came
up against, and stand a chance against weaker teams of older boys.
Marcabru had noticed that, although Rufeu was so shy that he was still
eating by himself at the end of the first term, he was a strong, fast, agile
fighter—an odd combina-tion in an Occitan, since the instrument we tend to
be best at is our own horn, but there are deviants in every culture.
After some discussion, the three of us decided to ask him to sit with us
at dinner to discuss the possibility of his being our fourth. As children, we
thought that if you invited someone to join you in one thing, you were
inviting him to be a companhon, and so we took it much more seriously
than older boys might.
We approached him after gym class. Marcabru explained that we needed
a fourth to enter the competition. Perhaps Rufeu would be willing to eat
with us tonight to talk about it?
Rufeu burst into tears. At first we thought that was be-cause he didn't
want to, and all three of us apologized franti-cally. After he became calm
enough to speak again, it emerged, between sobs, that Rufeu had been
terribly lonely all through the first term. Within minutes, we were

discov-ering that he was that not-so-rare phenomenon—a shy per-son who
loved to talk—and he didn't stop till bedtime. The companho was up to a
respectable four, and we thought we'd probably close it to further
admissions, then and there.
With Rufeu partnered with Marcabru, and me with Johan, we finished
thirty-first in a field of thirty-seven in the St. Baudelaire's Second Term
Tournament, beating out the other four teams of eight-year-olds, and two
exceptionally slow and sluggish teams of nine-year-olds. Honor was served,
I suppose, and at least a few older boys began to admit that Marcabru and
the boys of our companho were recog-nizable.
***
When I woke up again, we were back at the rented house.
Raimbaut was idly shuffling through my recordings. •I'm so glad you kept
up with this and did well at it, Giraut. We all thought you were the genius in
our crowd. Well, I guess Marcabru didn't think so. He thought he was. But
for the rest of us, looking at all this makes me think that maybe we were
right. You've played concerts on what, seventeen worlds?•
•Well, yes, but two of those were Wilson and Nansen, where I had to be
there for other reasons, and I did a tour of the Sol system, which added six
worlds right there. Still, yes, I have played a lot of places, and I think done
pretty well in all of them.• It seemed pointless to try to hide my pride from
anyone who could feel my emotions. •Partly it was just a matter of having
my day job with the Council of Humanity.•
•Well, I remain impressed. Would you like to try walking across the
room together?•
•Oc, ja.•
•Then let's try it.•
At first we clumped like a robot in an Industrial Age movie, but after our
third trip around the room, we were walking more or less normally.
•Shall I let you have your body back for a second, while we're moving?•
Raimbaut asked. •They say that's one of the hard parts.•
•Sure.• I stumbled on the first step but then walked well enough after
that, so much so that I wondered if he'd acci-dently disconnected.
•Raimbaut, are you still there?•
•Very much.•

•Could you hear my thinking?•
•Not as well as I can when we're sharing motor function, Giraut, but
yes.•
I felt strangely reluctant about something—no, Raimbaut felt something.
I thought, •There's something you want to talk about but you're not sure
how to begin.•
Unhappy surrender passed through my mind in an in-stant, something
like a sigh. Raimbaut thought, •Giraut, I am told that one of the things that
drives hosts mad when they carry a psypyx is that sooner or later, the person
in the psypyx begins to look through their memories—or else if their
privacy is respected, the person inside the psypyx must spend hours every
day reading things and viewing recordings that the host is already familiar
with.•
•Well, that's what they told me, too. I suggest that you feel free to start
going through my memory. You may not ap-prove, but it will save me a lot
of explaining. At least if you look through my memories you will know not
only what I did but how it felt.•
A sweet smile crept across my face, an imitation of the Raimbaut-smile I
remembered so well. •Oh, I think it will be all right,• he thought. •I'm just
glad to be back. I'm told I can access your memories while you're asleep, but
they won't always be coherent and the process may give you ex-traordinarily
vivid dreams from your past.•
•Most of my past, I won't mind dreaming about,• I thought. •And I'm
afraid I'm exhausted again. They say it will be four to six days of this, and
right now I'm so tired—•
•Then sleep.•
I did, plunging swiftly toward sleep. He walked my body into the kitchen
to order a meal. Barely, I thought •remem-ber no wine—•
•Yes, Dad.• The gentle, sardonic thought came from far away. I fell
deeply into dreams.
***
I had only been a jovent, really, for about twenty more stan -days
after Raimbaut's death, because I had gotten caught up almost immediately
in the affair that had led to my mov-ing to Caledony, meeting Shan and
Margaret, and eventually joining the OSP. Raimbaut also went through

some other memories; I could hardly blame him for those, either. Who,
given a chance to know exactly what his best friend thought of him, day by
day for years, would be able to resist that temptation?
Where his mind touched my memories, dreams sprang up like soldiers
from dragon's teeth.
The companho might have stayed at four—that was a usual size for such
a group—but for three coincidences. We gained two "auxiliary" members,
and through them, we gained our fifth full member. At the time I thought it
weird and was sometimes embarrassed by the strange circum-stances
surrounding mos companho, but looking back I think that I was very
fortunate; probably it had something to do with my adapting as well as I did,
to the wider Interstellar world, later on.
Perhaps the most embarrassing fact was that both the "friends of the
companho" as Johan dubbed them, were gained via me, and worse yet, the
first one was really un-thinkable—a girl.
Bieris went to the female side of St. Baudelaire's and she was a daughter
of two very old friends of my parents. We had played together constantly as
small children in Eli-norien. I never did learn how, but in her first term over
on the other side of the school, she had somehow become un-popular. Even
if I had somehow learned how Bieris fell from social grace, I'm not sure I
could have understood it, and I'm very sure I couldn't have explained it. The
social system for girls was elaborate and baroque far beyond that for boys.
Boys were allowed to make friends any old how; girls had to officially
register their best friends. Boys determined pres-tige unofficially, and
although we did all know who ranked who, friendships between high- and
low-status boys were encouraged—where else would leaders acquire their
most loyal followers?
Girls had a formalized system that was intended to make the creatively
talented ones flighty, excitable, and demand-ing, and all the rest mad, so far
as I can tell, now, looking back. Over on the female side of the school, they
had weekly contests for beauty, poise, popularity, and merce, with the
results posted for everyone to see, and friendships were only permissible
within a narrow range of your own posi-tion. It is possible, though I don't
know, that Bieris may have been unpopular only because she didn't get
along with the half dozen girls whose overall scores were close to hers.
Even to my eight-year-old self the job of becoming a proper donzelha
seemed to be far more demanding than be-coming a proper jovent.

For whatever reasons, although Bieris had lost out in all the contests of
popularity and the normal solution would have been to transfer her to a
more hospitable school and try again, her parents refused to move her to any
more congen-ial school. Again, if I ever heard why, it was all in grown-up
conversation that went completely over my head. Bieris might have fit in
fine at some schools that catered more to athletes, or to serious students, or
the toszeta type, but they wouldn't hear of anything other than her staying
where she had started.
Eventually it did come out all right for her at St. Baude-laire. By the end
of her school days, she was fully accepted, for reasons no more clear than
the ones for which she had been rejected. But for her first three terms or so,
Bieris had no friends on the girls' side, and therefore no one to pal around
with every fifth day, when we had a free day. Nor-mally that was a day for
taking your pocket money and ex-ploring around Noupeitau, but that isn't
much fun by yourself. Sometime in Second Term, during a parental visit
spent staring at each other across a table while our parents chattered, I
offered to let her tag along with me, and to my horror, she accepted.
My other companho were surprisingly tolerant about it; I think perhaps
Rufeu had a crush on her, and Johan thought she was great company,
probably because like him she was a more serious student than the rest of
us. She was funny and cheerful whenever the five of us were out together,
clever and resourceful whenever we were finding trouble to get into, and
calm and silent whenever we got caught. After a while, she was more or less
automatically accepted, and now and then we even addressed her as
companhona—a word that normally disappeared from the vocabulary when
you went away to school, though it was what I had called her, al-ways, when
we had both been at home.
***
I first met Aimeric when he was still named Ambrose, during the break
between Second Term and Third Term at St. Baudelaire's, in my first year.
I had known about the starship from Nansen arriving, of course—no one
in Nou Occitan could miss that. Starships arrived perhaps once in twenty
stanyears, and if I lived a long time I might be lucky enough to see five of
them. In our isolated corner of human space, they came mainly from our one
close neighbor, Nansen, in the Mufrid system, a "mere" six and a half light

years away. Perhaps one ship out of four was from the other systems within
starship range, Mu Her-cules and 70 Ophiuchi, and supposedly the next
starship, scheduled to arrive when I would be thirty-four, would be from
Mu Hercules. But even this "routine" one was more than exciting enough,
and the adults made sure we knew it would be exciting. In those long-ago
days (it's hard to re-member that I didn't see a springer till I was sixteen) a
star-ship arrival was something you didn't want to miss.
For several nights, it was the biggest free show anyone had ever seen.
Normally the sooty skies of Wilson, redark-ened with fresh ash and soot
every six stanyears when a po-lar forest burned down, allowed only the
brightest stars to shine through. The occasional clear spots that appeared
over Terrbori or Terraust in midwinter or midsummer were greeted by a
rush of tourists, anxious to see what the "starry sky," familiar from so many
poems and songs, actually was. The soot that dyed our sun blood red
affected everything from our sense of color and texture in art to our own
soft, fair skin, but usually it meant that there was no good reason to look up.
The arrival of a starship into orbit, even seen through a veil of dirty air,
is an awesome business. Satellite telescopes had been tracking it for more
than a stanyear, as it rode down on the immense light-parachute that was its
primary brake. Many pictures of it had been distributed. But the star-ship
hadn't been bright enough for naked-eye observation until it was almost
upon us. It had made a relatively close pass almost half a stanyear before,
glowing like a barely-visi-ble red moon as it took a deep turn toward
Arcturus as part of its deceleration maneuvers. Then it had retreated to
invis-ibility, almost an astronomical unit beyond Wilson's orbit before at
last dropping in for capture. My father had taken me out on the beach north
of Elinorien, on a couple of dark nights, to show me the little disk in the
sky, its dim glow tinted orange by the upper atmosphere, and had said that I
would be at school before we saw it again.
During the past few weeks, Donz Bisbat, who taught sci-ence and
mathematics, had frequently shown us some of the pictures from his own
telescope, and programmed the holo-graphic orrery to illustrate the process
of bringing in the starship. The only part that had held my attention had been
his promise that when the time came, we would stay up late to see it.
That night, Noupeitau scheduled a two-hour blackout so that everyone
could see, and by sheer good luck there were no clouds, and the soot was

thinner than usual.
As the starship arrived, still traveling at something consid-erably above
escape velocity, the planetary power ring would give it an assist in slowing
down into orbit. "Far up above us, in Wilsonsynchronous orbit," Donz
Bisbat explained, while we all danced around him, shivering from
ex-citement at least as much as from the evening chill, "the VNPs—the
power satellites—are always gathering energy, much more than we need,
and sending us what we need via the ground stations. When a power satellite
goes into the dark shadow of the planet, the other satellites relay power to it,
so that its ground station doesn't go down. Now, the star-ship is coming
down during one of those rare times when al-most all the power satellites
are in sunlight, and they are beaming all their power to a special satellite
much farther out from us, made out of a whole asteroid to serve as
bal-last-because that satellite has the biggest laser you can imagine, and it
needs a big mass attached to it so that the re-action from firing it won't
move it too far or too fast. The special satellite will send out a laser beam,
through a mag-netic disperser that will spread the beam out, so that it hits
the whole light-parachute and doesn't cut or burn anything. It will still be
about two million watts per square meter, and if it weren't for the
near-perfect reflection and heat dissipa-tion, the whole thing would
vaporize. The light-parachute will be very, very bright when it reflects all
that light, and since it's about four thousand kilometers across, it will be
like suddenly having a new star in the sky."
"Four thousand kilometers is forty percent as wide as Wil-son itself,"
Johan said.
Donz Bisbat nodded at him. "Exactly right. And the ship will go from
being a dot to being a disk to filling the sky, all within three days, as it
decelerates down to orbit us."
"How do they get rid of the parachute?" Rufeu asked.
"And what if the ship gets tangled in it?"
"The whole sail doesn't weigh as much as one large build-ing—it's
practically a wisp of nothing. And the ship hangs many thousand kilometers
below it. When the time comes, and they cut it loose, the sunlight will blow
it away, out into the galaxy. And even if a ship did run into it, it's so thin that
they'd probably never know it happened—it would be like breaking through
a wall of tissue paper in a trakcar—unless you look right at it, you'll never
know it happens."

We all stood looking up, not wanting to miss the first mo-ment. They
rang a bell, and suddenly a star, almost too bright to look at, appeared
directly overhead. It was brighter than a rainy day, with sharp shadows
everywhere on the pavement, and the light was a harsh blue-white unlike
anything we had ever seen from the sky before. The crowd gasped and oh'd.
"Why can't we see the beam going out to it?" I asked.
"Nothing to scatter or reflect it," Johan said.
By the end of the two-hour blackout, that first evening, the star had
become a tiny dot, no bigger than a period in fine print.
Two days later, when we watched cast-off, the circle in the sky was
gigantic, stretching across a fifth of the distance from horizon to horizon,
the light was more than bright enough to read by, and it made the evening
uncomfortably warm. Then the great round shape suddenly shuddered and
began to distort, as the ship cast off lines; in minutes, it looked like a
misshapen cookie with a couple of bites out of it. The laser turned off, and
it was dark; as our eyes adjusted, we could barely see the faint silvery-red
glow of the collaps-ing sail, now far above Arcturus's escape velocity and
on its way to drift around galactic central point for the next hun-dred
thousand years or so, until light pressure pushed it out of the galaxy or it
fell into a star or black hole.
"There's the ship!" Donz Bisbat said, and pointed. There was an actinic
flare as the ship's thrusters redirected it, and then a high, shimmering light
overhead, like the biggest me-teor you ever saw. "It's aerobraking," he said.
"They'll skip against the atmosphere a few more times to get into the or-bit
they want."
This all happened right at the end of Second Term, and, while exciting, as
a focus of my attention it ran a poor sec-ond to the adventures of we four
companho as a pairs duel-ing team. I knew, in an abstract way, because of
what they told us in class, that Nou Occitan was getting about seventy
immigrants from Caledony and about thirty from St. Michael, but they were
like the King or the more popular trobadors—people who existed, people
who I might some-time see on the street or meet at a formal party, but not
people I expected to have intruding on my life.
When I arrived home for break, a burly young man with a bad
complexion had moved into my house. My father had had a new room
grown onto the house, and it was occupied by Ambrose Carruthers, newly
arrived economist from the culture of Caledony, on Nansen. Carruthers had

been in sus-pended animation for about thirteen years. Mother said that a
close friend of his had failed to revive—that was common on the old
starships, which lost 5-10% of all passengers—and so this mysterious
Ambrose Carruthers was depressed, which was why he mainly sat in the new
room, reading and sleeping, except when we dragged him along on family
out-ings, where he would sit quietly by himself until it was time to go home
again.
"What kind of a name is Ambrose Carruthers?" I asked. "It's a Caledon
name," father said, very softly. "Keep your voice down. He's an economist,
specializing in free market economics, which is an obscure branch of the
subject that our culture happened to need, something about the
deregu-lation of some areas—I'm not sure I understand it myself." My father
had held many responsible positions in the gov-ernment, including some
that involved the Manjadorita d'Oecon, which served some of the functions
of a treasury, a central bank, an interior ministry, and a wage-price bureau,
or at least as much of such functions as Occitans were will-ing to tolerate,
so whatever Carruthers was an expert in, it must be obscure indeed. "He'll
be teaching and doing re-search for a while, here, at the University; then
after some time he's to go to work at the Manjadorita d'Oecon. He's had a
terrible shock—waking up here with his friend dead beside him. They revive
them several times on the trip, it's very rare for someone to die late in the
journey, and from what I understand his friend had made it all the way until
the very last time. He's gotten some bad news from home, too. So whatever
he's normally like, right now he's severely depressed. I'm sure he'll be more
sociable when you're back for Long Break, but for right now please be quiet
and polite around him."
"Oh," I said, having received far more information than I had really
meant to request. "Why is he living with us?"
Father shrugged. "He was going to stay with the de Ar-genez family, but
they have a new baby coming over there. So he'll be here until it's time for
him to move to Noupeitau. Look at it this way—if you get on well with him
here, you may have an adult friend in the city, when you go back for your
next stanyear. And adult friends can be useful, you'll find."
I shrugged. "I can't make friends with him when he's so quiet and
withdrawn—especially not if I'm not supposed to bother him."
Mother nodded. "We understand that, Giraut, donz de mon cor. Perhaps
when you're back for Long Break, things will be different. Meanwhile, if

you're going to play any noisy game, you might want to play it elsewhere."
I said I would, and that gave me a perfect excuse to run all over
Elinorien with Bieris, terrorizing smaller children and annoying shopkeepers
and parents. I think my own parents thought it was my best behaved break
ever—a tribute to the blissfulness of ignorance. I saw Ambrose Carruthers
only at meals; he was always polite, and smiled shyly at me when I said
something impertinent, but that was as much contact as we had.
By the time I came home for Long Break, Ambrose was much easier to
talk to. He had brown hair, washed out blue eyes, and a blotchy complexion.
He looked no more than twenty-five stanyears old, but due to suspended
animation, in real time he was past thirty-five. The pot belly, tired eyes, and
grayish skin he'd had when I first saw him were disappearing as he recovered
from the lingering effects of suspended ani-mation and depression, and he
was willing enough to talk to me, though he was awkward, as most young,
childless men are around children.
He seemed to be happy to hear me talk about school and what happened
there, and he was reservedly polite when mos companho would come over
on a trakcar from their home towns. He didn't seem to want to talk much
about where he'd come from, except to explain briefly that he was a
Caledon, and that Caledony was very cold and wet. "I've never gone so many
Lights before without putting on a coat, in my whole life," he said.
"What's a light?"
"Caledony has a very short day," he said. "Only about fourteen hours. So
we count two Lights and two Darks in a day, and live on a twenty-eight hour
schedule. Your twenty hour day is glorious! I always feel like it's so much
extra time awake and so much extra sleep."
Then Bieris yelled for me to come out in the street, that there was a
chance to go skimming with her family, so I made my apologies to my
parents—very quickly, since both of them were academics and often failed
to look up when I spoke to them—and ran out to join her. Beings from
another planet were interesting, but skimming—the Occitan combi-nation
of surfing and sailing—was fun.
During the early part of the long break, they kept Am-brose busy over at
the University—getting an office, getting a schedule, observing classes, and
so forth. So I saw very lit-tle of him. Meanwhile, my old friends in Elinorien
and I rev-eled in being big enough (and supposedly responsible enough) to
be turned loose every day. We were pretty much at large, and ready to tackle

the world around us, and we had more adventures and amusements than ever
before. We climbed rock faces we shouldn't have been on at all, swam too
far out in water that was too rough, became lost in the woods so many times
that my father threatened to have my transponder embedded surgically, and
did our share of petty thievery, lying, and cheating.
Occitan children grow up in an environment that actively encourages
rule-breaking and danger during puberty. Nou Occitan has one of the higher
death rates for children and adolescents, but the survivors have had a great
time. In Red-sleeves, probably his best novel, Cercamon Raimon says that
because of our upbringing, Occitans are slaves to custom but very badly
broken to law. He has a point.
Perhaps in a desperate attempt to have us not in mortal danger all the
time, my father and Bieris's father came up with the idea of joint family
camping trips. We did many of these and we took Ambrose along. I could
tell he was mildly embarrassed by the fact that I had to teach him how to do
very basic things, but he covered it well, calling me the "Olde Woodes
Hande" and disciplining himself to listen and get things right the first time.
For a grown-up, he wasn't a bad sort, and I began to think that maybe I could
stand hav-ing dinner with him on fifth days.
At the end of the Long Break, Ambrose and I took the same trakcar back
to Noupeitau, sharing facing seats and reading, comfortable in each other's
company. "Your father is sending me money on the promise that I will either
cook for you myself or take you to dinner every now and then. Why don't
you pick the day that has the most dreadful food in the dining hall, and we'll
make that the regular day for it? And I'd be happy to have you bring along
vos companho if you like."
That seemed like a wonderful idea, so I kept my voice and face
expressionless, and tonelessly said, "Sure, that would be fine."

***
The meals were great. Ambrose was always polite, even to children
, which, if you are a child, is such a surprise (a person who doesn't feel free
to hurt your feelings as most adults do) that you tend to think there must be
some won-derful secret behind it. He took me and mas companho to dinner
every time they had Tartine With Tomato Sauce in the dining hall, and Bieris

often came along. Sometimes Johan's younger brother David came too.
We had a fine little group of friends for a lifetime, ab-solutely
self-contained and perfectly balanced.
If we had thought about the question, we would have been very sure that
we didn't need a friend like Raimbaut a washout from Rimbaud
Academy—our archrival school, which was a bad enough thing, but worse
because it saddled him with being "Raimbaut from Rimbaud" for the rest of
his time at St. Baudelaire's.
He had failed to make any friends at all there, become homesick and
depressed, and spent his Second and Third terms of his first year at home,
going to some awful day school, in a state of absolute disgrace. His parents
decided to see whether a change of school might pull him out of it, and so
he was doing his second year with us. It did not look promising.
He was taller than most of us nine-year-olds, and much thinner. He
might have had a passable face if he had ever smiled. The hormones were
hitting early, so he had body hair and acne already. At academics, athletics,
and art alike, he was about average. He spent almost all of his time alone,
because no one was looking for new companho now.
Yet he wasn't the sort of accepted natural loner that had a role in the
social ecology of the school, for his time by him-self didn't seem to be spent
on any personal projects. He had a talent for mathematics, or so we were
told, and took all the voluntary math classes he could, so that I suppose a
thousand years ago he might have been a mathematician or physicist, but in
our age all the real math and physical science were done by aintellects; for
humans, these were trivial hobbies.
Raimbaut's one talent was to arrive—after an hour—at the same
solution the aintellect found in a microsecond. Hu-man mathematicians
were about as common as human star-ship pilots or human terraformers, for
the same reasons—it was simply something at which machines were
absolutely better. Now and then it might occur to us, and make us shudder,
that a generation before, the aintellects had tried to lever their various
superiorities into full equality with hu-mans from which it would have been
a short step to domination and control. People like Raimbaut were living
proof of how far ahead of us the aintellects were.
His most noticeable personal quality was an awkward shyness,
suggesting that not only would he often be ne gens, but he might never have
the enseingnamen to outface the people who mocked him. To the extent

that I thought about him at all, I thought how glad I was not to be him.
Because Raimbaut had come to us with a poor record from another
school, during his first term he was on proba-tion at St. Baudelaire, which
meant, among many other hu-miliations, that he was required to wear the
school's formal uniform every day, not just for special assemblies. Our
uni-form was bright yellow hose, a deep red tunic with gold belt, and a gold
and black high-collared tapi that came down to the backs of our knees, all
topped off with an absurd falling--over-the-side liripipe. Marcarbru's
summary of the uniform was all too accurate: "it makes you look like a
fireplug a dog would be ashamed to pee on."
Until Raimbaut was off probation, he would be stuck as the most
visually conspicuous person in every classroom. It led to a great deal of
bullying and harassment, despite school rules. Worse, some bullies resented
Raimbaut because they had been caught being cruel to him and been
punished for it; and in his uniform he could be seen from a long way off. So
by the end of the First Term of our second year, he seemed to live
permanently on the fighting ground behind the school, meeting boys there
almost every day to fight with fists and feet, pugil sticks, or the "tickler"
epées that we were allowed. Some days he might fight three or four of them
seriatim.
He had valors, though, you had to give him that—
I once saw him lose three fights, back to back, but he was trying every bit
as hard on the last one as he had in the first. His best hope of acceptance, in
some ways, was that the teachers who drew after-class referee duty
uniformly praised his es-piritu (despite the way they shook their heads at his
ability).
It was Tartine with Tomato Sauce day, so Ambrose had taken me,
Marcabru, Rufeu, Johan, and Bieris to a cafe, where we were eating the
chopped olive and fish paste after the big bowls of spicy soup with noodles,
and quietly hoping that he'd feel inspired to buy dessert.
There was great reason for hope, because Ambrose was doing his best to
make the evening entertaining. Trying to hold up his end of the
conversation, he was quizzing us about school life. He seemed envious that
we were all spend-ing so much time on athletics and the arts. We talked
about my rankings as a fighter and musician, and Rufeu's evolving fine style
of manners, and the way in which Johan and Mar-cabru were beginning to
develop the sharp, biting wit that would be so essential to reputation in a

stanyear or so.
Children aren't usually very interested in what things were like when
adults were children—that being lumped in with the Stone Age, the
Renaissance, and the Inward Turn as events that obviously had happened but
had nothing to do with today. And Ambrose was so obviously
uncomfortable talking about his family back in Caledony that we had given
up even the hypocrisy of polite interest. We knew in a gen-eral way that it
was dull where he came from, that he had had a few close friends, and that
one of them had died and given the six-and-a-half-year reply time he wasn't
expecting letters from anyone at home ever again. That was about all we
knew of him. It was good that he was glad to listen to us—every child likes
to be listened to—and it didn't cross our minds, much, that he seemed
uninterested in being lis-tened to.
Marcabru was recounting, blow by blow, his latest fight, when Ambrose
looked up from his post-dinner salad, and asked, "Isn't that the uniform for
your school?"
We all turned to stare out the cafe window. With Raim-baut's typical
luck, he had been cornered by five of what we later realized were the leading
bullies from Rimbaud.
Those merry companho were playing the always popular game of
surrounding and pushing the weaker, younger boy, trying to provoke him
into charging so that one of them could then hit him and claim to have been
attacked.
We all looked at each other. Ambrose said, very quietly, "I don't
understand the rules, but that boy doesn't look happy. And it seems to me
that if you owe loyalty to your school. . .. "
Marcabru shrugged. "He's not one of our companho. I don't know that
enseingnamen demands it . . . "
Johan was looking at me fixedly; and I was remembering how we
became companho. "Well," I said, "M'es vis, whether or not enseingnamen
demands saving that poor fool, we have a perfect excuse for brawling with
Rimbaud, and I feel like a brawl."
The strange twinkle in Ambrose's eye told me a warm, happy account of
this would be going to my father; I liked the way Bieris grinned at me, too.
Now I was in it, for good and for all.
I got up, so Johan got up with me. Neither of the others was about to let
us look more eager for a fight than they did, so now we were all in it. We

went out the door in a solid lit-tle formation with Rufeu and me leading,
followed by Johan, with Marcabru as rearguard.
"Raimbaut," I shouted, using a very old and corny callout that was the
best I could think of at the moment, "that's our school uniform. Don't let
shit touch it. Especially not shit from RimbaudAcademy. You'll never get
the smell off."
Their heads snapped around. Five to four, and they were all bigger than
any of us. Maybe five to five, since doubtless Raimbaut would kick a few
buttocks when the Rimbaud boys turned to face us. Good odds for honor.
Also good odds for getting ourselves a solid thrashing, so I tried to
concen-trate on the honor.
The tallest of them sneered, making sure we saw it was a sneer. "How
nice. And how appropriate. St. Baudelaire's is now dressing up their boys as
court jesters. We all know that Saint Bawdy-boys, however they dress, are
simply the boys who didn't have what it takes for the Rimbaud Academy."
Rufeu growled, "You're talking to me so much, I'm start-ing to wonder
if you're going to fight me, or if you're trying to work up the nerve to ask
me if you can suck my dick."
At nine, dick-sucking was a new concept for me, but I im-mediately saw
its usefulness in insult. Johan giggled, which was an even better effect. The
other side, in unison, stood up straighter, doubled their fists, and turned an
interesting shade of purple, so it had been a fine calling out.
Schools varied widely with regard to how much unarmed combat they
taught, and how they taught it. I learned, later, that Rimbaud Academy
trained its boys to fight with pure direct force, not finesse. Right now I was
about to learn that if your whole side is bigger and stronger, pure direct
force is a great thing to use.
Raimbaut jumped onto the back of the tallest one, wrapped his legs
around the boy's waist, and beat on the back of his head with his fists, not an
elegant fighting tech-nique, but a first-rate diversion. The four of us rushed
to get the all-important first blows in.
Those were very nearly the last ones we got in. We had more training and
far more style, but they had more mass, more strength, and more reach. I hit
one toszet three hard ones and went in for a throw. He grabbed my leg,
flipped me over and kicked me in the head. That was the fight for me.
From the ground, which was cavorting in circles as I clung to it, I caught
a glimpse of Marcabru being shoved backwards against the wall and

head-butted, and heard Rufeu's scream of rage as two of them, now free of
other opponents, grabbed his arms and pulled them back, allowing the
opponent who had been about even with him to hit him, hard, three times in
the gut. I didn't see Johan but he said later that all he was able to contribute
to our side was that he absorbed punches and kicks that the rest of us would
otherwise have taken.
Raimbaut stayed in it longest. The big kid simply backed up and scraped
him off on the wall. Finished with us, the others closed in and walloped
Raimbaut, each taking a turn. As the little knot of Rimbaud boys pulled
back, I saw Raimbaut sitting with his back to the wall, blood running out his
nose, breathing hard. He had a big bruise under each eye.
Beating all of us into helplessness had taken considerably less than a
minute.
The Rimbaud boys walked away, laughing at us. Raimbaut looked more
miserable than ever.
Ambrose came out and checked us over. He had known Occitan custom
too well to interfere, which would have shamed us all far more than our
defeat. Bieris followed him, her eyes shining with pride at our having stood
up to the bullies and indignation that we had been so roughly treated; gratz
breeds early in Occitan boys, and probably her pres-ence kept any of us from
even thinking of crying.
Between them, Ambrose and Bieris gave us the things we needed. He
gave us some quick touches with the antisep-tic/analgesic spray he carried,
while she cleaned our faces with a wet napkin. Both of them gave us a hugs
and a word or two about our courage. And Ambrose bought us all big ice
cream treats at the cafe. Raimbaut seemed to hang back, but Bieris grabbed
him by the hand and dragged him along, instantly making him one of the
companho.
After our noses had been wiped, and we had concentrated on the ice
cream and syrup for a while, Ambrose looked around at us and said, "You
were all much braver than I was at your age."
"Brave is nice, winning is better," Marcabru muttered.
"How would we know? We haven't won yet," Rufeu added.
"Have to fix that, soon, m'es vis," I said. "Somewhere out there, there has
to be a group of ne gens shitty-trousered dick-sucking Rimbaud Academy
boys that the five of us can give a beating to, mos companho."
Years afterwards, Johan told me that he had seen Raimbaut look down

and wipe his eyes; the word companho had never included Raimbaut before.
"I'd better deliver you all back to your school, now," Ambrose added.
"Missing dorm curfew and getting grounded would spoil most of the
effect."
***
The morning after a brawl is often the best part. Most of the pain is
over and you have no more anxiety about how It will come out, and the
endless talking about it is just be-ginning and hasn't gotten stale. There are
still plausible lies and exaggerations to be added, and a residue of the
adrenaline clings to your system somehow, making everything look brighter
and more exciting.
In the breakfast line, the four of us were grilling Raimbaut on his
interests, hobbies, and general ability to fit into nos nompanho, and
discovering that he would fit in very well and seemed to be our sort of
toszet. A very big older boy, twelve stanyears old at least, approached us.
"Hey, you turds of a sea skunk," he said.
We all tensed; older boys sometimes harrassed whole groups of us
younger ones, for fun. But this one didn't seem to be interested in that, and
he wasn't one of the known bullies, so we waited, patiently, showing the
respect that was required.
"Breakfast later," he said. "First thing you have to do is go see Donz
Sanha Johan."
We trudged down the corridor in pure and total terror, not speaking,
moving as slowly as we could without being non-compliant. An older girl,
one of the much-privileged office workers, held the door open for us. We
filed in, Marcabru first, me bringing up the rear, like prisoners going to a
hang-ing, and were ushered into the Headmaster's private office by Donz
Sanha Johan himself. At the point of his finger, we lined up in front of his
desk. He sat down.
Next to him, in the guest chair, another man, older than our headmaster,
glared at us with such ferocity that I almost forgot to be afraid of Sanha
Johan.
After about as much time as it would have taken for a long, slow
breathif any of us had dared to take one—our headmaster said, "Well, boys,

it seems that we have had a brawl. And it seems that in the course of this
brawl, a blow to the face was administered to one of the finest trumpet
players that Rimbaud Academy has ever produced. And this very fine
trumpet player is now not able to play in the com-petition at the All-City
Concert because his lip is swollen. And this is an outrage."
I wondered which of us had done it. Not me; the few punches I'd gotten
in had been to the belly and chest.
"Now, we know you are the ones who were in that brawl," he added.
"This man is Professor Ceszar, the headmaster at Rimbaud. He insists that
you attacked his boys without provocation, that you deliberately injured
them, and that it was only sheer valor and enseignmamen through which
they prevailed and their injuries were not more serious." There was
something odd in his tone—did I dare hope, sarcasm? "He said that the boys
were just talking with an old friend—-that would be you, Raimbaut—when
the four of you came along to insult them and assault them."
"That's not true, donz, Rufeu said, calmly.
"Do you all agree that it's not true?"
"Oc, ver, I do, donz" I said. The others nodded.
"They were bullying me and beating me when mas cam-panho came to
my aid," Raimbaut said, "and they were all bigger than any of us, and there
were more of them. They started it, Donz Sanha Johan."
"Good," Sanha Johan said. "Now, you will all sit here qui-etly while we
discuss it."
Professor Ceszar said, "I know this boy well. I had to use the epée on
him many times." He glared at Raimbaut. "Now, tell the truth. You were
having fun with your old friends when these boys came by and tried to beat
them all up, isn't that true?"
"No, donz," Raimbaut squeaked out softly, the terror in his voice
obvious.
"You were the instigator of this, you lured my boys there to be beaten
up."
"No donz" he said, pale and shaking. We could hear that he was on the
edge of crying when he added, "Donz Ceszar, I'm not going to lie about it no
matter how many times you ask me to."
The Rimbaud headmaster looked as if he might rise and strike the boy.
"No one is asking you to lie."
"You are, danz." Raimbaut straightened. Tears ran down his cheeks, but

he looked directly into Ceszar's eyes. "I was walking home from dinner at
my older sister's house when they surrounded me and began pushing,
shoving, and insult-ing me. Luckily my friends were having dinner across
the street, saw what was happening, and intervened. But the Rimbaud
Academy boys were bigger and stronger than we were, and we all took a bad
beating." He seemed to dismiss Ceszar, turning deliberately toward Donz
Sanha Johan. "I do feel badly about it, donz, because those boys used to beat
me up all the time, and I feel very strongly that they probably would not
have attacked my friends without my being there, and I don't think they'd
have gone after me if I had not been in my school uniform, since they went
out of their way to mock it. If there is any punishment to be meted out to
any-one on our side, it should all fall on me, for being so incau-tious about
provoking a fight. My friends looked out for me in an honorable way."
Sanha Johan nodded. I didn't think it was my imagination that he was
eager with the next question; I saw him grip the desk and lean forward.
"Have you anything else to say about the event? I am curious about
whatever it was that involved the school uniform."
"Donz, they insulted our school uniform and our school colors, directly
and deliberately, trying to get me to fight."
"I heard them myself," I said. "And I did too," Marcabru added.
"We all did." Rufeu, too, was looking directly at the rival headmaster;
something about the tone he'd used with Raimbaut, I think, had made us all
loathe him. Raimbaut might be a poor hopeless idiot, but he was our poor
hopeless idiot, and nobody else—especially nobody from Rimbaud- had any
business discussing him.
Sanha Johan sat back with a big smile, and said, "My boys do not lie. My
boys are as gens as any in Noupeitau, or in Nou Occitan. If you would care
to offer challenge, you and I can settle this issue, Ceszar, but I shall ask for a
fight atz fis prim."
We all held our breath. It was inconceivable enough that our headmaster
would duel on our behalf—but to demand that it be atz fis prim, to the first
death—meaning until one of them was in a neuroducer coma-was beyond
that. Atz fis prim was what you insisted on if it was a matter of intimate,
personal honor, not only for the sake of courtesy. Afterwards we all agreed;
during the long second before Ceszar re-sponded, we all went from fear of
Danz Sanha Johan, to awe.
Ceszar stood, bowed curtly, and left. Our headmaster closed the door

after him, turned back to us, and laughed. He beamed at all of us. "None of
you boys is ever to tell me the truth, should it be any different from what
you have told me. That was splendid, and a demonstration both of your
fi-delity to your school and your personal gratz and enseingna-men. Your
parents will be glad to hear of this too, I'm sure."
We were ushered out so quickly that the whole event felt like a
hallucination. The older boy who had come to get us conducted us to a side
room where a special breakfast was laid—more sweets and more meat than
we were accus-tomed to. For the rest of the week, we were sore, but we all
felt three meters tall.

5
I returned to consciousness, my mind still swimming with all the events of
my couple of stanyears on Caledony—when I had fallen in love with
Margaret, and had some friends whose names I rarely thought of now, some
of whom had died, and thought that Shan was merely the Council of
Hu-manity's Ambassador and helpful and friendly for a bureau-crat.
Raimbaut was asleep, now, and from the feel of things in my mind, deeply
so. Well, he also had been busy and had a lot to absorb.
I felt a funny, clean tingle in my urethra and reached down to gently
handle my penis, which felt suspiciously as if it had been given some extra
cleaning with a morning-after disinfectant. It looked like Raimbaut had
taken our dog for a walk.
I thought about poking into his memories and could see no good reason
to do so; nor would I impugn his honor by checking my credit record—I was
sure he had used his own, if he'd needed to do that. In Hedonia, one seldom
did, but then Raimbaut had been all but legendary among mas com-panho
for his ability to not get anywhere with any donzelha under any
circumstances.
I pushed up out of bed and checked the clock; I had been asleep for
fifteen hours. I felt clean, rested, and hungry. I went to the kitchen and used
the delivery springer to get a pot of hot coffee. I sat down, poured a cup, and
took a first pleasant sip; Eta Cassiopeia should be rising immediately.
I was feeling good, so Raimbaut had not done anything too exotic to my
body. The lack of Margaret felt more like a healing missing tooth than like a
toothache anymore. Maybe I hadn't cared as much as I'd told myself I had, or
the Ser-vice of Consolation had unguessed power, or the psypyx
in-stallation disrupted the patterns of intense misery before they could take
control. Whatever the reason, I was grateful to have the grief feel so old, so
soon.
I opened the drapes, blinking at the sudden yellow light, and pulled my
chair into the bright puddle of sunlight to drink another cup of the strong

dark coffee, and watch the parade of my current neighbors. At that hour,
everyone was going to or from exercise, meditation, or perhaps an orgy, and
the street was moderately crowded with people who were moderately naked.
Hedons live in their streets, and in their mild climate, aside from sandals,
clothes are for sup-port or decoration only.
Definitely, I was feeling better. It was unfortunate that I was going to
Earth; that planet didn't offer much to my taste. I would have to make sure,
before we sprang, to give Raimbaut a good taste of the pleasures of
Hedonia.
As recently as my teens, almost no one expected to see more than one
planet in a lifetime . . . and Raimbaut had died in that old world, expecting
to wake up a couple of weeks later in it, not fourteen years into the future
and fifty--two light years away.
I pulled on a loose robe and slipped into my sandals. I would do some
katas of the ki hara do, down on the beach, before it was crowded.
Walking through any Hedon town is joyful: sculptures and murals,
interesting sounds, gardens of every kind. The streets wind, to forestall the
temptation to hurry. It took me twenty minutes to walk the half-kilometer to
the beach.
The tenth hour high tide had left the sand close to the sea smooth and
soft. Now, at the fifteenth hour tide was low, and here was a splendid place
for kata, with sand firm enough to support, loose enough for turning, and
soft enough to cushion. The early morning sea breeze was just cool enough.
I kicked off my sandals and settled my mind to the task.
I ran through the two greater and three lesser katas, taking my time,
trying to keep my concentration entirely within my body. Raimbaut was
taking a long time to wake up, but that was only to be expected, with such a
huge flood of new sensations to process. I assumed he'd be along, sooner or
later.
As I finished the last of the lesser katas, a group of chil-dren were
laughing wildly behind me. This was odd—usu-ally if they're going to
laugh, they laugh at the Stork moves in the second lesser kata, or at the
Monkey in the second greater kata.
Holding and examining distractions, while not being over-whelmed by
them, is part of what the katas are about, so I merely refocused my mind and
kept working. When I fin-ished, I was feeling playful enough to turn around
and bow.

A rank of five mimic-seals all bowed back to me. The chil-dren, further
up the beach, screamed with laughter. The mimic-seals had been copying me
through most of that final kata.
•Where am I? What's going on?• Rairnbaut was waking up.
• I've been teaching martial arts to seals.•
•Er, why?•
•The beach can be a rough place.• I shook the sand from my robe and
pulled it back on, walking up the beach toward the children. The
mimic-seals danced around me, begging for attention like friendly dogs. I
rubbed their heads as they came under my hands; the mimic-seals took this
as a signal to flop their way up the beach and scamper around with the kids.
•Too bad no one had a camera,• Raimbaut said, review-ing my
short-term memory and catching up.
At this early hour, a few of the beach cafes were already serving
breakfast, or perhaps had been serving it all night. It would be no problem to
go into one of them in just a robe—-in Hedonia, it wouldn't have been a
problem to go in nude. We went into the first one that smelled strongly of
fatty meats and oily pastries.
One advantage of being two old friends in one brain is that you can not
only talk with your mouth full, you can both talk at once, and not all in
words. As I had surmised, Raimbaut had gone out for the evening to explore
Hedo-nia, and had quickly discovered one of the things that He-donia is
most famous for—the big public orgy rooms where people go to have
anonymous sex, known as "stress treatment rooms" to Hedons (because for
some reason they think stress is a disease, and that it's caused by lack of sex)
and as "fuckaterias" to the tourists. •Really, Giraut, I just went in to watch.•
I had no time to hide a reaction; he knew I was laughing. But since
defensiveness requires denial, and he felt me see-ing through him, he
laughed too.
•All right, I went in hoping something would happen, and nobody told
me it would all happen in the first ten minutes and then we'd be done. Not a
very romantic bunch, the He-dons, are they?•
•Not a bit,• I agreed.
After breakfast, I was already tired, and he was having a temporary surge
of energy, so we agreed to take the body back to the apartment. Raimbaut
wanted to listen to some of my music; I was only now realizing how
important music had been to him in our jovent. He wanted to hear my very

first commercial recording; he had died sixteen days before the party at
which he was to have heard it for the first time.
I put it on and sat back on the couch, letting my mind drift, hoping not to
interfere with whatever he might think of it. That recording was still my
most popular—in a sense I peaked at twenty-one. Cansos de Trobadors
contained no original work; it was merely a collection of seventeen of the
art songs that Nou Occitan treasured and valued, the great songs by the great
trobadors.
I had been a trobador, and a good one. Many people still thought of me
as one. I didn't, because I thought of it as something you could only do full
time, but then the original trobadors of two thousand years ago hadn't been
full-timers, either, so perhaps I was being needlessly fussy.
I had intended to go to sleep, but the second song on the recording
caught my attention; it was Canso de Fis de Jovent, Guilhem-Arnaut
Montanier's magnificent dirge for a young man, or for the end of youth—the
piece we had played at Raimbaut's funeral, which he seemed to have some
memory of, from the previous time I had carried his psypyx. Montanier had
died in a duel in defense of Yseut the Portraitist; Raimbaut had died in a
brawl that started with a pointless insult; by Occitan standards, both deaths
had been beautiful.
I wondered how my voice had ever been so young and so sweet. The
spare traditional stylings weren't something I'd choose, now, but perhaps my
earlier self was wiser.
Some fans liked my more recent compositions, and some had liked my
compositions during the years when I bounced from culture to culture as an
artistic affairs specialist for the Council of Humanity. Those two groups
seemed to be al-ways locked in argument. But the songs on Cansos de
Trobadors were liked by nearly everyone except the few that called them
"too pretty"—the polite expression, I assumed, for "kitsch."
As I listened, I knew I'd never hit my old rhythm again. Worse yet, my
younger self was always right. I swallowed the self-criticism, trying not to
disturb Raimbaut's experience.
•Sing along if you want,• he thought.
I restarted the recording at Canso de Fis de Jovent, and sang along
softly, not trying for power or vocal tone, just wondering whether I could
feel what my old self had felt while recording that song. As I sang, my whole
life seemed to stand out.

It was like the way that, compressor-packing once in the thin-aired
highlands of Cremer, minutes before sunset, I turned to see the mountain
range where I'd been two days before. The whole range, all at once, leaped
into my vision with painful clarity, overpowering all memory of the many
days of winding trails, rough campsites, and tricky descents.
I finished the song and fell asleep, even as I was drawing breath to begin
the next one, Nos Qui Dormem en Montanha Valor.
***
The school terms and the breaks between went by, and we all grew
bigger and stronger and better at our arts. We ad-ventured, fought, wandered
about the city, fell in love with all of Bieris's friends (though never with
Bieris herself—that would have felt like incest), broke rules and were
forgiven, and raced through the time remaining until our jovent like puppies
after mama.
Usually on holidays, one or two of mos companho would come home
with me to Elinorien, to join "the expeditions," as Father and Ambrose
called them. These were family camping trips, usually jointly with Bieris's
family, out into the splendid wild country that by design would always take
up most of the land area of Wilson, the beautiful planet that we were so
blessed to have all to ourselves. There had been room for three or four more
cultures, but they would have been scattered over half the planet's surface,
with no islands larger than seventy-five square kilometers, and that violated
the rule of contiguity. Thus we had been given a world to ourselves by
accident of Wilson's geography—only one large island at the equator was
reckoned to be habitable full-time, due to the ferocious cold and heat of the
polar continents, caused by Wilson's twelve-stanyear year.
Since they would never be needed for human habita-tion—we intended
to remain a sparse population, always-—the many little islands all over our
tropics and temperate zone had been seeded with a wide variety of life by the
ter-raformers, and more were being seeded all the time. On Wil-son, the
number of interesting places to go outdoors was probably greater than the
capacity of anyone human being to see in a lifetime.
One evening, camped near a tall, glorious falls on the vol-canic island of
Corberan, when Bieris, Raimbaut, and I were about fourteen, we were
sitting by the fire, late in the evening, with Ambrose. All the other adults had

gone to bed; he was sitting and watching the fire. None of us had spoken in a
while. I think we were all beginning to think of bed. It was less than half a
stanyear until Raimbaut and I of-ficially became jovents, and Bieris
presumably would be coming out as a donzelha, so our thoughts often
wandered away to the future, rather than staying in the present.
"I'm going to do something interesting when we get back," Ambrose
said, solemnly.
It didn't seem to call for a response. The three of us sat and watched the
fire.
Ambrose tossed in a few knots of driftwood, so that the flames leapt up,
and said, "Want to broil one of the salmon and split it with me?"
"Ja," we said in unison.
Ambrose pulled a big one, already fileted, from the cooler, planked it
with by-now practiced ease, and braced it up to cook by the fire. After a
while he said, "I'm going to apply for full citizenship here in Nou Occitan.
That means that I have to have an Occitan name-so after some
consid-eration, I've chosen one, and gotten permission from the family that
owned the name after it went extinct, and so forth. And in less than three
stan days, there will be no more Ambrose Carruthers."
"Who are you going to be instead?" Bieris asked.
"The name I've chosen is Aimeric de Sanha Marsao," he said. "And my
residence is going to change. You'll probably think this is very funny, but
I've taken enough dueling train-ing, now, to be able to think about becoming
a jovent."
Aimeric looked about the age where most men stopped being jovents,
and he was older than he looked. Counting his years in suspended animation
he was at least six years older than that. It seemed like a very strange idea to
me. Some men did try to stay jovents forever, but it wasn't looked on
favorably.
"It may sound odd," he said, "but I have you and your com-panho to
thank for it. The only way I've been able to under-stand most of my
colleagues at the University is by reference to how they grew up—and I've
gotten to see more than two years, now, of how Occitans grow up. I think I
will probably never understand, until I try being a jovent myself So I know
I'm old. I know I'll be made fun of. I have no idea how long I will stay in the
Quartier des Jovents, or carry my epée, or anything of the sort . . . but I'm
going to try it."

Bieris nodded as seriously as if he had really asked her opinion. "You
don't have any joventri where you came from."
"Not even close. I was in a little clique called the Wild Boys, but it
wasn't the same thing at all."
"Then it doesn't seem fair that you don't get to be one, just because you
were born in the wrong place, does it? I think you should try it."
He smiled at her, strangely, and said, "Well, then, I think I'll have to."
We sat a long time without talking till the fire burned down. That was
one of the last such trips I can remember, but not quite the last one, I don't
think. I don't remember exactly which one was the last. I wonder why I let
that part of my life slide away so easily.
***
Aimeric's decision to become a jovent—it took no time at all to
begin to think of him with a normal, ordinary name like Aimeric instead of
a bizarre one like Ambrose—-had a number of extremely pleasant
ramifications for me and mos companho during the following First Term.
First of all, children were not allowed in the Quartier without an
escort—partly because of the danger, primarily because what they would see
was unsuitable to children. So since Aimeric would take us into the
Quartier des Jovents now and then, to eat in a place he liked or to spend an
evening at his apart-ment, we could take a good look at the place where
most of us would be moving in less than a stanyear.
Aimeric's skill with the epée was progressing from ade-quate to fine and
might someday soon be truly impressive. For one thing, he had the
advantage that he drank much less than most other jovents, and his older
body forced him to work out and practice more. As he improved, he became
more confident about taking us into the wilder areas. We al-ways came back
to the Senior Dormitory with grand tales of the wildness of the brawls, the
beauty of the donzelhas, the fine poetry and music in every cabaret and the
beautiful art on every wall.
None of us was going to waste precious time at any of the
universities—not now, not while there was a chance to be jovents—and all
of us were very close to qualifying physi-cally (Johan was marginal but still
looked promising) and mentally (Johan led the pack). We put on extra
effort, in-tending to graduate together at the end of Second Term, rather than

Third. Once we graduated and qualified, we would automatically qualify for
a jovent's public allowance, and emancipation from our parents. At
fourteen, that's won-derfully motivating.
Donz Sanha Johan was well aware of how visiting with Aimeric fired
our ambitions, and of what those ambitions were and how close we were to
realizing them. In the five years since our brawl with the Rimbaud Academy
boys, we had become his unquestioned favorites. To a conservative old
Occitan like himself, we were exactly what boys ought to be, promising to
become equally fine jovents. We were still all terrified of him (I think it
would have hurt his feel-ings if we had not been), but now, besides the
terror of our dreams, he was also our friend, protector, and ally. Whether it
was coming up with a medical reason for Johan to have a couple shots of
growth hormone, or Rufeu's extra tutoring in poetry, or Marcabru's
psychotherapy to help him pass the maturity test, Donz Sanha Johan did
whatever he could to make our dreams come true.
At the end of Second Term, we were licensed as jovents, were assigned
small apartments of our own, and moved into the Quartier. The whole
stanyear I was fifteen is still a blur to me. That was the year that I, and mos
companho, tried out everything all at once—sex, wine, drugs, art, reading
things that were not assigned, seeing performances, performing, publishing
reviews and critiques, fighting duels in defense of who we fucked or what
we published, arguing with each other about everything-all the things that
seem so pro-found and wonderful then.
At the end of the first year, I wrote to my father to catalog my
accomplishments. I had changed entendendoras twice (both had been
virgins, both about my age—I was looking to impress my friends by getting
an older one, perhaps seven-teen or so, next). I had fought nine duels, three
atz fis prim, and I had not died yet. I had been the opening act at four
different cabarets, each time for well-known trobadors. Three of my poems
were published in small journals (but I was giving that up-there was
persistent complaint that they read more like song lyrics, and I was tired of
fighting duels to defend them). Mos companho and I had been set upon in
three brawls, and had won or tied every time.
I recall that the letter seemed to take a very long time to compose,
consuming perhaps an hour of my time in the busy days before the
excitement of Festival Night began-—but I had put it off for so long that I
could not possibly jus-tify letting it go till Festival was over. I recall what a

chore it seemed like, and I remember that years later, when I was home on
one leave or another, my father showed that letter to me and Margaret, and
all the memories flooded back at once.
***
I was awake again, back in my body. I stretched experi-mentally to see if
either Raimbaut or I had done any dam-age lately. When two minds share a
body, it's all too easy to wear it down.
Raimbaut was thoroughly asleep; he'd taken a long walk, and the visual
stimuli in Hedonia are more than enough to overload even a very strong,
stable, relaxed mind.
I didn't want to go anywhere much. I took a shower, changed into
comfortable clothes, and went out for some greens and soup. I thought I
should probably remind Raim-baut that the body at thirty-five is not the
body at twenty-two—I had a feeling he'd been overeating, and I didn't want
to get fat from his appetite.
As I was finishing, I felt him wake up. • Hello .•
•Well, what do you think of this part of the century?•
•Here on Hedonia, very nice. Definitely better than being dead. Shan
called while you were asleep. I took notes .• My hand reached into my
pocket, pulled out a piece of paper, and smoothed it down on the counter. •I
hope they make sense.•
•Even if they don't, I can always call and ask for a repeat.• I looked it
over. •Looks like you got it all.•
•I didn't know what it all meant, • Raimbaut thought. •When my last
recording was made, springing between star systems was so expensive that I
didn't know anyone who had done it. So I know the message has to do with
how we spring, but it's all outside my experience.•
•Well, first of all, that's an Earth springer address and that's the time
GST. I can check it, but I suspect that that's a springer into the apartment
where we will be staying, at the OSP's Main Training Center in Manila,
which is a big, run-down old city in the Philippine Islands. For a while, right
af-ter the Slaughter, it was the capital of the Western Pacific Region in the
global government. Now it's a huge office town. It will be by far the biggest
city you've ever seen in your life—it's a full-fledged hyperpolis—but on
Earth it's not even in the top twenty.•

•Sounds different, interesting, and exciting.•
•Different, at most.• I checked the time again, and then pulled out my
comp and checked. •We have two days to get ready. Time enough for some
more long walks, another visit with Piranesi and Paxa, and packing—though
that last won't take long. At the moment you don't own anything, and I live
packed, anyway.•

Part Two
In her Sweet Secret Treasure-Box, The Key

1
We sprang direct to the apartment in the OSP building this time; for
some blessed reason I'm immune to springer sick-ness, so I don't need to
immediately take a walk outdoors to re-orient. My things had been sprung
ahead of us, and the robots had followed instructions refined through
dozens of trips. It took no more than three minutes to see that things had
been stored properly in their proper places.
Since the only other thing on the list besides the meeting four hours
from now was "recheck itinerary," I grabbed a quick, hot shower and
changed clothes. Purely psychologi-cal—the "journey" had only been about
four meters, as I ex-perienced it, with a brief moment of walking through a
curtain of fog in the middle.
Once I was dressed, I looked at the itinerary. It was ex-actly what it had
been a couple of hours before:
MEETING 1400 H PER PREV MEMO
AFTERNOON AND EVENING:
KEEP FREE, SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT
•Now, that's going to be hard to memorize.• Raimbaut thought. •Senher
Deu, this place is absolutely institutional-ized and boring, isn't it?•
•I'm afraid so. And that's just the first thing you're going to learn to hate
about Earth,• I thought back. I checked my appearance, or perhaps our
appearance, in the mirror. •We are now perfectly presentable. Perhaps a nap
or some read-ing, before we go to the meeting? I'm afraid there's not much
else to do.•
I could feel some sort of shyness moving through the not quite
conscious parts of my mind; he blurted out, •I know you've been here many
times, Giraut, but I haven't. And with the springers, since travel takes no
time . . . could we go to . . . you know, the sort of, tourist places?•
We had one of those moments where the minds run to-gether like cream
stirred into coffee, and I knew how different the world was from his
viewpoint. The difference was that Earth, for me, had always been nothing

more than a place to work; I had made the requisite pilgrimages to the
requisite cultural sites, with the clear knowledge that there were better
places elsewhere. But for Raimbaut it was the first new world that he would
have time to explore. I remembered how eager I had been to see Nansen, so
long ago, and felt mildly ashamed to have inflicted my jadedness on my
friend, even inadvertently.
•Of course! As much as we have time for, bo certa! As much as we have
time for. As much as you want to. But then we do have to make sure that we
keep traveling, so that you can see somewhere nice, too.•
•Indulge me on this and I'll be so happy that you won't have to make
good on that promise.•
I chuckled, because I could feel our blended emotions, and thought, •By
far the best thing about this job has always been stepping through the
springer to put your boots down on a new world. And it still is. Once you
have a body of your own, apply to the OSP, or whatever it's going to be
called once the dust settles, and come along and see.• The jolt of pure
pleasure at that suggestion made me add, •And if you don't, as your friend
and companhon, I will damned well make you.•
I felt him laugh. •That won't be necessary. But now that you understand
how I feel, can we see the tourist places? There are things I've always
wanted to see—• I felt the images flicker through my mind—•and surely
there must be some things here that impress you?•
Our first step through the apartment springer was to see the Grand
Canyon of the Colorado, from the North Rim. Sightseers have been coming
to it for nearly a thousand years, but that view simply won't allow itself to
become clichéd or banal. Every political power that has had control of it has
been careful to preserve it, and luckily it was never on the route of any army,
nor the logical place for any indus-try. So, despite sharing a planet with 25
billion people, it's still in excellent shape.
It takes time for the eye to adjust to the combination of scale with
intricacy; there's so much of any one part of it, and so many parts of it, that
it takes the mind time to grasp how truly impressive it is. We had departed
Manila at about an hour after local noon, which meant that it was ten at
night locally. Earth has not had a really dark sky since around the time of the
Third World War, so the light reflected from seven orbital cities that were
above the horizon, plus the huge, tethered city of Gonzalez to the south (at
that loca-tion, it's about two thirds of the way up the sky)—all of them very

bright—provided more light than you would need to read by.
•There's no night here, ever, is there?• Raimbaut asked.
•Not anywhere on Earth. The terminator line is visible from orbit but it's
not very sharp anymore. The "dark" side looks about half as bright as the
"light" side.•
To see the Grand Canyon through his eyes was to see it for the first
time—much more impressive than either of the times I had before (both
because Margaret had insisted). Not just the shifting shadows as the moon
and the eight cities cast their light into it; not just the wild profusion of
cliffs, scarps, and faces; not just the far-distant view of the country beyond,
or the steel streak of the river below, or the immensity of the whole picture;
but the power that seemed to come up through your feet and flow out
through your eyes into that view, like an infinite feedback loop, filling you
with beauty till you thought you might fuse into it forever.
Our next spring was to the platform on Brabant's tower, overlooking the
vitrified remains of Paris. Before us, the guide plaque helped to identify
which low lumps had been the Pantheon, the Arc de Triomphe, and Mont
Saint-Sulpice. For as far as the eye could see, the land was covered with the
hard black glass.
•It's a pity there's no observation spot for Avignon,• I ex-plained.
•Brabant had originally wanted seven of these sites, but they built only four,
and Avignon was one of the ones they cancelled. A gap in the antimatter
cloud left part of the city wall and a little bit of the papal palace in
recognizable form. It always seems to me as if that's the one, above all
others, that they should have included. It would fit better with Brabant's
vision—to make all the memorials places where you'd feel how much
something was missing.•
Brabant's tower rests on the site of Notre Dame, of which nothing was
left at all. The old city center around Ile de la Cité and Ile St. Louis was all
low ground, so the cloud set-tled densely there in its few minutes of
existence, eating a perfectly circular hole more than a kilometer across, as if
someone had taken a red hot iron sphere and pressed it into a slab of butter
for an instant. The hole was now filled with deep blue, almost indigo, water,
and in this last hour before dawn, the bright sky with its many man-made
satellites, sta-tions, and cities reflected back up at us from the void where
the heart of Paris had been.
From the west side we looked out from, you could see three of the five

pieces of reconstruction that were also part of the memorial—the twin lines
of réverbères that marked the former path of the Champs Elysees, the
eternally glowing blue outline of the Hôtel des Invalides, and the
slim—-only two centimeters thick—diamond rod that held up the single
white light marking where the top of the Tour Eiffel had been.
•I've never seen a space so empty,• Raimbaut thought, after a long time
of mental emptiness. •Isuppose that's what Brabant meant.•
•I always thought it was the most effective possible memo-rial—that
sort of retro Late Industrial Age trick of expressing the void. It reminds me
of the Guilhem IX poem, the one that begins "I will make one song out of
the utter void." Much more effective, I think, than the gigantic grieving
woman that Hiroshi did on the site of Tokyo, or Delacerro's Exploded
Crucifixion,• I thought. Looking at this, I always had to talk, just to keep
what I was seeing from reaching too far into my mind. World War Four, the
Slaughter, the Scarring-—all the terms that persisted despite the occasional
official campaigns to label it the Unification War or some other fatuous,
look-on-the-bright-side term—still vise-gripped all our imaginations, six
hundred years later.
•The other three Brabant memorials that were built don't hit me as
hard—I'm not sure why. Outlining and marking doesn't make the Acropolis
anything other than an empty mountain, or St. Peter's any more than a shape
on a lake, or Weimar more than a lighter patch of glass on a darker
land-scape, I suppose.•
•Let's go,• Raimbaut thought. •One view of this can last a long time.•
•Isn't it strange,• I thought as we walked down the steps to the springer,
•that unlike any other important weapon, there was never a short name for
the antimatter cloud? Nothing like gun, chopper, plane, tank, or nuke.•
• Maybe nobody wants to be that familiar with it,• Raim-baut thought.
That reminded me of Briand—what had happened here had happened to
New Tanjavur and to Yaxkintulum, scant hours after I and most of the other
OSP personnel had been evacuated, less than three months ago.
The view of Mount Erebrus in Antarctica was fully the equal of the
Grand Canyon; the big eruptions triggered when the ice sheets had slid away
had built an astonishing mountain that still has to be seen to be believed.
The orbital tower at Singapore, from both the top and the bottom, was
equally awe-inspiring—the mighty tower rising all the way into the sky from
that artificial Everest, and the view down from the top, in geosynchronous

orbit, down to the shining white metal that covers half of Malaya and half of
Sumatra in one vast building—the biggest transpolis in human space. •One
out of every seventeen living humans—counting everywhere—lives in that,•
I thought, reading the guide plaque, as we hung weightless, staring through
the window at the awesome object 36,000 km below. •They have over four
hundred copies of famous historic cities in there—-there's even a copy of
Noupeitau—not a good one, I'm afraid.•
From there we jumped to New York and looked at the an-cient skyline
from the top observation deck of the New Jer-sey hyperpolis—even looking
down on it, the array of twentieth century towers sticking out of the water is
amaz-ing, and the woman with the torch, water up to her ribs, looks like
something out of one of the old Arthurian cycles. I had once written a song
about the scene.
•One more place to go,• I said, •but it's another depress-ing one.• We
stepped into the springer and a moment later we were in a darkened
observation dome in the Sea of Tran-quility, We took a few moments to do
what the first genera-tion of tourists to come up here had done—to look at
the footprints and the quaint, wrecked hardware, all protected inside
transparent bubbles that were open to the outside vacuum for eternal
preservation. But then we did what everyone eventually does—we looked at
the round Earth, sunside yin blending delicately into nightside yang due to
all the lights and reflectors, nothing like the famous flat photo. We stared at
the scars where the antimatter clouds had been set off, inky smears on the
grayish-blue world. Honshu is of-ten hard to pick out, both because of the
clouds and because it's an island, and Europe can be difficult, but today,
both were fully visible.
There wasn't much to say about it. We stood for a long time.
•This is what your job is about,• Raimbaut said.
"It is," I said, aloud, breaking the silence in the dome. There was no one
else there except a couple of guard robots.
We looked for a while longer, and then Raimbaut asked •Where are all
the other visitors? There are twenty-five bil-lion people on Earth, and the
springer tour we're taking costs about as much as dinner for four in a good
restaurant. Why aren't there at least a few hundred people at every place we
visit? It seems as if thousands would be appropriate.•
•Oh. That. Well, that's part of what this mission is about, too. They've all
seen these places many times, through vir-tual reality. None of them sees

any reason to leave his apart-ment and come to the real thing.•
Raimbaut shuddered. • Almost time for the meeting?•
It wasn't, not quite, but I said it was, and we took the chance to get out
of there, back to the apartment in Manila, from which we sprang straight to
the meeting room. Neither of us thought anything in words for a long time.

2
While we waited for the others, Raimbaut and I stayed quiet. I could feel the
depth of his shock at the memorials to the Slaughter. For almost everyone,
the Slaughter was like Rome falling, the Crusades, or the genocide of the
Americans—unfortunate, vaguely remembered, nothing to do with the
business of living now. For a very small number of us it was the thing that
kept us awake some nights, and came to our attention, at unexpected
moments, with tears or a shudder.
After a while, Paxa and Piranesi came in. They had sprung here about a
day earlier than we had, with a layover on Ducommon to break up the big
change in gravity, because Paxa was very sensitive to springer sickness. She
still looked tired. Piranesi bore the patient weariness of a career military
officer.
We had the usual idle chat about the niceness of the weather compared
to what you usually had in Manila, the sameness of all OSP meeting rooms,
and the OSP's always serving good coffee.
I had met Dji at official functions a few times before, and I knew that he
and Shan were very old friends. Dji's operat-ions tended to be much more
focused on mass conscious-ess and much less on the sort of micro-issues
that Shan dealt with, but the two organizations within the OSP had worked
together well many times in the past, and I didn't think I'd have much
problem fitting in.
Dji looked to be about Shan's age—he might be any-'here between a
dignified fifty or a youthful eighty; especially if he was from one of the
cultures that used life-extending drugs. He had deep brown skin and very
close cut, tightly curled white hair.
The woman with him, who I'd never seen before, didn't look much older
than twenty. She was as pale as the man was dark, and her hair, worn straight
down to her shoulders, was thin and a very pale shade of blonde. Occitans
are fairer than most of the other Thousand Cultures, and she would have
been pale for an Occitan. She wore her bureaucratic uniform, but she'd taken
advantage of the rule that allowed her to pay to have it tailored out of better
than standard ma-terials. Her high cheekbones, large sea-green eyes, and full

lips would have made her the cause of at least one duel and two songs per
week back in the Quartier des Jovents.
Dji told us to "call me Dji, which is my family name and very proper.
Don't call me doctor or sir!" He scored many points with me by
remembering that my name is pro-nounced like in Ancient Latin or
Industrial Age German-like "gear out," not like a Greek sandwich.
As he was introducing himself to Paxa, Piranesi, and Raimbaut, he
explained that he was from Pure, one of the more aggressively totalitarian
utopias out there. "So that there is not a misunderstanding to begin with," he
added, "yes, I am the product of a supposedly pure human blood line,
descended from a variety of African leaders, provable on all sides of the
family. But I'm also a political refugee. It is a condition of my contract with
the OSP that they not send me anywhere near Pure, since I am still under a
sentence in absentia, of forcible collection of DNA and termination. I like
to think that the genetics authorities of Pure would no longer dare, actually,
but I do not think so so strongly that I would like to bet on it, eh? Refugee
that I am, from a strange culture, as I am, I am bound to be a strange
man-and therefore I shall be a strange boss, for which I apologize in
advance."
"Dji, you are talking to two Occitans and two Hedons," Shan said,
coming in. "If you want to be the strangest person in the group, you will
have to work at it."
Dji jumped to his feet and the two men embraced tightly, for a long time.
When they sat down, there were traces of tears in their eyes. "We're old
friends," Shan explamed.
"Really?" Paxa asked, getting us all to laugh, and breaking the ice.
Shan smiled. "We were part of that first group of agents ever in the
OSP," he said. "Recruited mainly out of the diplomatic service."
I revised my guess at his age upwards by a decade.
"But it was all very different then," Dji said.
The young woman raised her hand and said, ''I' m an Earth girl, myself.
Do I get to be strange?"
This caused me to stare at her for a second—Earth is severely
underrepresented in the OSP. Raimbaut didn't mind the chance to look at
her, at all. •Steady, there you mad im-petuous toszet.• I thought at him,
•remember that as far as she can see, you are going bald and developmg
crow s feet.•

His chuckle inside my head was good-natured, but all the same I could
feel that she was getting to him like a spear through the chest. •Remember,•
he reminded me, •in two years I'll be physically four years old. It's only
going to get worse. Might as well do my longing and yearnmg while the idea
is remotely believable.•
The young woman spoke. "I realize that you may be surprised to meet an
agent from Earth, and perhaps technically speaking, even though I've lived
here all my life, I m not exactly from Earth."
•Senher Deu, and she's mysterious, too.• Raimbaut thought.
• Patience and attention to detail, Ramibaut.•
•Yes, coach.•
She had a sweet smile, into which a fellow could read any-thing he
wanted. She didn't explain a thing. She was more like an Occitan donzelha
than anyone who hadn't grown up among us had a right to be, I thought.
Maybe my racing pulse wasn't originating solely in Raimbaut's share of our
brain.
After a moment, Shan said, "Well, I don't think normal people ever join
the OSP. That's always been our greatest strength, and our greatest
weakness. So let's rejoice in it." He smiled and nodded toward the young
woman. "Since she hasn't introduced herself let me present Laprada Prieczka
to you; Laprada, these alarmingly odd people are Piranesi Al-cott and Paxa
Prytanis. And this alarming person is actually two odd people, Giraut
Leones and Raimbaut Bovalhor." We introduced ourselves and explained; I
could feel Raimbaut blushing with my face.
Piranesi said, "I am assuming, Mr. Dji, that you are the diplomat that
most people say ended the fighting on Roo-sevelt?"
Dji smiled. "Just Dji. No title, please. Yes, I am the Dji who arrived just
in time to take the credit for the fine work my subordinates did on the
problem."
That triggered a memory for me. "And you're also the per-son who
prevented Fort Liberty from seceding?"
"Well, I, and eventually their own common sense." He glanced around
the table; Shan was smirking slightly, an ex-pression that I had long ago
learned to be suspicious of
"Shan," Dji said, "perhaps you will help clarify things for them later.
Negotiation is such a tough job that practically all 'talent' in it is accident
and reputation. If you've been lucky once, they give the job to you in the

hope that you may be lucky again—and if you are, then your reputation will
usually allow you several successes before your final, ab-ject failure. That's
when they say your talent deserted you."
Shan nodded. "But it's still true that even if talent is noth-ing more than
luck, you might as well pick people who are lucky. And luck is detected by
the same methods we would use for talent." He looked blandly around the
room. "This group is about as lucky as OSP agents ever are. And one way
you are lucky is that we have Dji with us."
Dji smiled politely. "So let us begin, my fortunate ones, eh? One of my
areas of specialization is working with the various communications media,
a fancy way of saying 'manipulating the news.' It happens to be highly
relevant to our current mission because ultimately it won't matter what the
individ-ual representatives to the Council of Humanity think, so much as it
will matter what the populations of their home cultures think. And that, in
turn, will not matter nearly as much as what the population of Earth thinks."
"Aren't they supposed to be representing their home cul-tures?" Paxa
asked.
"Yes, theoretically they are, and some of them do so very
conscientiously, but you have to remember the travel re-mains expensive,
and was expensive for centuries—and dur-ing most of that time the Council
of Humanity was a figurehead body. During that time a tradition grew up.
Rather than go to the expense of recalling or replacing their
representatives—a process that could take many decades-—since the
Council of Humanity didn't matter much, most cultures just left
representatives in place for life, and when they died, appointed their
descendants. Once you got your representative to Earth, you never, never
moved or replaced him or her; you hired his or her children. And co-workers
tend to marry each other.
"The total effect is that the Council is more like a little incestuous
family living in Nuevo Buenos Aires than it is a representative body. So for
many representatives, the most relevant public opinion is what's being talked
about in upper class NBA Their own cultures are barely real to them.
"After all, till now, no one cared. Does any of you even know the names
of the representative from your home cul-ture?"
We all had to admit we didn't, with Laprada "abstaining," with an odd
little smile.

"And speaking," Dji said, "of hereditary representatives, Laprada is the
representative for Second Eden, on Addams, but she's never been there and
neither had her father—both were born on Earth. When her grandfather died
last year, her father, who has a career as an actor, did not want to take the
time to be in the Council of Humanity—and therefore, voila, Laprada is the
new representative, with a vote as good as all of Earth's. She's also
well-accepted at the very center of fashionable opinion in NBA, and that's
almost equally im-portant. That's where the four of you—excuse me,
Raim-baut—the five of you-come into this."
I nodded. "All right, clear enough."
Raimbaut asked, "And so the exact thing we're supposed to do is. . .?"
"That's Raimbaut speaking, right?" Laprada asked.
"Very good!" I said, when I realized he'd frozen. "This is me. . ."
". . .and this is Raimbaut," he said, finishing the sentence. •Thanks. Deu,
how will I ever talk to her?•
•You just did. Don't worry, I couldn't leave you alone if I wanted to.•
"How fascinating!" she said. "You have different accents."
"We'd be happy to discuss that at length," I said, "but for the moment we
should probably find out what we're sup-posed to be doing."
Dji nodded and said, "Our strategy is to keep the idea of commercially
exploiting psypyx recordings from becoming fashionable. We don't want
that stupid idea to be identified with youth, art, vigor, or style. Laprada has
completed train-ing at Manila, as of four weeks ago, so she's now a
full-fledged agent; more importantly, she's the only one we have with a
pipeline into that world, though who knows how long she can keep
it—officially the Council of Humanity doesn't know she's an OSP agent and
hasn't purged her yet, bu we think that's only a matter of time. Until then,
Laprada will be helping the four of you influence the Earth opinion that
happens to matter. So the first assignment for the four of you is to get to
know Laprada well, and to socialize enough so that you catch on to each
other's peculiarities."
I thought, to Raimbaut, •Is there any way this can be bet-ter for you?•
•Or more terrifying?•
"Right now the best thing we have going," Laprada said, "is the large
number of representatives to the Council who are horrified at having to take
a side. With the help of the cowards, the reasonable people have secured a
substantial delay. I'm going to take you through what there is of the

bo-hemian current on Earth. There aren't many of them—I should say, many
of us, I spend my time in the current—but the younger, valuable advertising
demographic lurks that current with intense attention, and whatever's in the
current now, whether it's ideas or shoes, is what most of the lurkers will be
thinking, or wearing, or eating, soon.
"We're going to try to infuse the current with the idea that 'traditional' is
good—which is usually an easy sell, but who knows what it will be like this
time. I'm going to take you around to where some of the most fashionable
young people are, and you are going to make them think that you are
wonderful, fascinating people. The best way to do this is by being
wonderful, fascinating people."
Paxa smiled. "Well, then, I'm sure we'll manage somehow."
Laprda made a face. "This is Earth. You're dealing with a population that
wishes there had never been a Thousand Cultures—as far as they're
concerned, you all produce way too much news that interrupts the
entertainment. Being wonderful and fascinating takes more than merely
appearing to be a wonder, or keeping someone's undivided attention." She
sighed. "Giraut, I've set up many appointments in which you will be talking
with musicians, poets, and so on—prima-rily musicians and poets with a
chance to become big in the next few years. (It does us no good if you're an
underground sensation: at least in the short run!) Paxa, you'll be talking to
various kinds of connoisseurs of various sorts, about esthetics of pure
pleasure, and anything else that suggests that you can teach them to have fun
by themselves. It will be a younger crowd, twenties and thirties, but not a
very young crowd. Also, as the only woman in the group, you'll be speaking
to various feminist groups. Piranesi, you'll be talk-ing to military, police,
and so on, raising the specter of battle experiences becoming a form of war
porn."
"Excuse me," Paxa said, "but there are still feminist groups on Earth, and
they still have something to do?"
"Oh, yes," Laprada said. "Equality has been the law for many
generations, but there's invidious discrimination even now, and you'll see
why we still have feminism quickly enough. And there's work enough for
them to do, here on Earth. Unfortunately, another reason for their existence
is that Earth is a planet of busybodies. Maybe it always has been, or maybe
we're just a busybody species.
"Earth feminists spend their time agitating about the in-equality of

women in many of the Thousand Cultures. They campaign ceaselessly to
make the Thousand Cultures con-form to Earth standards of gender
equality. Not much differnt from the movements to make all of the
Thousand Cul-lures follow the right religion, or raise their children without
spanking, or eat no meat, or a dozen other things. Since the Thousand
Cultures are far away (at least until springer costs come down still further)
discussions of reforming them can be carried on without anyone's having to
know anything about any of them, or do anything."
"Well I doubt I'll be completely in or out of sympathy with them," Paxa
said, "so I guess there will be something to talk about, anyway."
"I guess I'll tag along with Giraut," Raimbaut said, with my mouth.
Everyone, including me, laughed at that, and then Laprada gave him a
smile that melted him (there is hardly a stranger sensation, by the way, than
to have another man's butterflies in your stomach).
•God, she's beautiful,• Raimbaut thought at me.
I tried to suppress the thought that this could be a long couple of
stanyears but Raimbaut's melancholy chuckle in my mind told me that I
hadn't succeeded. The whole ex-change took much less than a second;
probably it did not even look like a hesitation to anyone outside.
Laprada said, "Tonight, you and I (and Giraut, because the poor devil has
no choice, even though he's slightly old for this crowd), are going to a party
with the Divers. They re a very influential clique and it will be a good place
to start—especially because they are my clique."
Dji doled out the remaining assignments in half a minute, and then
dismissed us. As I was walking out behind Laprada, I thought to Raimbaut,
•I noticed that glandular surge that hit when she said "tonight you and I."•
•I have some way to go,• he thought, glumly.
•We will get you there, companhon. Non ajas destrech.•
"Laprada," I said, turning around, "do you suppose you can give us some
orientation to all of this? Perhaps we could meet an hour or so before going
to the Divers' party?"
She nodded. "Good idea. It would take me much more than an hour to
explain it all completely, but perhaps I can make it not totally
incomprehensible . . . why don't we have dinner together?"
"We had no plans," I said.
After we had sprung back to the apartment at the OSP building,
Raimbaut thought, •Why isn't it that easy for me?•

•Because I don't care if it's never anything more than din-ner. Though I
have to admit, if you get somewhere further than dinner, companhon, I truly
will have nothing to com-plain about. M'es vis, que bella! Anc non vis
bellazor!•
•It's a good thing that I would feel so ridiculous if I be-came jealous, •
he thought back at me. We stepped through the springer back into the
apartment.
We had four hours to kill, and I suggested a nap. For once, he agreed,
perhaps because I told him that it always sharp-ened my conversational
facility; he had an acute interest in having me be able to do the talking. I
stretched out on the bed, fully dressed, thinking of everything and nothing,
and as Raimbaut reached into my memories, I fell into dreams, again.
***
Normally no jovent pays any attention to any news of any kind; the
Quartier des Jovents is a very self-contained place, and since politics,
business, scholarship, and every-thing except the arts, gossip, and dueling,
are infra dig to any real jovent, even if young people did follow the news,
they went out of their way to conceal that from everyone else, es-pecially
from their companho.
All the same, the news of a remarkable innovation from Earth caught
everyone's imagination during the stanyear I was sixteen. Supposedly this
miracle machine, the springer, could—at enormous cost—bridge the
distances between the stars instantaneously, once there was a springer at
each end of the journey. Within a few hours of the beginning of the debate
about the subject, news media had constructed some small demonstration
springers, and were using them to show people what the device did. Several
volunteers were sprung large distances around the planet.
An interstellar-capable springer, however, would be a much more
expensive proposition—the power require-ments alone would mean
growing two more VNPs in orbit around our world. That was a lot; twelve
VNPs supplied the whole planet's power requirement. Besides, who knew
what we might be letting ourselves in for? Our culture, to us, was very
nearly perfect, the most satisfactory arrangement yet worked out of
individual liberty within an appealing es-thetic tradition, the one place in the
universe where beauty, utility, and freedom were not pitted against each

other. The injection of so many strangers, it seemed to many of us, could
only disrupt, and never improve, our harmony.
But curiousity would have its way. The Royal Post Office built a
light-aperture springer so as to be able to send and re-ceive messages
instantly from anywhere in human space; news flooded in from everywhere,
and the number of things people wanted to see and hear for themselves
skyrocketed. In no time at all, it seemed, everyone was simultaneously
saying that the springer would bring deplorable changes and that nonetheless
we had to do it.
Along with thousands of other jovents, therefore, I was in the broad
front courtyard of the Royal Palace on the day that we opened the first
interstellar human-rated springer, and the first party of dignitaries from
Earth stepped through.
It looked like a funeral party partially formed of prisoners in uniform.
All of them, men and women, wore their hair severely short, no more than
collar length at most. The group in the center, which was entirely
unattractive middle-aged women who wore no cosmetics and didn't seem to
be doing anything to work with their few assets, was all wearing the
suit-biz, a desperately outmoded style that involves a squar-ish jacket,
knee-length skirt, shapeless white shirt, and clunky black pumps. The only
way they could have looked worse would have been to dress like the men
surrounding them—who wore heavy black high-collared tunics with
matching black pants and billed caps, and calf-high boots with what were
obviously functional soles. They looked like they were about to be sent out
to clear brush or clean floors as part of a punishment detail.
Our king—it was Cercallon VII, a handsome man if ever there was
one—strode forward, his big red and purple tapi, floor length, swaying.
behind him. He was flanked by five ministers in their stoles and robes, and
then a bodyguard of young men in full, billowing body shirts, hose, and high
boots, with magnificent plumed caps.
The party that had just come through seemed to retch, very slightly—not
a surprise, because we had all been told about springer sickness. They
recovered themselves well enough and came forward to meet our party.
I watched them closely, these strangely bland beings in nearly identical
clothing, and I saw them exchange glances-and winks. I cannot describe my
horror when I re-alized that they were looking at our highest officials in
their finest clothing, and the Earth delegation was barely able to avoid

laughing.
***
It was about halfway through getting myself attired in what could be
described as a moderated outfit—I didn't want to look like a freak show but
I definitely wanted to be noticed, if I had correctly understood what Laprada
had said. I had selected clothing, shaved, bathed, scraped a callus or two that
I didn't like the look of, checked the manicure, and in all made myself as
presentable as I could, with Raimbaut making curiously supportive
comments, considering that I could tell he was uncomfortably aware how
much my body was losing that duel atz fis prim with time, fought by every
middle-aged man in shape.
The com pinged, and Laprada said, "Giraut? Raimbaut? Which one of
you am I talking to?"
"Whichever you like, we both hear you," I said.
"Well, I hate to trouble you, and I know how inconvenient something
like this is when you're getting ready to go out, but Shan asked if we could
come about half an hour early to the place where we're having dinner, the
Assemblejam Café, and asked me to pass the request along to you. There's a
piece of news he wants to give us personally—he said it will be going
public within hours—"
"Not something else the OSP has been caught at!"
"He didn't say. But he asked that we arrive half an hour early, and
promised to buy us a drink before he left us alone."
"Well that's at least minimally gens of him." I looked at the time. All that
would be lost would be certain leisureli-ness about finishing my toilet.
"Well. That would be fine, I suppose. Half an hour before?"
"Right."
"See you there then."
"Atzdeu, te salut," she said.
Raimbaut clutched inside; I said "Very nice!"
"It's the only Occitan I know."
I said, "It's a start. We'll coach you," to her, and thought •Down! Boy!• to
him. She clicked off, and I checked myself in the mirror. Let's see, I was
supposed to be impressive but not startling: navy mid-thigh-length tunic
with deep red velvet dagger sleeves, a broad black leather girdle carved with

the rose-and-lion design that had been in my family for cen-turies, lavender
crushed cap with long feather (I never could abide the liripipe), black
stockings, and deep mauve knee-length boots, in a soft suede, with a flat
heel. I decided to add a tapi—something with a red lining to match the
sleeves, darker outer layer to take down the whole effect, maybe some
slashing, not too clingy, hem about mid-thigh to help cover my middle-aged
buttocks. Not for the first time, I cursed the Occitan tradition of wearing
your age; cosmetic viri and nanosurgery were strictly for girls, girly boys,
and tostemz-toszeti. It took half a minute to make up my mind and order the
tapi; it should pop out of the springer slot in five minutes or so.
Raimbaut was following all this eagerly. A young Occitan male deprived
of fashion information, especially for twelve stanyears, is in real
desperation. •This looks like—•
•What we were all wearing at the time you died,• I thought, or he
did—now and then, it was getting hard to tell. •That's because we aren't
going to this thing as real Oc-citans, who now dress almost completely
along the lines of the Interstellar Metaculture. And we aren't going as
repre-sentatives of Nou Occitan. What we're going as is what these people
imagine Occitans to be. And I'm afraid those songs of mine—and Biens's
paintings, and the very romantic novels of Cercamon Raimon, and the
holopresentations of Eleanor St. Alamanda—have made Nou Occitan a
place that is known throughout the Thousand Cultures for what it was like
just after the springer reached us. We've become a liter-ary location like
what the West was in Old American flat film or Titan in the Lunar Post
Refugee literature. If we don't dress like this, people will be disappointed,
the same way they would if a Texaustralian didn't wear those silly hats, or a
Novus Romanus didn't wear a toga.•
•Fifty billion people, all prisoners of the artists,• Raim-baut thought.
•It beats being prisoners of lawyers, priests, soldiers, or bankers, which
are the other historic choices,• I pointed out. The springer slot pinged. I went
to it, shook out our new tapi, and put it on. I looked remarkably good to
me, anyway, and Raimbaut was too nervous about dinner with Laprada to
have much of an opinion.
I took one last glance around the apartment, and then one last good long
look in the mirror, to make sure I hadn't for-gotten anything important.
Seven minutes till we were due.
Although practically everything on Earth is unattractively functional,

designed simply to deliver goods to people who want to ignore all the
people around them, at least that same love of convenience puts springers in
every possible place, so you don't have to look at any of that functional
ug-liness on your way from one ugly place to another. I sprang directly to
the Assemblejam Café; the springer opened into the same foyer as the front
door. The customers looked up, saw the Occitan costume, stared at me for
half a breath, and went back to to their food or conversations. A few pulled
out computer terminals from their pockets, unfolded them like
handkerchiefs, and made a quick entry.
I knew that my arrival on Earth was being followed by many of the
celeb-watchers, so no doubt a few of them would make a note in their
personal records, but diplomats and musicians aren't especially collectible,
not compared to athletes and actors, so probably no one would come over to
bother us.
Laprada waved from a table against the wall, about half-way to the back.
Her hair was up in an elaborate system of coiled braids, probably enhanced
with autogenic falls—she hadn't had that much hair a few hours before.
Some damned Occitan tradition of wearing one's own age had kept me
from ever having hair grown for trans-plants, or a good positive grip toupee
made, but I was al-most as conspicuous in the room for my baldness as I
was for the boots and tights. At least streaks of gray were cur-rently
fashionable, though not in the way I was naturally graying.
As I approached Laprada I saw that her dress was cut in the
then-fashionable long-to-the-right style, at the middle of her right calf and
above the middle of her left thigh. It was a swirl of intelligent panels—an
effect I'd not seen much be-fore, but all the rage that year and for a decade
after in the Inner Sphere. Four or five, or perhaps six, of the silky,
irides-cent panels crept back and forth, slithering to cover gaps the instant
before they could open, lifting to expose teasing bits of skin, carefully
trading places so that nothing was shown but everything was risked. I
couldn't tell exactly where one began and another left off—they traded
patterns so easily and quickly, and so neatly morphed one pattern into
another.
"What an extraordinary dress," I blurted.
Laprada smiled. "I have to stay damp, if anyone's going to pay attention
to anything I do."
"Damp means—"

"I've been in the current and you can tell, roughly. Right now all the
metaphors for what's fashionable connect, somehow or other, to the current,
but understatement is more fashionable than overstatement. So someone
who is 'wet' is too trendy, and what you try to be is 'damp.' And if nobody
needs to know me anymore, I'm 'drying out.' See? Actually I first got soaked
as a musician but that couldn't last. I'm only an average classical
guitarist—but so few Earth people learn a musical instrument anymore, I
was put on the bill as a curiosity, with people from the outer worlds who
re-ally could play. I don't have much artistic talent, despite all the praise that
gets heaped on everything I do. So I have to stay damp with my clothes, or
my conversation."
"If the conversation is the equal of the clothes," I said, "I shall be too
fascinated to speak for the rest of the night."
She beamed at me, and gestured to where the chair was creeping out to
let me in, a disconcerting feature that most public eating places on Earth
seemed to feel was necessary; why a world that was once nearly seized by
aintellects doesn't limit their role to the necessary—in fact revels in putting
them everywhere and having them do everything-—is a complete mystery to
me. It's another thing that makes me shudder every time I have to go there.
We had been chatting idly for just a minute or two when Shan arrived,
wearing a plain diplomatic uniform without insignia. He sat down and, with
no ceremony, launched into it. "We've recovered, from a cometary orbit
around Sirius, the first alien ship with remains."
I took a moment to realize that "remains" meant "alien corpses." The
alien culture that had preceded us by about 20,000 stanyears in this part of
space had left a surprising number of ruins, spacecraft in long orbits, and
other evi-dence of its passing, but in the dozen stanyears since the
dis-coveries had begun, no one had ever found a dead alien.
"What did they look like?" Laprada asked.
"The remains are fragmentary," Shan said. "But at least the main
hypotheses, based on their tools and machines, are confirmed. They're
bipedal and DNA-based, with some kind of a circulation system and
something that looks like a brain in a case on the top of their bodies, so
they're not far from us—vertebrates who walk upright, not bugs or mollusks
or trees. Something hit their ship so hard that we only found about half of
it—it's very possible that, since its orbit was so long (a period of 28,000
years), it's an inbound starship that ran into debris, and fell into a cometary

orbit, and it was making its first close pass at Sirius since the accident."
"Do the entertainment and news media already know?" Laprada asked.
"Yes. The alien derelict off Sirius was found by a deep ex-ploratory ship,
with a paid experiencer on board."
"I don't see why this is urgent," Raimbaut said, speaking aloud. •Does he
always drop by with trivia?•
•Listen to him. He's usually right.•
Shan shrugged. "If you talk with some Earth people about the news
story, I suspect you'll develop a better feel for what it is like here. And in a
sense, as Giraut has probably told you, everything to do with the aliens is
central to the OSP's mission; partly our job is to prepare the human race to
meet whatever is out there."
It was a strange little prank on me that the OSP's mis-sion—urgent and
important as it was—was also leading to the destruction of much that I
cherished about the Thou-sand Cultures. I could feel Raimbaut tapping into
that di-chotomy in my feelings, and I knew my face was going slack in front
of Shan and Laprada.
Humanity had to be ready for alien contact—so isolated cultures and
excessively weird cultures were now intolera-ble. One night, long before,
over red wine, in a place not un-like this, Shan had talked about the way that
some of the old empires had operated, back when humanity was confined to
Earth, and much of Earth itself was unknown. Often an in-vading empire
forced their way into technologically inferior civilizations, identified some
small group that had been mar-ginal or losing out (religious dissidents, un
assimilable eth-nics, plain old bandits), and promoted them to deputy rulers.
He'd asked, rhetorically, "You don't want to suddenly discover that we're a
satrapy of the alien empire, and that all local rules and regulations will be
made in Deseret, or Cale-dony, or Bremen Beyond the Sky, do you?"
Then, I'd thought I knew the answer. Now I wasn't so sure that being
ruled by any of the more eccentric of the Thousand Cultures was any worse
than being ruled by Earth.
Shan made small talk for a few minutes after that, obvi-ously itching to
be off to whomever he would be telling next. When he had gone, Laprada
said, "Well, I hope you won't be disappointed, Raimbaut, when you see that
he's right."
"About—?"
"About the way in which Earth will take the news. I'm afraid it's going to

reveal a great deal to you. Especially if you remember that these are the
most broadminded, thoughtful people you're apt to encounter here." She
sighed. "Probably not one person tonight will mention the alien remains
story—though if anyone does, it will be no more than a five minute topic of
conversation. Even Shan doesn't always grasp how much Earth is turned
inward on itself There are people who live their entire lives in elaborate
virtual reali-ties of Sherlock Holmes's London or Opal Bingstraw's
Tran-quility City, who nearly forget that they're in a simulation at all. Of
course the people we're going to meet tonight are somewhat different.
Instead of living in a simulation, the Divers live their whole lives in two
cafes and a park."
I thought of how the Tamils of New Tanjavur—people I had been
working among not fifty stan days ago, people now probably extinct—had
lived such lives so very beautifully, and said, "But surely some people do it
more gracefully than others."
"One of the great privileges of life on Earth is that no one will ever
notice how you do anything—well or badly—and usually they won't even
notice if you do it," she said, looking down at her plate. "My father is an
actor, I know Dji men-tioned that. I became the representative of Second
Eden-—for which I have no qualifications whatsoever—because he turned
down the job. He wanted to continue to pursue his acting. But you know,
he's never been in a professional play, or a flatscreen film, holo, simulation,
or professionally-pro-duced experience. Nothing, nothing, nothing.
"He takes acting classes over and over, and goes to audi-tions. That's
completely thirty years of his life, now. No, it's hard to grasp, but I think
you'll realize it tonight. Half of hu-manity is here in the Sol system, but
we're all in our individ-ual boxes. There are plenty of us, but not one that
matters. If we don't matter, we don't let anything else matter. Espe-cially not
a pile of body parts in an orbit around Sirius."
Raimbaut spoke up; mentally I cheered for him. "Is that because Earth is
roughly at the center of human space, and people here think that anything
'out there' is going to hap-pen in the outer shells, somehow, and not come
down here?"
Laprada frowned. "I wish that were the case, but probably not. People
here understand subtension of angle about as well as they do anywhere. The
whole volume controlled by anyone human-inhabited planet around any of
the stars out there isn't big enough to be a disk to the naked eye. The news is

always reminding people that all the human-patrolled space there is doesn't
take up a ten-millionth of the night sky. The most popular analogy among
media types is that it's like Earth is in the middle of a field ten kilometers on
a side and all our 'fencing' together is thirty-two pieces of vertical wire, less
than a hundredth of a millimeter wide each. But I don't think that analogy
scores much with the public as a whole. Most of them have never walked a
kilo-meter all at once, and hardly anyone on Earth has ever seen a sky full of
stars, unless they've taken the tour of the farside observatory on the moon."
She sighed and sipped her wine, then gestured at the entree, a pale sauce
poured over noo-dles. "So how do you like this stuff? Most offworlders tell
me it's bland."
Raimbaut waited an instant, and I thought at him •You talk, companhon,
I'm your passenger here,• so he said, "Well, it's not anything very special.
But the company is the best I've had, and I didn't come here for the food."
Her attention focused inside herself for a moment—I could see that in
her eyes—and then she smiled, almost shyly, with obvious pleasure. Perhaps
he wouldn't need as much coaching as I'd feared.

3
The dinner was consistent. Every course was both unexcep-tionable and
unexceptional. I concentrated on the taste be-cause I felt like I was
eavesdropping on Raimbaut and Laprada. Aside from being visually
striking, she was warm, and funny, and intelligent, and had that important
gift for the question that kept him talking long enough for her to get to
know him. After a while the thunder of blood in my ears and the wail of
impossible desire died down to back-ground noise. Raimbaut was growing
calmer, forgetting to be self-conscious, settling in to enjoying himself. Of
course he was missing most of the experience of a very ordinary baked
tomato with gorgonzola.
According to Laprada, the invitation was for two hours from now, and
to be less than an hour late would be the surest way to prove that you were
absolutely no one. Raim-baut was about to ask why we'd met so early, then,
but I gave him a quick •Don't ask-trust me,• and he shut up be-fore opening
his mouth, with an equally brief •Thanks.•
"Now, what we're going to see next is what the Assemble-jam Cafe is
famous for," Laprada said. "It's one of the most important arts venues here
in Nuevo Buenos Aires, the only place where every school and movement
comes out to see what's showing."
We had stepped straight from windowless apartment to windowless
foyer; I'd had no idea that we were in Nuevo Buenos Aires. With the
springer, there wasn't much reason for any given place to tie itself to local
time, and most of the planet seemed to run on universal time, without
windows or outside doors. ''Arts venue?" Raimbaut asked. "Which arts do
they do here?"
"Oh, all of them. That's what Assemblejam is all about. It could be the
name of the cafe, the name of the movement, the name of the art, maybe
only a name. That's what's made it such a vital part of the current, and why
even after being open for a year and a half, this place is still damp, bordering
on almost being too wet." She glanced around the room. ''At least half the
people that will be at the party are dining here now, which means that the big

topic at the party will be tonight's performance at the Assemblejam Cafe,
which means I drifted right into the current. That's good, if we're going to
make our position wet."
"So I should watch carefully and be prepared to have an opinion?"
Raimbaut asked. To me, he thought, •I guess we'll know what Assemblejam
means once we see some Assem-blejam.•
"You're going to find this completely intriguing," Laprada said. The way
she emphasized "completely" sounded as if she were running her tongue
around it; I couldn't help wonder-ing what it would be like to kiss her, and
then realized a mo-ment later that that was Raimbaut's thought.
Somehow or other, the topics switched to their child-hoods, to not being
understood by their parents, to the diffi-culty of finding true friends, and to
the startling experience of being able to be emotionally moved by a work of
art that not very many other people knew about, all within a few minutes. I
reminded myself that they were both about twenty-two stanyears old, and
that I was being a jaded old poop. Raimbaut thought, •Don't be envious.•
I hate, I truly hate, not being able to deny an emotion that I'm feeling.
Definitely, it was going to be a long couple of stanyears.
"Is there a term for what we're about to see?" Raimbaut asked.
"Just Assemblejam. I told you." She sounded impatient.
"That was my question," I said. "What Raimbaut meant was, do we call it
a performance, a jeu, a luso, a vuau, a far-rago, a hullabaloo . . . ?"
"I like hullabaloo," she said, smiling, "and someday I'd like to see one,
but tonight you're going to see Assemblejam. It is what it is."
"Thanks," I said.
"So they taught you to fight duels and encouraged you to?" she asked,
in a complete non sequitur.
Raimbaut nodded. "It was part of who we were. What I can't believe is
that you had all that training in acting and dancing but you never—"
I let it fade to background noise; Raimbaut was doing very well,
although ninety percent of the credit for that undoubt-edly went to Laprada.
I was realizing that that was an age I wouldn't be again for anything . . . and
simultaneously real-izing that if anything happened to me, I would have to
be that age again, physically at least. It was enough to make me think about
being careful.
I wondered what it was like to go through puberty all over again; our
companhon. Rufeu was going to experience it in a few stanyears, but I

suspected it was one of those things that no one can tell you.
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Raimbaut and Laprada agreed that though they had only known
each other a short while, they understood each other better than anyone else
ever had, and I was beginning to think about how long it would be before I
could have a drink. If you've ever been the third person present with a
couple, you know the feeling. Now try to imagine not being able to go to
the restroom to give them a chance to talk pri-vately.
When the space had been cleared, a small stage rose from the floor at
one end of the room, and the Assemblejam be-gan. There was a master of
ceremonies of sorts, but for the first act, all she did was walk out onto the
stage, looking ter-ribly bored, and shrug. "Uh, here's the first act." She
wan-dered off the stage as if she had found herself there by accident.
A slim young man, attractive in a not-very-noticeable sort of way,
walked onto the stage nude, and began to put on a costume, as Lunar fusion
jazz played in the background. When he finished his dressing, we could all
see that he had dressed as the long-lost Mona Lisa. He held up a gilt frame
around himself, and smiled. He sang along with the jazz number, for a few
measures. Then he broke the frame in half, tore off the costume, and walked
offstage.
The master of ceremonies came out again, and looked around as if to see
if there were any audience left. Then she said, "Uh. That one is over. Now
there's going to be another one. It will be different from the one before."
A morbidly obese young man in a diaper came onto the stage. Clutching
his crotch the whole time, he spoke in a screeching falsetto, and delivered
what I had always thought of as one of the most moving passages in
literature, some-thing known and taught throughout all of human
space-—the short chapter that begins the third part of No One Home A
Thousand Kilometers Later, when Mrs. Chovauz finds her son dead on the
surface, mummified, a small child's body in a space suit, thirty years after he
disappeared. About halfway through it, four young women, all with
freakishly big breasts, came onto the stage, set up a crude stake, and tied the
young man to it, as he continued to shriek his way through Park's
masterpiece. As he wound down into the famous, often quoted part about
everything being nothing more than lost pieces of everything else, and as
Mrs. Chovauz lifted up the body to carry it back to the airlock, the girls

began to paint the now-tied-up fat man blue with a wet, sloppy mixture that
also, very unfortunately, rendered his diaper translucent. Then they smeared
the blue paint on their breasts and lined up at the front of the stage. As the
young man wailed the last, painful sentence of the scene so loud and high as
to make it all but unintelligible, the four women began to jump up and
down, their big breasts slap-ping around and spraying drops of blue paint. In
unison, they shouted "Oo-oo, oo - oo," over and over.
After a minute or so of that, they stopped and bowed; the fat man lifted
the stake from its hole without bothering to untie himself, and bowed with
it still tied on.
I was offended and annoyed. The room went up in thun-derous applause.
All the patrons, including Laprada, leapt to their feet, cheering and clapping,
as if that had been ab-solutely wonderful. The group on stage bowed again
and ex-ited; robots came out to clean up the blue paint.
While that went on, Laprada tried to explain to me what the piece before
was being admired for. "It had all the ele-ments of the wet but it never fell in
so deep that it got soaked. He ran such a big risk and came out exactly as
damp as he should be. Everything in that was an idea or image that almost
everyone is just about but not quite tired of, Gumba ran a huge, completely
huge risk with that piece, and he suc-ceeded brilliantly, going right to the
edge without falling in. Sometimes I think that man, all by himself, defines
the cur-rent, completely. But see for yourself You'll meet him at the party."
The master of ceremonies came out to announce that there would be
another act; this time she looked very put-upon, as if she were being forced
to do the job.
I couldn't say that I blamed her, once I saw what the act was.
A thin young man with very dark skin came onto the stage in a diaper. I
began to wonder what Earth's obsession with diapers was. Not that I had not
seen such things in art before. In some cultures, it expressed an
unwillingness to be grown up and a demand to be taken care of; in some, a
mis-focused anger against the pure physical necessities of living; in still
others, a desire to shock the mature world by reject-ing it.
Then again, sometimes it was merely a way to make peo-ple feel ill.
The man began to shout nonsense words, occasionally accidentally
hitting some pitch or other. "Shooby Doo Wa!"
•Oh, no,• I thought to Raimbaut.
•What?•

•Well, what he's doing is one of those ancient things that people bring
back all the time, which is known as "scat singing," and since the diaper is
usually the mark of an artist who is trying to shock you—•
•He's not going to—•
He was. He turned around and pulled down the diaper, revealing a very
ordinary ass covered with what looked like shit and was probably peanut
butter, chocolate, or some such. (I was blessed to be too far from the stage
to be able to smell anything.) Then he grabbed a handful and ate it.
I was hoping this wouldn't win any applause, and I was right. "Obvious!
Obvious! Obvious!" a thin young man with a bad complexion screamed
from the next table. The woman with him looked embarrassed, but soon
others took up the cry, and I joined in with a will.
"Go away! We're bored! It's all too obvious!" the young man shouted.
The man on the stage stood up. At first I thought he might rush the
heckler at the next table, and was mentally preparing to rush to the heckler's
aid—his opinion was the first esthetic idea I'd heard expressed all night. But
the man on stage contented himself with a single rude gesture, fol-lowed by
stalking offstage in an apparent fury. The master of ceremonies came out
and announced intermission with more excitement than I'd seen from her all
night.
"We'll stick around for the intermission," Laprada said, "because that's
when you hear all those good spontaneous remarks that people are going to
repeat at the party. Then most of these people are going to be offended by
the second act in the second set, and get up and leave, so we'll get up and
leave with them."
"How do they know they'll be offended? Did they see a preview?"
Raimbaut asked. He was more confused than I, and had the further
disadvantage of not wanting to mess things up with Laprada, so he felt very
awkward asking any questions at all. •That's right, companhon, valois,
tostemz val-ors!• I thought.
•Bewilderment, simple bewilderment,• he thought back. She looked as
puzzled as he felt. "No, of course not. Each act is supposed to be a surprise.
But when intermission ends, the public conversation is over, here at the
cafe, so then peo-ple will be offended, so that they can leave and go to the
parties. Some people will very vocally stay, too, the ones go-ing to the
late-night parties. Getting offended just has to do with when your party is.
It's completely simple."

Raimbaut was in agony; he didn't want to quarrel with someone he was
getting on so well with, but his Occitan soul was offended to the core. I
could have told him that this attitude was not uncommon in the Inner
Sphere, but I thought it best not to distract him while he worked out his
particular solution to the most difficult of all problems in fi-namor—how
to tell the woman that you're infatuated with that her ideas are rank
nonsense. "But isn't that too simple? People being offended solely to make a
schedule? Couldn't we save being offended for something that genuinely
upsets us? There wasn't much that offended me in the first three, and I doubt
there will be in the second. Why do we have to be offended?"
"But then no one would ever escape from a public per-formance."
"Well, why couldn't we just slip out at the end of inter-mission and go to
the party?"
"Because that would be saying that the art, and the artists, don't matter as
much as our social lives. It would be terribly offensive to say that."
Raimbaut sighed, at me, internally. •Is talking to them al-ways like this?•
•Earth people yes, women sometimes, women you're in love with,
usually it's worse.•
He said, "Remember I'm a social idiot in your culture."
She nodded, very seriously. "Careful about that, to start off with."
"Er—" I felt his confusion as a tiny hitch in his breathing.
"About what?"
"Don't call Earth a culture. It's not. I mean I know what you mean, but
people don't think of it that way. A culture is a place like one of the
Thousand Cultures, and most Earth people would call it 'artificial,' or
'exotic,' or terms like that. Sort of like . . . " she thought for a moment " . . .
you know how some people think they don't have an accent, because they
don't realize that 'talking normal like the people back home' is an accent?
Same principle."
"All right," Raimbaut said. "Now, remembering I'm a so-cial idiot . . . all
right, I can see that we're supposed to pre-tend to be offended so that we
have to leave early so that we can make it to the party that we'd really like to
go to, be-cause to just say the party mattered more than the art would be . . .
um, ne gens. Gauche, uncouth . . . well, I guess I mean ne gens."
"That Occitan word had a vogue here about five years ago, and I know
what you mean," Laprada said. "Yes, that's it. Except that—well, you may

have to pretend. You can't take any psychoactive drugs while you're living in
Giraut's brain, can you?"
"No, I can't. It could damage his brain."
"Speaking as the landlord," I added, "I would object."
"Then you will have to pretend. But I'll do what nearly everyone else
does—I'll take the pill. One of the little yellow ones will make me very
easily annoyed for about ten min-utes. Enough time to build up a rage,
storm out, and spring back to my apartment to check my appearance before
springing to the party. I arrive at the party as the pill wears off, and I
remember the performance as completely tedious, or obnoxious, or ugly, or
something. Most people at the party will have had the same experience. It
gives us hours of things to talk about."
"I see."
"Especially because it's the Divers. It would be different if it were the
Floaters or the Facedowns, and even more differ-ent if it were Swimmers."
Raimbaut asked, "The Facedowns?"
"The group names this year are all about your relationship to the
current. Some people look at the current and want to plunge right across it
and go deep, some people want to stay on the surface and just go with it, and
some people are so passive about staying on the surface that they might as
well be face down."
"And Swimmers are the ones who try to cut across it?" I asked.
"That's right—Giraut, right?—that's right."
"And you're a Diver?" Raimbaut asked.
"At the moment."
"And what do you like about them—"
"Oh, I could like it all, any of it, really—it's all fun, you know? But I
happened to decide to like the Divers."
I tried to see if I could get any further. "Well, what was it about the
Divers that made you decide that they were the ones you would decide to
like?"
"First of all, their clothing is cut nicely for a slim, petite woman.
Secondly, they have a couple of members that I think might have real career
prospects."
"Did you agree with them about anything?" Raimbaut asked.
"Sure. I joined them and of course then I agreed with them." She looked
as if she might be losing patience.

•See if you can switch the subject. She likes to explain things. Try for
something we'll both understand.• I thought at him, frantically. Deu, I
couldn't remember any donzelha who had ever been this difficult. Raimbaut
swallowed hard and said, "Maybe I'd have a better picture of what it's all
about if you told me about the art we've been seeing here. Has it all been
Diver art, or is it a mixture . . . ?"
She smiled and held up a finger like a teacher who has caught a student
in a very clever, subtle error. "Assemblejam is apart from all of that.
Assemblejam is more a matter of . . . well, let me think how to put this. All
art is nothing but chopped up pieces of old art applied to other old art,
obviously. So since nobody wants to do the old art—I mean, there's no
audience for it at all, and the only people who would look at old art if you
made it would be people looking to slice it up for their own art—well, then.
If we're going to make art we have to keep old art alive without having
any-one stuck with the job of making more old art."
"But if you just now made it, how is it old?"
"Have you ever seen a pencil drawing of a head in profile?"
"Of course."
"Well, there's nothing new about it, is there? I mean, Leonardo or any
Renaissance artist could have done one, they did lots of them, didn't they?
So there's nothing new. It's the same idea one more time. So the moment it's
made, it's old, because it can't be new."
I was wondering which one of us was having the headache.
She said, "Here at Assemblejam, people take all these little pieces of art
from all over the human record and stick them together. It's not new but it
gives everyone access to the old, which they can then use in their own art.
So Assem-blejam is the principle that underlies all the groups—Divers,
Floaters, Swimmers, and all the derivatives and extreme groups.
Whoops!—next act coming up. It's the last one we're going to like, unless
this hits early and I decide to be offended by the end of it, and severely
disappointed, after liking the first part so much." She dropped the little
yellow pill into her hand and gulped it down; around the room, I could see
dozens of other people swallowing pills. •I wonder if there's a pill for
slavish admiration, and how much it would cost to have it mixed into the
food for my next concert,• I thought.
•Now that's unworthy.•
•Maybe so, but wait until you see what a bad crowd is like before you

judge me.•
The lights came up on a cluster of men in barely moveable steel chrome
copies of what must be the twentieth--century New Look. They were
wheeled onto the stage by other men who were naked. They sang for a
while—I think it was all old hymns of some kind. Then a machine gun
sound effect—very grainy, made deliberately to sound like an ancient
phonograph record—went off and they all sang it again in falsetto, very fast.
When they finished, there was thunderous applause.
"Too short," Laprada said. "The drugs haven't hit yet, not for anyone."
A small man walked onto the stage; he was dressed in a version of the
suit-biz with those things people used to wear on their faces, a thousand
years ago, before surgery and con-tact lenses—spectacles, that's what they
were called. He ahemed, opened a notebook, and began to read aloud.
I recognized it. "He's performing The Wasteland while pretending to be
T. S. Eliot," I whispered.
"Careful!" Laprada hissed. "It is not polite to check on the com while the
performance is going on."
"I just happened to know it," I said. "Eliot didn't write that many poems,
and the first part of The Wasteland is very rec-ognizable, and so is his
picture. What's the matter?"
"Everyone will know it's Eliot," she snapped at me, "but they will know
by the time they arrive at the party. That's why we all have to stop and check
the com before we go to the party. How else are we going to be
knowledgeable about it, and perform our knowledge for others?" She glared
at me; then her expression softened. "Look, try very hard not to bring up any
facts that you happen to remember. They'll be angry if you can show them
up. We didn't give you nearly enough preparation for all this. Raimbaut, do
you know all this trivia?"
"Not like Giraut does."
"Well, then, Giraut, if you could—"
"Stay under wraps unless someone wants to talk to me? Sure," I said, and
shut up. •I'm still here if you need me.•
•Gratz deu•
"I'm offended," she said, "into a rage. Completely. Into a rage. I hate
Eliot, I hate poets, I hate poetry, and I hate actors who pretend to be poets
while reading poetry." Onstage, the man had pulled on a duck mask, waving
his arms and shout-ing in a language I did not recognize. "We've got to go

now, all right, please?" Laprada added.
Raimbaut followed her toward the springer, and I was grateful again to
be a passenger. Before we stepped through the springer, she turned to
Raimbaut, and smiling very sweetly, said, "I hope I haven't really hurt your
feelings. It's just art, you know. A way to kill time, something for parties.
It's not like it's important."

4
There were seventeen women and twenty-one men at the party (I counted to
have something to do while Raimbaut circulated) and of the seventeen
women, fourteen were wearing the same hairstyle as Laprada. It didn't seem
to be a problem. All seventeen of them were wearing the same left--right
asymmetric, intelligent-panel dresses, in a very limited range of colors and
patterns.
Like any time since the first few couples went over to visit in the trendy
cave, see the new bison paintings, maybe hear the new drum, all of the
people were posing to show off their bodies or their clothes, holding drinks,
and pretending to enjoy it.
Many of the women in high heels were teetering on them as if they were
young girls trying them out for the first time. The men, in their asymmetric
jackets, weren't leaning or draping them right. No one moved like a dancer
or athlete or duelist; all were awkward in their bodies, like children playing
dress-up, unsure how to wear grownups' clothes.
At first I thought that whoever was running the music was taking a long
time running a sound check. After a while I realized that that was the
music—a random walk through motifs and hooks from the last thousand
years of recorded music. Cultures that like to do that are usually cultures
that like to hold dances to exhaustion, which can often be fun, but no one
was moving to the music here.
•Maybe they'll start later,• Raimbaut thought.
•I doubt that very much.•
•Me too. I was trying to be optimistic.•
I was paying little attention to the conversation, yet, trying to get the feel
of the party while Laprada dragged Raimbaut around and introduced him.
People shrieked as if they hadn't seen her in years, gave her little insincere
hugs, anc called her "Proddy." She always winced at that.
When Raimbaut thought •All right, I have to admit, I never have known

what to do at a party, but you, man viellh companhon, have been going to
these things for most of your working life, and are no doubt an expert at
them,• it sur-prised me; I'd thought he was doing fine, and thought that back
at him.
•I don't feel like I'm really meeting anyone or like this is a party,• he
replied.
•Ah, there's your only mistake. You're expecting a party to be fun.•
•Thanks, I think. Where would you go looking for some interesting
conversation?•
•That corner,• I thought, turning my head to indicate. •Three people
talking, no one who looks to be monopolizing the conversation, no one
standing in the poses that indicate "Member of audience waiting for a turn
on stage." Either they're talking about something that they all take seriously,
or they're socially comfortable enough to make small talk well. That's our
corner.•
Raimbaut sighed at me mentally—the poor toszet really was very shy and
reserved, and this wasn't coming easy for him—and we drifted over toward
the conversation.
They were happy to introduce themselves. Rebop was a young woman
who had set her intelligent panels in black and white patterns, strange blobby
swirls that looked more like inkblots than anything else. She wore her hair
very short, dyed in an asymmetric black-white pattern, and was one of the
three women not wearing the elaborate mass of coils that seemed to be de
rigeur. From the way she kept touching it, I think she was aware of this and
felt very out of fashion.
Ntaung was a tall thin man, twenty-five or so, skin shaded slightly more
Caucasian than the others, with a beaky nose and bad acne. He seemed
nervous but also the most eager of the group to talk rather than to be seen
with Raimbaut.
Both of them took some time to be persuaded that de-spite appearances,
our names were not French—"Gear Out and Rhyme Bout, honestly, it's not
a prank," Raimbaut said, "Old Occitan kept classical Latin pronunciation
longer than any other Romance language, that's all."
Gumba nodded and said, "Boys and girls, I think we'll have to take these
chaps' word for how their names are pro-nounced. Broadcast announcers
have been known to be wrong, now and then."
I was grateful to Gumba that he'd kept us from getting any further into

the pointless argument with Ntaung, who was the sort of intense, ne gens
young man—destined to be interesting but painfully aware that he isn't
yet—who will argue anything into the ground, especially with anyone who
knows more about it than he does. Gumba was perhaps thirty, older than
either of the other two, and it dawned on me, after we'd chatted for a while,
that he was the fat man whose performance had gotten the most applause; I
hadn't recognized him without the diaper, the blue paint, or the busty girls.
He sat on the table with his legs crossed in a full lotus, sitting on the long
tail with the short tail flopped over his lap, making his tailored jacket fit
worse than most beach towels.
He accepted my congratulations, but immediately said, "But we do know
that all audiences are made up of idiots. Some are just nicer idiots than
others. The point I was making was so trivial that they failed to notice it, and
since this year the absence of a point is very in the current, they ap-plauded
without noticing that I was doing what I wasn't supposed to."
Raimbaut said, "I hate to admit this, but as an offworlder, I don't think I
caught the point. So what was it, if you don't mind?"
Gumba shrugged and pushed his black hair back up his forehead. "Four
possible ones, at least. I might have been say-ing that the book is overrated
and everyone exclaims over it without having read it, or that people should
read it and don't because they're too busy admiring it, or that we all were
rewarded as children for parroting back perceptions that only an adult could
have. Or maybe I was saying that watching pretty women cover themselves
with liquids and shake their tits is more fun than reading. As I said, it's all
trivial."
"I think I can see all that," Raimbaut admitted.
"Just don't admit it where others can hear you," Ntaung said. "Perception
is mocked around here; that's also very in the current."
"Pretension and excessive seriousness also are mocked," Rebop said,
looking off into space. "I wonder if Proddy is go-ing to keep her 'up' act
going all night. When we were at school she could do it for days on end, but
lately she hasn't made it through a whole evening."
I thought, urgently, •No rising to her defense! They don't understand that
here.•
•And I don't understand them either. Tomorrow morn-ing, you must
remind me again what would be so bad about humanity's cutting off contact
with Earth.•

Gumba said, "We were talking about Klienir. He's a friend who's gone
solipsist. I wish we'd been able to get him here. One can't help being
embarassed, having a friend decide he prefers the box to you, eh? We knew
Klienir many years and saw no trace of the tendency. He used to be a very
reason-able person to talk to, and now he's so far into it that he won't speak
to us. Instead he's called the government's om-budsline and asked them to
have the writers work up a set of friends he likes better."
Around a quarter of Earth's adult population had "gone
solipsist"—meaning that they'd come to believe that noth-ing outside their
apartments was real, that everything was generated by the aintellects to keep
them pacified, and that the only difference between what you saw through
the en-tertainment hookup when your brain was plugged in, and the world
you saw when you took off your hookup and went out the door, was that the
latter was a "base" or "default" pro-gram that wasn't supposed to be very
interesting.
Ntaung added, ''And you know how no one ever comes back from being
a solipsist? That's the worst."
Rebop nodded emphatically. "Most of us here in the crowd spend all our
lives doing ridiculous things, but at least we change which ridiculous things
we do from time to time. It helps to keep our friends amused."
"Just as they do for us," Ntaung added. He moved a hands-breadth closer
to her, and she didn't move away but didn't look at him either; I had a sense
that he thought they were a couple and she disagreed, but not strongly.
"It's mutual support, really," Gumba said; "Being a little eccentric makes
your friends wonder what you will do next, which keeps them from going
into the box. And if they're a little eccentric, that means you're still in touch
with them, and they keep you from going into the box. So we all feel lost
whenever someone falls over to the other side—and when someone who
used to be as lively and engaged and brave as Klienir justifies it by going
solipsist—bah. To hell with him. I won't speak his name again. If I don't
really exist for him, then he doesn't really exist for me either, right back at
him."
"I'm sorry to hear about it, all the same," I said, "and I imagine you will
all miss him terribly."
"That's right—uh, which one are you?" Ntaung asked. Rebop smiled
tensely, as if he'd embarrassed her, so I made a point of praising him.
"You're doing well to be able to tell us apart at all. I'm Giraut. I'm the one

whose body this is, which is why I'm staying quiet at this party—too much
of an old man to be able to follow things. But I was very curious about it."
"And he's nice enough not to annoy me by tugging my mental sleeve and
whispering 'Ask him this,' " Raimbaut added.
Rebop nodded, as if the whole situation were profound. "All right, I
think I'm learning to tell the difference between you."
Gumba said, ''And returning to topic—before, I hope, we veer off
wildly—in the last few years they've come out with a sleepwalking program
that causes your body to take care of eating and defecation and cleaning,
while you're asleep—-so you never have to experience coming out into the
real world any more at all. That's why this party is so small-ever since they
started being able to avoid emergence com-pletely, there have been more
people going into the box all the time. It's my opinion that that's also why
you see sillier and sillier public opinion surveys in the news—the tenth of
the population that wants Briand erased from the record so that there was
never any such place, and another tenth that wants the story revised to end
happily. There are already commercial versions out there in which that
happens—you star in one of them, Giraut."
"I what?"
"You step between Ix and the gun. He doesn't die, you do. Everyone
suddenly becomes best friens after he explains it all to them, over your
corpse."
"But that's preposterous! I was right there. He was killed with a military
maser—it blew a hole right through the building a hundred meters behind
him. If I'd been in the path of it, we'd both have been killed—and besides, I
was nowhere near where I would have needed to be to get into the path!" I
was startled at how upset I was.
"For most of us here on Earth, reality doesn't have to be real, and it
usually isn't," Ntaung pointed out, reasonably enough. "Since the audience
makes no decisions that affect you or Briand or anything else, why not
believe whatever they like? Some of us can't do that; most have no
problem."
I didn't answer, carried under by a sudden wave of lonely misery.
•Are you all right?• Raimbaut thought at me, after a moment.
•No,• I admitted. In the chaos of my collapsing mar-riage—my
collapsing life—I hadn't had much time to grieve for Ix. Perhaps he'd been
the only saint or sage I'd ever known, perhaps merely a very clever charlatan

who had lost patience with his own charlatanry, and been killed while
try-ing to escape from it. Now I was seized, painfully, with the thought that I
would have loved dearly to see him stroll qui-etly into this room and begin
to circulate—straightening out all these poseurs and fools, who were
nevertheless the best people that the mother planet had to offer.
"It's not that unusual," Rebop said. "Most of us go into the box now and
then when something upets us. After my last relationship ended, I went in
for abou six months, myself. These two fellows came and dragged ne out,
finally, but I have to admit it was lovely in there."
Gumba nodded vigorously. "I've done it too. Ntaung is our one real
puritan—he just takes drugs."
Ntaung shrugged. "I am not a puritan. I'm sad when a friend goes into the
box, but I don't judge them to be bad for it. I only avoid it myself because I
doubt my own ability to come back out."
"Poor Ntaung," Rebop said, in a tone that might be affec-tionate, or
sarcastic, or a pose to impress Gumba. "He's un-happy and he's afraid that if
he stopped he might not want to start again." She turned sideways, giving
him a view of her breast and hip. "It's such a difficult thing for him. Poor
Ntaung."
From the way he was flushing, I didn't think what she was doing could
be friendly. Gumba caught Raimbauts eye, and Raimbaut asked, "Did
anyone hear the news today? They found an alien ship that had some remains
in it." • First thing that popped into my head as a change of subject,• he
admitted.
•Into my head, companhon, Well, perhaps we'll learn some-thing.•
It seemed to take all three of them a long time—perhaps five or six
seconds—to decipher what he had said. When they did, they all looked as if
he had suddenly told them what he had for breakfast, or what his favorite
color was, like one of those horrible six-year-olds that sometimes accost
you at a family reunion.
After a long pause, Gumba said, "I suppose that's interest-ing, but I can't
see why. The aliens must have existed, be-cause, after all, there are artifacts.
Finding their bodies doesn't make them exist any more than they already
did."
Rebop nodded and smiled in approval at him.
Ntaung flushed. "I don't think I'd even heard that there had ever been any
alien artifacts found. So there's another intelligent species out there?"

"They've been dead for twenty million years, or twenty thousand. Twenty
something," Rebop said. "No reason why you would know."
Gumba shrugged. "Was there any reason you brought that up?"
"Oh, things differ, you know," Raimbaut said. "Some places people
would talk about that and speculate about it, I suppose as if it were a new
work of art or a new fashion or something. I don't know all the rules here
yet. Well, I sup-pose I'm supposed to circulate, so perhaps I'll do that."
As we walked away, he thought to me, •Did that happen because it's
Earth?•
•Could be. Or because they're people. We'd better look for another good
conversation.•
•And your method is to look for any conversational knot where people
aren't making speeches or giving lectures?•
•Anything that doesn't look like street theatre, is how I'd put it. If most
conversations were tennis matches, you'd see a row of people playing
against the wall, side by side. But we don't have to avoid the performances
entirely. Some people are good and it's worth catching their show—once.
Or, sometimes the person who would really be a good per-former is quiet,
while a person who is not holds the floor against all comers, and you can tip
the balance toward the more interesting person. And then too sometimes
you can acquire a reputation for being a marvelously nice person merely by
disrupting an unpleasant act. Just keep repeating, it's a game, it's a game, it's
a game. Like dueling in Occitan.·
•I got killed doing that.•
.Well, exactly. That's why you have to be careful when something's a
game.• I spotted a heavyset man gesturing with big, symmetrical gestures.
He had a big, bushy beard, combed into a fork, and wore his hair in a double
figure-eight on the back, fastened with a clasp. I couldn't see his face, but
five or six people, eyes approaching glaze, were gathered around while he
explained whatever it was he was explaining to them. •Let's see what we can
do over there.•
We joined the fringe of his crowd. He was mocking a per-formance he
had attended earlier, at a different franchise of the Assemblejam Cafe, if I
understood correctly. "Synesthe-sia Fourteen was the really painful one. A
complete, com-plete failure. There was far too much forethought evident
and not nearly enough forethought that was not evident. And that was a
singularly—I mean, singularly—unfortunate combination. I could always

tell that the whole effect was intended by the constant sneaky looking for an
effect, but at the same time the effects they were trying to sneak in seemed
very imposed on the consumer the way in which they took those effects for
granted. Violently elitist. Terror-ist, really." He dropped his wildly waving
arms to his sides, as if resigning himself to the uncomfortable truth he was
about to speak. "Now, when she picked up those four ancient tools and
talked about women who used to use them, and they were all old things you
only even hear about in stories-—broom, soldering iron, battle ax, and egg
beater—it seemed to me very much that she knew what she was going to say
before she said it, so she'd probably rehearsed it into rigidity. That's pure
vicious aggression. She hadn't even considered the possibility—so she had
not left herself any opening from which to respond to it—that the audience
might want to see something else, or might not find women interesting." He
punctuated that last sentence by pumping his arm up and down.
We Occitans seldom miss a chance for a quarrel. "There are very few of
us who don't find women interesting," I said, wading in. "I would think that
women would be interesting."
He glared at me, but deigned to speak "Yes, her performance was full of
expressions like 'I would think' All kinds of oppressive expressions."
"What's oppressive about 'I would think?' " Raimbaut asked.
"Don't tell me that an important visitor like yourself has immediately
fallen right into the shallowest possible part of the current."
"No one seems to be telling me what the current is, at the moment, and if
anyone would kindly summarize it for me I'd be grateful," I said. "But I
would still like to know what's offensive about a phrase like 'I would think.'
I in-tended it as courtesy—if there's something offensive, I'd like to know
what it is." I kept my voice even, level, and soft. In Noupeitau, it would be
the tone you would use if you were close to provocation for a duel but still
hoped to avoid it.
His tone, on the other hand, sounded as if he were a not--very-good
primary teacher, explaining things to one of the less-bright children. "It's this
way. Right now the current is running through being very neutral and it's
splashing around, playing with the whole objectivity, neutrality, po-liteness
thing, you know, Where you put it in the subjunc-tive so that you allow
disagreement without giving the lie. Some of the Facedowns are even
calling for a return to that Truth idea. So, as a Diver, I know that what there
is, is only other people's wills. If someone is powerful enough they will

make a thing they say objective, even in the very teeth of your subjectivity,
and they do that with their politeness and their I-would-thinks. We must
defend-ourselves against such terrorism."
It wasn't an unfamiliar idea, or a good one, so I played the standard reply.
"But if an idea describes a reality, then chang-ing the description can't
change the reality, because reality has no way of knowing that the
description changed," I said. "No information flow back to the objective
world. No magic, if you will."
" 'If you will.' This gets worse and worse. Soon you'll be hitting me with
'I would think, if you will.' We all know that all people think their own
thoughts are superior, so when you say 'I would think' you're saying 'the
superior thinker thinks this,' which is like saying I ought to change my
mind—which implies I'm wrong or a fool. It's a direct in-sult." His hands
chopped up and down in front of his chest, in unison—it looked to me like a
professorial gesture for this will be on the quiz. "The very act of arguing
and making up arguments must mean that you think some ideas are better
than others, and since the differences between people are mainly differences
in ideas, it's a way of saying that some people are better than others, which is
a way of asserting your superiority over me." He had walked forward to me,
standing close enough now for me to think of knocking him down. •It's a
pleasant thought• Raimbaut commented, •but I'd like to have an altemative•
"But the objections you are raising would then be a demonstration of
your superiority," I said. "So if this argu-ment is about superiority (and I
have not stipulated that!-—I'm just following your speculation) then are you
not doing exactly what you accuse me of doing?"
"Aha!" The man bellowed with pure glee of victory. "The infamous
reciprocity argument. Sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander and do
unto others as you would have others do unto you. But it completely denies
the individuality of everyone. It asserts alikeness among us all. Therefore it
pre-scribes a dreary, drab, lonesome sameness in which we are all treated as
objects and governed rather than self-governing. The catastrophic end to all
real conversation! I'm sorry that you don't wish to continue talking to me,
but since you don't, I guess we should stop here."
Raimbaut threw one in. "But if we should stop here, and if there's no
point to the conversation, then haven't you been complaining about being
insulted by nonsense?"
"You're arguing morality from the outcome, which is a common

philosophic—" His eyes widened. "Oh shit. Oh fuck. Oh filthy cunthole
bitch crot-covered-snatch." He turned and faced the wall, resting his
forehead against it, beating at it with his fist. His friends turned and
applauded me/Raimbaut as if we'd sung a fine song or won a duel.
•Do you know what this is about, Giraut?•
•Non sai, Raimbaut. Anc non vis aquel estranher•
When he turned back from his melodramatic wall-thumping, he stuck
out his hand, grinning as if he were pleased with me, and said, ''Absolutely
splendid." He turned to one of the group that I'd thought were his admirers
and said, "Logged and scored?"
"Oh, yes. Gill, you'll win more honor from being defeated by this fellow
than most of our Diver arguers ever achieve from an outright victory. You
might even have made your-self central to the Diver tendency. Magnificent
job."
"This was all some kind of contest!" Raimbaut exclaimed,
simultaneously with thinking it.
"Of course, what else?" Gill, the heavy, forkbearded man, said,
"I thought we were—I don't know, looking to produce mutual
understanding, getting to know each other's minds . . . I had no idea there
was a score or anything."
"Why else would anyone do it?" the woman asked. "My name is Loupa,
by the way. I'll be writing this up in You Weren't There. That's my column
on broad-access com that covers parties people missed. This one leaped
from very dull to very exciting. I do think it will probably earn Gill a
pro-motion. Probably several million boxed people will vote for that; there
was such feeling and such a deep clash." She seemed lost in thought for an
instant, then delightedly ex-claimed, "Deep! Oh, see, Gill? It's very Diver!"
It seemed to me more that it had been the kind of argu-ment one had at
about fifteen, among bookish friends. I said so.
"You forced me out of consistency," Gill explained. "Drove me right
away from the style of argument that the Divers have gone with this season.
Brilliant—total defeat. The off-worlder is a hit among the Divers, and
because so many things that become part of the current originate with the
Divers . . . well, I think you've had a very profound influ-ence. All I can say
is bravo, sir, bravo."
"I'm happy for any congratulations," I said, "but—uh . . . "
Raimbaut took over. "This is Raimbaut talking, Giraut just finished. The

thing is, we chose the idea not to win a contest or set a trend or achieve
something in front of you. We thought we were right. And we had no
intention of playing this game."
Gill, and everyone else, stared at me. Loupa said, "Com-pletely amazing.
Or at least you've completely amazed us. So, out in the Thousand
Cultures—or at least in the Outer Worlds—people still really believe
things? I'd heard that."
"Er, yes, people believe things." I was beginning to wonder if I would
ever communicate with Earth people. "Don't you?"
Gill smiled and shook his head. "That's utterly unknow-able, but I'm not
going to get into another argument with you this soon after losing the last
one. It won't do a thing for me, and at this point I'm interested in what
you—Raimbaut and Giraut, I mean—have to say. I think I've decided to
af-fect an interest, and I might decide to affect it for a long time." His crowd
turned and drifted away, some looking back and glancing wistfully, but
Loupa stuck by him.
"I still don't understand the rules here," Raimbaut said.
"There's not that much to understand," Gill said. "Loupa has a certain
prestige and besides she has a professional duty to cover this; the others
don't feel as if they have enough sta-tus or reason to stay in an important
conversation, especially not in a creative one where you can't predict at all
what will be said next. I think they ought to stay, but they're afraid of
looking like they want to rise above what they regard as their inferior
position. I, on the other hand, am interested in the conversation, so here I
am."
We talked for perhaps an hour, about his job. He taught an elementary
politics course, which was dull, and a litera-ture course that was not much
better, so as to have some challenge in his life. Other than that, all he did
was hang around with the Divers. We also talked about my career and
adventures, about jovent on Nou Occitan, about whether or not belief
mattered when you talked about ideas. It was a normal conversation,
literally, and water in the desert, metaphorically.
I decided to try an experiment. "Have you heard about them finding alien
remains?"
Gill looked puzzled, and then said, "Oh, bodies. No. Was there
something interesting about it?"
"They looked very much like us."

"Well, then, if they'd come by earlier than they did, we could have invited
them to parties. Pity we missed each other. So . . . you must know Shan
well. Do you think that old fox can still somehow save his political career?"
I probably could not have gotten him to talk for three minutes about the
aliens if both our lives depended on it. But on the other hand, Gill did care
about art, politics, things that were not in the box. If he wasn't perfect, he
was a big improvement on most of the rest of the Earth. By the end of it we
were planning to have lunch together, soon.
***
In the early morning hours, the party ran out of energy and
collapsed in the way that parties generally do. The wall- flowers went first
except for a few bitter optimists. The hangers-on had had enough of
whatever it was that they hung on for, and drifted after. As the party
dwindled and the available audiences became smaller and more focused, the
life-of-the-party types went. By then Laprada had been around the room a
few times, visiting all the clusters of peo-ple, gushing over how glad she
was to see them, bubbling about how exciting things were. She had
downplayed her unusual guests, upplayed all of her friends'
accomplish-ments—•working the room like a true professional phony,• as
Raimbaut thought at me, while she said more effusive good-byes.
•She's young and she's fashionable,• I thought, slightly more sharply than
I had intended. •Give the girl a break.•
•Whereas I'm still young and have never really learned to be
fashionable.•
•Compared to these people, you're a fashion genius. Did you notice how
they wear their clothes?•
•Yes, unfortunately. Just the same, my heart's never been in it. Not like
you and Marcabru.•
It might have been one of the three or four best approxi-mations to a
genuine party conversation that night, and it was all happening in my head
while I drank a big glass of cold water.
Laprada came up behind me and murmured, "Time to start our
fifteen-minute process of working our way out the door."
I looked and Ntaung was already gone. I had wanted to chat more with

him. He was socially maladroit, even ne gens, but he had some of the
passion that the rest lacked. Rebop probably believed herself too good for
him, yet would finally be his inferior, as artist, human being, or even dresser
or con-versationalist, once he got out of his own way. He had seemed like a
good person to try to recruit.
Gumba passed by, with Wennji, a quiet young woman, tall, thin, very
polite, who had attached herself to him later in the evening. They were going
to some after-hours spot for food and conversation. He seemed to conclude,
instantly, that Raimbaut and Laprada would want to talk without other
company (and would be stuck with me anyway). He suggested that we might
have a late night/early morning conversation some other time, and Wennji
added that she'd like that too. Then, having run out of polite noises to make
at each other, we shook hands and promised to talk more; he seemed to be
trying to sell me on the idea that a local cynic such as himself would be
invaluable to me in learning to cope with Earth. When you already detest a
place and its people, the last thing you need to do is talk to a local cynic, but
all the same, I would make sure to see him.
Raimbaut asked why, and I realized that it was now such second nature
that I no longer thought of the reason con-sciously. For an instant, I was
back in training at the big building in Manila, wondering what I had gotten
into, during the final week of training, which Shan had conducted him-self I
saw the twinkle in Shan's eye, the jaw tilted slightly upward, the sideways
smile that stabbed a dimple into one cheek. He raised a finger, looked us all
in the eyes, and said, "Never, never, never turn down a chance to talk to
anyone who wants to tell you things, unless it's a deliberate strategy to
extract more information later. There are no uninforma-tive informants. The
ignoramus's structure of ignorance will look very much like his culture's
structure of knowledge. The fool's folly will be a bad copy of her culture's
wisdom. The liar's lies will stretch into the shape of the truth beneath them.
You can always throw out the bad information later, but you never know
where, or when, or from whom, good information will come."
•You know• Raimbaut thought at me, •Shan is one of the people you
talk to in your head most.•
•I do know, and that's why the whole business with Mar-garet hurt like a
kick in the balls, companhon. Vos dirai, you can't imagine how desperate I
am to have someone to talk to, and how glad I am that it turns out to be
you.•

The sensation of being both the giver and receiver of a nice, sincere
compliment is a very intense pleasure.
Gill stopped by, Loupa still in tow. They stood like people who were not
lovers yet but planned to be soon, and they were leaving the party with Byra
and Pyere, who clearly were a couple. Their plan was to jump from outdoor
springer to outdoor springer until they found sunrise, and have coffee while
they watched it.
I thanked Gill again for giving me such a fine start at mak-ing an
impression on Earth's fashionable intellectuals. (Are there any other kind,
anywhere?) We agreed that we would have to have that long lunch together
very soon.
Raimbaut came back to the front of my mind as that group went out the
door. The few who were left were mainly the sort of awful people the host
has to throw out, so it was time to be gone. Raimbaut fretted. •Well, if
Laprada is—•
Laprada was there, as if he'd thought her into existence.
She slipped her arm through mine and breathed in my ear, her lips
brushing the lobe. "Definitely time to leave the party. God, it's been grim."
Once again I had the sensation of Raimbaut's butterflies in my stomach. I
thought to him, •Now, look like you've suddenly thought of something
great, and say . . . say the following out loud—•
He said it in his voice, and I don't think it was obvious that he was
getting dictation. (Laprada would have said something.) "Would you like to
go for a drink or something? Not alcohol since I can't have that, but just to
talk over the evening while it's still fresh in our minds? I can feel Giraut
going to sleep in the back of my head, but I'm not tired."
Laprada grinned. "I know the perfect place for a drink—-completely
private, quiet, and comfortable for a conversa-tion. Why don't we spring to
my place?"
As we followed her to the springer, I thought, •Que val-ors! Que gratz!
Que cortes! See, you do fine with women•
•Thank you, Giraut. You're not the only one who's glad I'm in your head•

5
While Laprada changed into something in the bedroom, Raimbaut and I
looked at all the pictures on her walls, which were standard vus from
Second Eden, the home culture that she represented without ever having
seen.
A map of Addams on the wall showed that Second Eden was fairly far
north in the temperate zone. From the look of the vus, Second Eden was
pretty in a bland sort of way; nordic terrain, plenty of water, not high enough
or polar enough to have much in the way of glaciers. There were big
waterfalls running down moss-covered faces, winding steep creeks, thick
conifer forests, deep fjords and canyons, and various low domed dwellings
that said nothing except that they were buildings.
Laprada came back out with two largish drinks. "Yours, I'm afraid,
contains nothing more powerful than Vitamin C. Mine is to help me get
loose and happy—or at least loose."
"Start with loose, try for happy?" Raimbaut suggested.
"Good enough for me." She handed his glass over care-fully—"I want to
be sure I give you the right one." Then she bumped her glass against his, and
said, " 'Another round for humanity.' "
" 'And one more for the good guys.' " It seemed that he had already
acquired one part of OSP lore.
The drink was a mix of lime and pineapple, with a dash of coconut, a
trifle sour to my taste. I could smell the gin in hers, and since her drink had
to be at least half a liter, she was drinking to get drunk.
She and Raimbaut sat down next to each other on the couch, quite close,
and I felt the stirrings in his mind matched by stirrings in my body. I tried not
to think at all. Since Raimbaut had been inexperienced with women at the
time he died, this evening was going to be important to him, and it seemed
only fair to let him experience it, as much as pos-sible, as himself.
"I heard people at the party calling you 'Preddy,' " he said, "and it looked
like you didn't like it much."
She made a face. "I do hate it. Thank you so much for noticing. It was the

nickname I had at Diplomat's School in Nuevo Buenos Aires—that's not a
school that trains diplo-mats, it's the Council of Humanity grade school for
diplo-mats' children. With so many of us being hereditary, the people you
meet there are the people you see for the rest of your life, regrettable as that
is. I was always 'Preddy,' the most popular girl, happy girl, perky girl, perfect
girl . . . everything that is so tiresome when adolescence hits and everyone's
expecting you to be bouncing around with joy, when what you want to do is
sit down in a dark corner somewhere and cry your heart out. I was sentenced
to 'com-pulsory happy without the possibility of parole' from age thirteen to
twenty. Always up, always working, always jolly, always tired and scared
that a bad mood would show or someone would notice how hard I had to
work to keep it up. Worse yet, in that little cultural prison, I was sort of a
trustie, too. I saw that you spent some time talking to Rebop. What did you
think of her?"
Raimbaut shrugged. "She seemed very nice to me."
"She is very nice. That's the whole problem. She's pretty but not very
pretty, she's smart enough to be in a conversa-tion but not witty enough to
dominate it, she has all those conventional virtues like loyalty and kindness
but nothing that would ever fascinate anyone. Now, there's nothing wrong
with that. And she was my best friend from younger years. But the leader of
the pack should have a classy, fascinating sidekick, not Adequate Girl,
which poor Rebop will be all her life. Normal Healthy Girl. Sweet But Dull
Girl. You see?"
"I do," Raimbaut said. "Is it any way to talk about a good friend?"
I felt his panic. •Senher Deu, Giraut, I can't believe I said that to her!•
•Non ajas destrech, companhon. It was the right thing to do. No woman
respects a man who encourages her worst impulses, at least not for long.•
•How do you know that?•
•I have some more experience than you do,• I thought, very firmly and
emphatically.
"You're right, Raimbaut, of course you are," Laprada said, choking up.
"Rebop has always been kind and patient with me and done her best to treat
me well, and most of the time I'm the same with her, but now and then I just
lose patience because . . . well, she is what she is. And when we were
teenagers I spent a tremendous amount of time and effort trying to 'fix'
her—in other words, her best friend perse-cuted her all the time over how
she dressed and acted, and I made her terribly unhappy while at the same

time I com-pletely depended on her for emotional support. That's what I
meant. It was like being a prison trustie. And you notice that when I started
to talk about her again, the old habits came roaring right back. Tonight I've
been Preddy, the happy, perky girl with a smile for everyone's face and a
knife for everyone's back."
"You could probably start treating Rebop, and your other friends,
differently any time you wanted to," Raimbaut pointed out.
Laprada shrugged. "Well, I suppose for the last couple of years, I have
been more reasonable and calm, getting out and meeting people who I think
are different and interesting." She said the last part very pointedly, making
his hopes leap up and my heart feel like it was swelling. "But when I go to
parties . . . especially, with the old crowd . . . well, then 'Preddy' comes back
again. The whole wretched silly child-ish business is completely tiring,
completely unhappy, com-pletely I don't know." She took three big
swallows of her drink.
Raimbaut said, "You seem so interesting, and you seem so good at
things—"
Her sigh was almost a groan. "I can tell that I'm unhappy and
depressed—why can't you?"
"Are you unhappy and depressed right now?"
"Oh god. Beyond that." She turned to lean against him; I felt his
butterflies. "I don't know if I can explain."
Mentally I swallowed and leaned away from Raimbaut's mind as hard as
I could—trying to make sure Raimbaut didn't know I was recognizing the
script. At least a quarter of all the donzelhas in Noupeitau had used this
approach, along with probably billions of women since the dawn of time.
Raimbaut might be finding the love of his life; he might be having a brief
intense fling; he might be about to provide free therapy for someone who
would then dump him at once. But it would have been grossly unfair, to
him, this evening, to make him aware of any of the possibilities; he
deserved, like anyone else, to have his first experiences for himself.
After holding his hand for a while, she said, quietly, "I hate having
conversations with most of my friends, Raimbaut. Usually I'm in the role
you're in now, and I can't help notic-ing that many of them are drowning in
self-pity, and very of-ten I hate them for it. So I'm afraid of sounding like
them while I talk to you." She took another big swallow from her huge,
potent drink. When she set it down, it was more than a third gone. Raimbaut

flashed a thought at me: •Could it be that most of her problems come from
plain old drinking too much?•
•Not a bad guess, companhon, but for right now you'd be a fool to
mention it. Just let her run. You'll be glad you did.•
She sighed, and her voice caught as she ran out of air. "Sometimes I
dramatize, and pretend that I'm weeping for the whole human race. Pretend
to myself I mean. Because it would sound so pretentious if I said it to
anyone else. You know what I mean. I try to convince myself that I'm crying
about how people can't take care of themselves, can't find anything better to
do with their time than turn into dream-ing zombies in boxes, can't learn to
supply each others' emotional needs. That ought to be plenty to weep about,
don't you think?
"But that's not what I cry about, really." She took another big swallow
and pressed her cheek against our chest, right over the heart. "This is really
sounding stupid."
"No it isn't," Raimbaut said. "I'm fascinated. I'm here for as long as
you'll talk, or longer if you just want to sit. There's nowhere else I'd rather
be." Tentatively, he rested a hand on her neck; he could feel her moving
against it, warming and relaxing. "Talk, or not. I'm here. You know I want to
hear you."
She whispered. "You're different too. My first Occitan-—or are you my
first two Occitans? Is Giraut in there?"
"He's daydreaming and thinking about songs he means to write, and not
paying much attention. I can have his atten-tion for you whenever you—"
"No, don't do that. I like it being just us. Even if it's not exactly just us."
After one deep sigh, Laprada was quiet for a long time. "The world will
never get any better than this, I'm at the top, this is my big moment . . . so it's
time for the exit."
I don't know whether it was my reaction or Raimbaut's that felt like a
hard thump on the breastbone. "The exit?"
"Send in the wipe order on my latest psypyx copy. Order the pills. Take
them and never wake up." She squeezed al-most painfully hard at my ribs; a
tear made a series of soggy dashes down her cheek, like an indecisive slug.
"I'm so scared that someday I'll do it on impulse. You can complete the
whole thing in less than twenty minutes nowadays, you know, And maybe
once a week I want to, for, I don't know, ten minutes at a time. But if you
count momentary flashes and stray thoughts, then at least twice a day, I feel

sure I want to do it. Just get it over with. Just not be."
Raimbaut held her tight and said, "You have so much rea-son to be
here—and I can't be the only person who's noticed that you're wonderful.
Laprada, I—"
"I'm really vain. I know I'm very good looking, you know, and I look in
the mirror and think, even starting anti-aging drugs at nineteen like I did,
there's about ten years of this, and then maybe forty years of being attractive
but not stun-ning, and then maybe forty years beyond that of being some-one
who obviously used to be attractive. And that's not very much, even if it's
more than some people ever get, and more than anybody got a thousand
years ago, and all that. It's not much. Why not leave while no single human
being remem-bers me with any crow's-feet or wrinkles or little cracking
lines that never go away around my mouth? Why not leave while no one has
ever seen me at anything less than my best?"
"Well, we Occitans wear our age," Raimbaut said, "which is why Giraut
chooses to look like this, and he's not the handsome fellow he once was—"
(•Sorry, companhon• -— •Quite all right•)—"but he's still a fine man and he
can still enjoy being who he is. And even if you want to leave before you're
older looking, why today? Why not wait the ten years and see how you feel
then? And you are an OSP agent—you have more to see than you can in one
lifetime and more im-portant things to do than you'll ever—"
"I don't really want to see and do new things," she said. "I don't really.
Every time I see something new I miss things I've already seen, and another
thing will never have the power to surprise me again—if it was a surprise,
and usually it's not. So I'd have the stimulation for a few minutes, and then
I'd remember it fondly, and then be bored with it . . . how much can that take
up in a life?"
"To see the Thousand Cultures," Raimbaut said, "should be enough new
excitement for a century, at least, and after that, with all the new colony
ships headed out beyond the frontiers, there will be so many more new
cultures and new places, that no one is ever going to even be able to grasp
all of human space, mentally—let alone whatever we learn when we meet
the aliens. Laprada, there's so much. How can you bear to leave?"
"Oh, but it won't work that way! After the fourth or the fifth new
adventure, I won't care about anything new—"
"You can't know that yet."
"But why wait and be disappointed when I can leave now and miss all the

let-down?" She held onto him tight. "Don't stop arguing with me, Raimbaut.
Don't stop. I know every-thing you're saying and it all makes sense, but I
can't make myself believe it, and I'm scared that I'll do it sometime-—maybe
the next time I feel this way for even half an hour."
Raimbaut brushed the thick coils of her hair with the un-dersides of his
fingers, and said, "Knowing what you're feel-ing, I don't think I could leave
you alone, for anything. I'm right here. I'll be here as long as you need me;
Giraut's a pa-tient toszet and a bo companhon and if I need to do this to
keep you alive, he'll let me have his body for the job." He smoothed out the
tear tracks with the tips of his fingers; for a fellow with so little experience,
he had a very delicate touch. "Now let me talk about the thing that worries
me. Have you seen anyone for depression?"
She sniffed. "Why? I've already got a fine one as it is." They both laughed
a great deal more than that was worth. Then she started to cry, and to hold
onto him hard. She whispered, "Sometimes I think that people might be a
good enough reason to not do it. Not people in general, but some people
that I like. And I'm sure you are going to be one of those people."
"You're welcome, and I'm so glad." He lifted her chin, and she smiled as
if he were going to kiss her, but instead he looked into her eyes and said,
"And yet. Even if someday I send you some horribly cruel good-bye-forever
letter, even if I prove to be nothing like as good a fellow as you think I am,
still—don't do it. You are far too good a person, and far too worthwhile
yourself. Don't. Even if I disappoint you. And al-though you ended the
question with a great joke, I still want to know about your getting taken care
of for depression. That's been curable for hundreds of years. It's stupid to die
of something that's so easy to treat."
She shrugged. "Gunshots to the body are easy to treat nowadays but
people still die of them."
Raimbaut said, "I don't want you to die of anything."
He held her. Now and then she'd cry. I very nearly went really to sleep
before she said, "You have such patience, that, if you're trying to wait me
out, I should probably tell you that after a good late-night cry, I'm hardly
ever interested in sex."
"It's not what I'm here for," he said. I could tell that he meant it, which
was good; when you say the right thing, you want to mean it if at all
possible.
"Well, I thought you should know that in case you're one of those men

who waits around hoping that when I'm done crying I'll want to fuck."
"I am your friend the monk," Raimbaut said, "if you want me to be. For
as long as you need it."
So she talked about her childhood and the feeling she had always had,
then, that someday she would do something special, and how disappointing
reality was turning out to be. Her practice at classical guitar had led to some
concerts, but the concerts hadn't been like she'd hoped for. All of her lovers
so far, without exception, had been disappointments. (By Occitan standards,
there had been very few; I had to question the judgement of Earthmen.) She
had odd, wild daydreams and talked about them as though they were plans.
Slowly she turned more and more toward him, until they were lying
together on the couch, with him holding her against my heart. At last she
finished her drink and said, "You know how I told you that, unlike other
women, I don't nec-essarily become horny after spending all night talking
about my depression and things?"
"I recall it," Raimbaut said, neutrally, dreading another ghastly story of
how she'd been mistreated.
"Well, that was a lie to make you leave if you didn't really like me. Or
maybe it was a test to see if you were as nice a person as you seemed to be.
And you didn't leave, and you passed the test. So . . . " she leaned forward.
"If you were thinking very seriously about me, what would you be think-ing
about?"
Raimbaut grinned and said, "Exactly what I'm thinking about now." He
brushed the hair away from her face, caught her chin gently, looked deep
into her eyes, and said, "Plus of course worrying myself sick that this isn't
the time."
"Well, how many hints does a girl have to drop?" she asked.
They kissed. Parts of my glandular system worked harder than they had
in years. Mouths opened, and her tongue slid gently into my mouth.
Raimbaut thought. •I think I can manage from here•
•I don't think I could sleep if I tried. I hope it will be all right with an
audience.•
•Senher Deu, companhon, it would be all right on a bed of hot coals, if
that were the only way. Now try not to think in words•it's distracting•
***

After Laprada fell asleep, Raimbaut got up, washed our face, and
thought, •Interesting for you?•
•Very.•
•I'm not sure how I feel.•
•That feeling will persist at least until you're thirty-five, Raimbaut.•
•I thought it might.•
We lay awake, not thinking in words, sharing the emo-tional tone of the
early morning, for an hour or so, and I didn't fall asleep until well after
Raimbaut did. Perhaps it was the sensation of physical satisfaction, perhaps
the ex-citement of Raimbaut's love affair, but whatever the cause, I dreamed
of long ago, again.
***
Early on, in our first few weeks at the training facility in Manila,
Margaret and I realized there was something spe-cial about Shan, because of
all the special attention our in-structors gave us. During most of my first
mission, as far as I had known, Shan had simply been the Council
Ambassador to Caledony. I had no idea that there was any such
organiza-tion as the OSP.
True, Shan had seemed to have far-reaching powers and an ability to turn
up at key moments, but for all I knew, maybe all Council ambassadors were
like that. At the end of the mission, after Margaret and I had married, and so
much had changed, he had told us about the OSP and offered us the job.
Nine standays later, we started training in Manila. And everywhere we went,
people said "I heard Shan re-cruited you personally," shortly to be followed
by, "Oh, if you stay in the OSP, eventually you'll know all about Shan."
We didn't much care. We spent all our time hanging around with the
seven other people in our class, learning how things actually worked in
human space. Of course it was impossible, really, to like Earth—it was
crowded and dirty and all the major sights to see were ruins—but we did
our best. Spy training isn't supposed to be a honeymoon, and vice versa, but
Margaret and I found it's possible to do both at the same time.
***
I remember once, early on in our career and our marriage, in

Daylasunglo, a culture with architecture that was too big, art that was too
sentimental, and a system of govern-ment that was too fond of bureaucrats,
Margaret and I spent fifty standays, at least, negotiating about quartz
crystals, of all things.
Quartz crystals are pretty enough, I suppose, but they're also found on
every habitable planet in quantity, and if you want more, they can be grown
by the ton, overnight, by nanos. They are not much more expensive than
sand.
However, the Council Charter allows cultures to declare any good "not
in general trade" to be "culturally vital," which means, essentially, that they
can impose tariffs, quotas, ex-port taxes, and all the rest of the paraphenalia
of local eco-nomic administration on it. Sadly, because quartz crystals were
sacred in Daylasunglo—believed to have souls, in fact—the other 108
cultures on Ducommun had long exploited Daylasunglo economically, by
producing quartz crys-tals and holding them for ransom. We had negotiated
an end to that nasty practice, but now the OSP's fear was that, if
Daylasunglo created a complex code to regulate the quartz crystal trade, it
would create opportunities for a black mar-ket, and organized crime on
Ducommun would become even more affluent, pervasive, and exploitive
than it already was. Now that we had persuaded other cultures to stop
ex-ploiting Daylasunglo by playing on their unfortunately silly beliefs, the
next step had to be making sure that Daylasun-glo didn't mess with the free
trade in quartz crystals. After all, free trade was the only sure way to prevent
a black mar-ket, smuggling, the creation of special police to deal with both,
the corruption of the special police, and all the rest of the downward spiral
that led to permanent organized crime, permanent police corruption, a huge
permanent prison pop-ulation, and a permanent drain on the treasury.
Eventually, though it took some time, Margaret and I had come to
understand that the negotiators from Daylasunglo weren't objecting to our
proposed modifications to their Declaration of a Cultural Good. They just
needed us to sit there and listen to their explanations about fields of
har-monics and interpersonal energies as if we were taking them seriously.
Once we understood that, matters wrapped up in just four more sessions.
The evening that everyone signed, Margaret and I went out to celebrate
with whatever nightlife Daylasunglo might have. After a while we drifted
into a club that promised a complete experience for the evening: a large
vegetarian din-ner to be followed by "relating time," whatever that might be,

and then several hours of dancing. It sounded good to us, so we went in.
The dinner was amazingly bland and an ugly slur on vegetables
everywhere. They served it with a strange tasting wine. For some reason, our
waiter kept assuring us it contained no alcohol. After Margaret asked what
the point was, then, the servers left us alone, and conversation became
possible. Af-ter a while they came by and "as a peace offering" (we hadn't
known we were at anything but peace with them) they gave us a big jug of
red wine which very definitely did contain al-cohol, so our conversation
became even better. (At least in our view of things.)
After dinner there was to be an hour and a half of "relating time." I have
no idea what their definition of it was, but after-wards Margaret and I settled
on explaining it to our friends as "conversation structured around an absurd
principle."
Or so it seemed to us. Everyone else was taking it seri-ously so we tried
to do the same, but it didn't come easily, and often it didn't come at all. For
an hour and a half, every ten minutes a central speaker would announce the
topics of conversation: "Talk about an old memory that is in the way of
what you are doing now."
Strange, warbling sounds, mixtures of piping, arrhythmic drumming, and
low thundering moans (what locally passed for music) emerged from small
speakers all over the room, not in unison from speaker to speaker. We had
already been urged to listen deeply to the music and let it guide our
thoughts.
Margaret, perhaps drunker than I was, said, "The major memory that
keeps bothering me is that I remember I'm employed and I can't just walk off
my job."
"Where would you go if you could?"
"I'd go look for another job exactly like it. I'm having fun, Giraut, I love
the travel, I love the work, I love you. How about you?"
"I love travel, and work, and me, too."
We both laughed for a long time. Most of the people at the tables nearest
us were staring at us angrily. That might have started us laughing more, and
caused more trouble, but then it was time to "Talk about what you feel is
your most important relation to your partner's most important energy."
I expected that the whole evening was going to be as dull as the dinner
and as silly and pointless as "relating time." I was absolutely wrong. The
dancing was glorious. Daylasun-glolese didn't dance in partners, or free

form, or like any contra line I'd ever seen, but in a slow, graceful set of
move-ments, a little like martial arts katas and a little like Indus-trial Age
free form, into which each pair of dancers were expected to fit themselves.
You signaled what you were doing with a hand-carved wooden stick, to
the end of which was affixed a quartz crys-tal. In some ways it seemed like a
toy magic wand or scepter, but the carving was very fine, the patterns clever
and subtle, and all in all it had an understated wit and grace that touched my
heart. "And these are the ones they have around to loan to customers at a
medium-priced club. It looks like most people bring their own, which are
far more elaborate."
"I still wonder what it is about quartz crystals," Margaret said. "I mean,
anyone could have a diamond or any other gemstone—they aren't that
expensive for an object you might keep for the rest of your life. After all,
gems are indus-trial materials; you'd have to make them somewhat nicer,
but it would still be cheap."
"You can take the girl out of Caledony . . . " I began, grin-ning, and in
those days, as she always did, she stuck her tongue out at me. Less than three
years before, she had been sure she was destined to be the operator of a
remote weather station in arctic conditions, or perhaps running a small farm
in one of the dead sea basins that formed the western frontier of Caledony,
surviving psychologically on com and mail messages from her old school
friends, trying to persuade herself that what she needed to do was spend
more time praying and more effort on being rational.
Instead, Margaret had walked into a revolution, a love af-fair, a
marriage, and a spy service, in about that order. She had opened to the wider
world beautifully, as one might ex-pect of someone with her spirit and
intelligence, but she still tended to think about beauty, art, and so forth in a
very Caledon way—i.e., as if it were all a matter of money, mate-rials, and
scheduling.
Chimes sounded. The dance masters lined us up. There were a few other
novice couples—the dancing was different at every club—and we were
steered to a corner to learn how it worked, what we were supposed to do
while we were in the various "choruses" surrounding the central area, and
what we were supposed to do during our time "in solo" (silly term—they
meant one pair on the floor, so it should have been "in duo") and "in your
group" (which was when four couples would be in the central space at the
same time).

They led us back to the floor, and for the next five hours, Margaret and I
were lost in the exhiliration of it. I was mildly sad when the evening was
over and I had to turn in my quartz-crystal-on-a-stick. We walked back to
the Em-bassy, where we were staying in a small apartment, talking and
laughing, and we were halfway there when Margaret suddenly said, "Well, if
you can only do that with the right quartz crystals, no wonder they wanted to
protect them."
I nodded. "I know exactly what you mean."
We made love that night, did final paperwork the next af-ternoon, and
sprang off to a much-needed break at my par-ents' house in Elinorien. That
break stretched out to almost two months before we were called to active
duty again. By the end of that time we were rested, fit, and bored out of our
minds, and the riots and hostage-trading that we coped with next, on
Roosevelt, were almost refreshing.

6
Half the day was gone by the time I awoke. Raimbaut, with so much to
assimilate emotionally, was still very deep asleep and I guessed it might be
an hour or two before he awoke. Laprada was in a muzzy curl under the
piled sheets. I pushed a coil of hair back from where it lay across her cheek
and kissed her lightly there. She stuck up a hand, I took it in mine, and she
squeezed for an instant before murmuring, "Com me later today, promise?"
Hoping she wouldn't notice it was me and not Raimbaut, I said, "Ja,
donz de mon cor," and squeezed her hand again.
"Thank you. You're a prince, whichever one you are." She released my
hand and burrowed back into the heap of sheets. I picked up my clothes and
sprang home, not bother-ing to dress.
After I had a hot shower and coffee, Raimbaut was still dead asleep in
my brain. I was idly picking out arpeggios on the lute—long runs in minor
keys, the sort of thing that al-ways sounds sad—when the com pinged.
It was Dji. "I wanted to confer with both of you," he said, "and thought
I'd check in to see if there's a good time to meet."
"This is Giraut," I said. "I have nothing to do right now, but Raimbaut is
still asleep. Should I wake him up?"
"Not right away, I think. Would you like to meet me for coffee? Say in
Commissary Eighteen, this building, about ten minutes from now?"
"That would be fine."
It took only three minutes to stretch, dress, put the hair and beard in
order, and be ready to go down there. I was bracing myself. At least in Shan's
group, the OSP tradition is that good news can be commed but bad news
always comes in person.
When I emerged from the springer at Commissary Eigh-teen, Dji was
already there, seated in a booth and smiling. Probably we weren't in much
trouble, then.
He had a pot of coffee on the table and a spare cup ready; as always, the
OSP coffee was excellent. Dji let me finish most of a cup before he asked,
"First of all, is Raimbaut with us yet?"

"Not yet, and it feels like it's still going to be a while."
"Well, feel free to tell Raimbaut everything about the conversation, and
allow him full access to the memories, eh?" He refilled his cup.
"I couldn't prevent his getting the memories if I tried, and I wouldn't," I
said.
"Excellent, then. I wonder who it was that said that the two good things
you can count on in the OSP are travel and good coffee? It must have been
one of Shan's-and-my geneneration, eh? Because I would swear that I first
heard it during our training, and my training class number was four."
Mine was 229, low enough to impress most OSP agents. Laprada's was
924, and right now, on other floors of this huge complex, Training Class
927 was working on earning its permits and badges. Despite all the political
uncertainty, we were staffing up as fast as we could without sacrificing
quality, for reasons that people at my level only heard mur-murs about.
Dji neatly, fussily emptied two packets of sugar into his coffee, shaking
them out to catch stray grains, then folding them precisely into quarters
before putting them through the little micro springer that would send them
to a recycling plant somewhere. He made a face and said, "I asked Shan how
to approach you about this, and he said that I should just tell you the truth.
So to be sure I am overpreparing you, eh? You and I have both been through
some overprepared missions . . . "
"Oh, yes," I said. "All right, should I run out and set up a cover story in
case our conversation completely fails? Do let me add that this entire
conversation will go much better if only I have some idea what in nomne
deu you're talking about."
Dji uttered a barking, shouted, utterly sincere laugh, the kind any skilled
agent, salesman, or politician can always do on cue. "Well, then, yes, this is
about Raimbaut and Laprada, and no, it's not trouble of any kind, per se. I
just wanted you (and Raimbaut via you) to know about Laprada's
difficul-ties, what has happened to her in the past, things that may affect her
during this mission. More importantly, I thought you might want to know
why we're pleased that she has de-cided to take Raimbaut as her lover."
It made me laugh—I knew mine wasn't faked—because it was either that
or belt him in the face and I suspected that OSP already had me marked as
dangerously unstable. "You're the nice cop?"
"I can see how you would see it that way," he said. "Surely you are as
painfully aware as anyone that the OSP often in-tervenes in the lives of

agents, often in ways that are brutally unfair and harmful to everyone and
everything except the mission purpose. I would think you would be more
aware of that than anyone else."
I stared at him. "I know very well that everyone in the OSP has heard my
story. I might, someday, perhaps, if my feelings changed drastically and
enough time went by, talk about Margaret, and Briand, and all that, with
Shan, pri-vately, again.
"I won't discuss it with a man I've known less than a week. Not even my
supervisor, unless you give me a direct order. And if you do, I assure you I
will resent that the rest of my life."
We stared into each others' eyes for a long time. His ex-pression was as
calm as a stone Buddha's. "I am sorry I re-ferred to a sensitive subject. What
I have to say does not concern that subject; it was my mistake to bring it up
at all. Now, are you calm enough for further conversation? The
in-formation I want to give you has some possible major effects on the
success of the mission. And based on my reading of your records, I think
that the success of the mission, at the moment, really matters to you."
I sighed. It's hard to be angry at Dji. He's always sincere and
reasonable—and he can be that way at will, regardless of the subject or the
truth about it. Often the best thing you can do for your peace of mind is to
believe him. "I suppose what you plan to do is to pimp Laprada to
Raimbaut, the way Shan pimped my wife."
Dji looked away, his expression pure distress. "You know, Shan bet me
that you would say that."
"Well, be sure to pay up. Shan is very punctilious about the small points
of honor."
"He is, indeed. But for the moment he is not the person I need to talk to
you about. For the moment, the problem is Raimbaut and Laprada, and I do
have some hope that in this case what will be good for the people involved
will also be good for the OSP.
"Now, here it is. We began to consider recruiting Laprada when she was
a very promising teenage classical guitarist, about five years ago, because
touring artists have often proved to be such effective agents. For most of
those five years, it's been a constant struggle to keep her alive. She's
at-tempted suicide fourteen times that we know about."
"Seriously?"
"Any cop or doctor can tell you it's always serious. I'm telling you this

partly because she's important to your mis-sion, but also for your sake and
for Raimbaut's. Yes, as al-ways, you're all being monitored, and it looks to
me like they're falling in love. How's it look from inside the brain?"
"They're falling in love, certainly. For how long or how deeply, qui pot
saber?"
"We think it might be a good thing for her; you're the one who'd have to
judge for Raimbaut. And anything that stabi-lizes Laprada's life would be
good for the OSP. Not to men-tion that I would be delighted; she's been as
close as blood kin to me since the day she was born." Dji pushed a
docu-ment across the table at me. "Psych profile. If you read this then
Raimbaut won't have to—not directly—and he can know what's in here and
why it's important, without having to deal with the pain of each individual
sentence."
I speed-read it while Dji went up to the counter for a fresh pot of coffee.
It was not easy or pleasant reading. Laprada had tried poison, bleeding, and
drowning, and had hanged herself once. She hadn't tried explosives, a maser
to the head, or springing into a vacuum—those were the ones that they
hardly ever saved anyone from. All three of her therapists had noted how
important it was not to mention those possi-bilities in her presence.
The current shrink feared that any extra sadness in her life, a touch of
long-running frustration, almost anything, could cause her to have her
psypyx recordings erased, and try a more certain method.
She adamantly resisted every suggestion to try medica-tion, as was her
right in Earth law. Based on a few thousand similar cases, her shrink said
that barring some drastic change, she would probably be dead within five or
six years, "and certainly needlessly miserable if she is not."
I handed that sad catalog back to Dji, without a word. He was still
stirring his coffee. I hadn't noticed his coming back to the table. He slipped
the report back into his bag, put both hands around the cup as if to warm
them, and said, "Her grandfather and I were very great friends, you see, and I
have known her a long time." He sighed. "She wants to die, Giraut. Despite
all that talent, charm, and ability, and in the face of any love or affection she
gets—usually. But she has seldom made an attempt during any of her
longer-running love affairs, and that's a hope of sorts. Now, according to
your profile of Raimbaut, he is a very fine young man."
"The best," I said, meaning it. "Very inexperienced at love, but that's
probably a good thing—especially that he doesn't have much experience of

Occitan finamor. I think if she re-turns his affection, he'll be devoted to
her."
"That would be a good start. But watch out. Like many depressed
people, Laprada is often verbally cruel, suddenly and spontaneously. She
lashes out at people around her, es-pecially if she becomes fond of them. It's
a lot to ask, but it would be a very good thing if, even when he is startled
and hurt, Raimbaut does not lash back."
I nodded. "He has the merce for that, you may trust me. And perhaps,
already, the love for it, too. May I ask a blunt question?"
He nodded.
"What exactly is the interest of the OSP in this girl? What is it about
Laprada Prieczka that matters so much? Is she po-tentially so fine an agent?
Or do we need a superb guitarist?"
Dji laughed at that, making a mock toast with his coffee.
"Wouldn't it be wonderful if that were what we really needed? Well, the
reason Laprada is important is something you could call nepotism, or a debt
to the dead, or the fact that our leadership is as subject to sentimentality as
any other group of people. It has its roots, perhaps, in a story not many
people know."
I could have tried to make it look like I didn't care whether or not I heard
that story: stretched, or drunk a little coffee, or done almost anything to
make it look casual. But as an Occitan, after an introduction like that, I'd
have stayed to hear the story if the building had been on fire. "I have nothing
to do until you tell me I do. So tell me the story, and give it all the time it
deserves."
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
At first, the many petty tyrants of the Thousand Cultures didn't
always understand what they needed to do to maintain control over the
springer. If you bypass the fuses and circuit breakers that keep too much
power from being pulled into a springer, and if you know a springer address
to spring to, you can go anywhere from anywhere. In later years, every
totalitarian culture learned to put power chokes on every public springer.
They took off manual dialing, and made possession of an unauthorized
springer code a crimi-nal offense. But back in the first decade of the
springer, ac-cording to Dji, there were a lot of simple mistakes.

Not that they didn't try to control it by means they did understand. If you
escaped Pure by an unauthorized spring to anywhere on the rest of von
Suttner, the Genome Guards would track you down and either kidnap you
back or kill you, depending on how valuable they thought your genes were.
Other cultures on von Suttner tolerated the Genome Guards and their
activities due to bribery, intimidation, blackmail—whatever the rulers of
Pure had to do. So if Dji was to escape, with his priceless DNA, he would
have to es-cape a long way away.
His reasons, at nineteen, for wanting to escape were "too numerous to
count, too vague to specify, and probably too obvious to mention," he said,
waving his hand in the air as if I'd asked him to tell me everything. "That's
rather an eva-sion, eh? The thing that tipped it all over for me, and assured
that I'd be escaping, was that I looked over all of the highest-ranking
bloodlines, which is to say all the ones as high as my own that were
acceptable for breeding purposes, and saw that I detested every woman
anywhere close to my own age. And I was a lusty fellow, you know, the way
anyone is at nineteen." He laughed and placed an order for a plate of snacks;
I looked at my watch. Raimbaut had been asleep now for eleven hours.
Feeling at the contours of my friend's emblok and gee-blok, through his
psypyx, I could sense that he was sleeping off a load of stress, and that he
was happy.
"How is he?" Dji asked.
"You can tell I'm checking?"
"Your eyes focus on something very far away and your expression goes
blank. He's not awake yet, is he?"
"No."
"Well, then, on with the story."
Dji had contrived to steal the bail-out, run-for-cover code of an OSP
agent; he didn't know that was what it was, be-cause he thought the person
was an ordinary Embassy worker. The only thing he knew was that the
telltale third group—the three thousand digits that specify where the
springer first came into existence—was unlike any other he'd ever seen.
Therefore the springer that this was the ad-dress for couldn't have been made
on von Suttner. With any luck, it hadn't been brought here, and therefore if
he sprang to it, he would be going off planet. The number was differ-ent
enough that he could dare to hope it was a long way away.
Dji had been drilling himself for more than two stanyears on wiring

around the fuses and power chokes on a public springer. He did this because
he was painfully aware that his chance to spring away might last a very short
time; he needed to be ready to go whenever the chance came up, and to need
no preparation at all. Thus the moment he had that code, he left work,
walked to an office building where he knew the springer room would be
deserted, wired it, coded it, and took that long step through the field, in less
than five minutes. He emerged into a conference room at the OSP fa-cility
on Earth's moon as a meeting was breaking up.
Many of the OSP people present took that as a sign of tal-ent, or maybe
they just didn't want to send the frightened young man back where he'd come
from.
He had arrived at a good time to be hired. The newly es-tablished OSP
was desperate for agents. Dji's inside knowl-edge of his own
very-tightly-closed culture would have been invaluable even if he hadn't
been athletic, bright, and lin-guistically gifted. He was enrolled directly into
the fourth OSP training class, ever.
"And that was how I found my way into Training Class Four, which will
be made, by some fool of a historian, into a wonder or marvel, you know,
with so many of the distin-guished OSP agents and leadership coming out of
it. The truth is that the early days of anything are the days when the giants
grow, eh? The same way with the OSP as with any-thing else. Every origin
must have some human greatness to it, and afterwards, greatness will come
to be defined as 'any-thing that is like the sacred founders.' Shan, myself, Sir
Qrala, and Lohemo Prieczko—that was Laprada's grandfa-ther, a young man
at the time, as we all were, eh?—and oth-ers you probably don't know,
except for Carolann Pilsbri and Boru Bearu, because they are group heads
like Shan and I—all of us were in Class Four, and Class Four—or 'Kiel's
Boys'•came to dominate the OSP for at least—"
"Wait a minute," I said, "Kiel's boys? Surely no relation to the
Ambassador to New Tanjavur that I served under." He had been taken
prisoner by Tamil rebels before he could be evacuated, and was presumed to
be among the millions of dead on Briand.
"It's the same one, Giraut. No doubt you are mystified be-cause when
you knew him, he hated the whole OSP, and Shan in particular, with such a
deep passion. Well, things were once very different. Very different indeed.
And I am not sure how much you should hear about how things be-came so
different. Let me say . . . at first there was a differ-ence in theory, which was

friendly and if anything helped both their work. This led to their drawing
different conclu-sions from the same experience, which was not really a
problem for the job, but it made them less friends than they had been, and
created a space for misunderstanding. And then there was—I'm being
delicate here, since even now Shan cannot comfortably speak of it—one of
those things we politely call 'something about a woman.' And that in turn
opened the gap into a canyon, and set parts of the OSP working against each
other, and ultimately led to a series of catastrophes, some of which we
could conceal and some of which we couldn't. That ugly affair on
Roosevelt—the one whose aftermath you were called in to cope with—was
one such case, where we not only took sides in a local dispute, we took both
sides.
"After all the rubble had stopped falling and the fires were out,
metaphorically, Shan had his way, but not his friend and mentor. Kiel was
free to pursue his way, but not within the OSP. And that first brotherhood,
forged during the dizzying, exhilarating years when the springer was
changing every-thing, was broken for good and for all. Sad story, eh? But
that's merely something that happened some time after the story that I am
going to tell you now."
The OSP has always preferred to keep partners together for a long time.
For eleven stanyears, Dji's partner had been Lohemo, and Shan's had been
Sir Qrala. (I was both sur-prised and unsurprised to learn this; I had met Sir
Qrala in the Briand operation, and it had been clear at once that he and Shan
had a history, but I'd never have guessed that it had been years as partnered
agents.)
At that time there were only three groups in the OSP, of which Kiel's
was both the largest and the most active, both in numbers of operations and
in the physical activity in-volved. When Kiel needed to send a double team
for a big, rough situation, his choice was almost always those two
pairs—Shan, Lohemo, Dji, and Sir Qrala—and so they accu-mulated levels
of experience that no agent with the same time in the OSP could have today.
Together the four of them had been shot at and jailed, seen riots and
coups, endured boredom and terror, and had every other experience that
comes with the only interesting job in human space. "Now I'm sure you're
well aware what an ugly rathole of a place Freiporto is today. Well, back
then, it was much worse. The other cultures of Soderblom had suppressed

slavery officially, and forced Freiporto to submit to some inspections, but
there was plenty of unofficial slav-ery that hadn't been touched, and it led to
corruption in other cultural governments, and all sorts of simmering
re-sentments between various factions. And in one of those things that
shows that you always have to watch the aintel-lects, large aintellect-run
corporations were secretly using Freiportese slaves. (To an aintellect it's
merely cheap labor, but it was just such economic reasoning that led to the
Ris-ing. When this operation was all over we had to deconstruct more than a
hundred aintellects to root out the bad ideas.)
"Meanwhile, with the Freiportese steadily irritating more and more
cultures on Soderblom, there was a real threat of war because the Council
of Humanity couldn't officially do much about slavery, and the 'equal
protection' rules that the Council maintained effectively favored the slavers,
and any attempt to use Council justice against them merely resulted in court
cases that dragged on for decades while the slavers would be out on bail and
back in business in no time. Oh, god, it was grim, grim, grim.
"Now, for most purposes human labor is worth practically nothing
nowadays. Almost anything a person can make or do can be made or done
better by machines. The exceptions are usually supposed to be in things like
art or interpersonal re-lations, where the ability to see that there are
hundreds of kinds of smiles is vital. And sure enough there was a lively
trade in enslaved artists, courtesans, nannies, poets, experi-encers, and that
sort of thing.
"But that wasn't the majority of the slave trade. Another thing a human
being can do better than anything else is to cower. Cringe, whine, beg, show
a broken spirit . . . a human being is the only thing that can do that
satisfactorily. I'm sure you can guess most of the rest, how human whipped
puppies were produced, who bought them for what, what eventually became
of them. I'm hoping there's nowhere anymore where such horrors are still
going on, but human space is big, and I would be surprised if there's not.
Wher-ever that little pocket of slavery might be, no doubt we will hear
about it and move against it sooner or later—and it's also no doubt that
some of them will get away and start over.
"Well, back in those long-ago days, one of the major trade entrepots for
broken people was Freiporto. And Lohemo and I were out to put a stop to
it—another round for hu-manity, one more for the good guys, all that old
stuff, eh?-—if an OSP operation could crack it open, we could send in the

CSPs on a big raid, and establish jurisdiction over such cases, and
eventually make it too hot for the trade to oper-ate. But everything depended
on our first getting a very ex-act knowledge of the operation."
He sighed; it turned more to a groan, and the gentle, ironic tone, in
which he'd been telling it as a story of his over-idealistic youth, suddenly
dropped, and I saw what anger and pain and determination there must have
been in him, decades before I had been born. "Well, you don't al-ways win,
do you? Hardest thing to learn about being the good guys. Harder even than
learning that you aren't even good, eh?" He stared down at the table; after a
breath or so, he grunted. "It's quite the tale, but here it is in brief You might
as well say our operation didn't work at all, although the slavers were shut
down, eventually, and we had some-thing to do with it." He drank off his
coffee, and then, with-out transition, started his story in the middle. "As we
were entering the big warehouse that we had guessed was the center of it all,
the four of us got caught, maybe due to alert guards, maybe due to a tip-off
"Lohemo was hit first, a maser shot that blew off one of his hands. An
instant later, I was shot in the chest and only failed to receive the coup de
grace because Qrala nailed the man about to execute me, and Shan and
Qrala grabbed me and threw me through a springer into the OSP's medical
ward. By the time the two of them had done that, Lohemo had been carried
off.
"So I was saved from capture, and Lohemo was not. The head camera
recordings from the three of us all seemed to show that he'd been losing
blood so fast that he must be dead, and one of the slavers had had the
presence of mind to locate the transponder near his liver and shoot him
there, also. Normally the transponder is in a location that is fatal within a
minute or less, but this time they whisked him right onto the surgery table
before he could bleed to death.
"So he had last been seen losing blood fast, and less than five minutes
later the aintellects had detected the scream of his transponder being blasted
away, which seemed to mean he must have no liver; we were stupid enough
to classify him as 'presumed dead,' a mistake we've learned not to make
since that time. But back then, we didn't know we should be looking for him
or planning a rescue. I keep saying 'we' but I wasn't much involved. For four
months I was un-conscious most of the time while they grew a new heart
and left lung and put them into me.
"Now, the branch of the Freiporto mob that we were dealing with was

already losing out to other branches trying to move in on them—that's why,
to get the big war chest they needed, they were taking on such
high-exposure-to--shutdown businesses. Aside from lots of money, they
needed a public victory, something that would give them a reputation. They
thought that if they could break Lohemo, and sell him, they'd establish
themselves publicly as tougher than the OSP.
"They thought they had broken him. He certainly acted like they had. So
they brought him out for a private demon-stration of their power, to show
him off at a gathering of bigshots from other crime families, not only from
Freiporto but from all over human space—it involved siphoning off an
astonishing amount of power to spring them all there, and that helped us
catch many more of them, but that's another story, one of those dull ones
where the good guys win, the bad guys never have a chance, and nobody gets
hurt.
"Lohemo's story is not one of those. Once he had played the role of the
broken man for an hour or so, making them all laugh, getting them all
excited to see what they could or-der him to do, he grabbed a maser from a
guard, and started killing every non-slave in the room. He'd already been fast
and a good shot and he didn't waste any time or any lines of sight taking
cover because he didn't care whether he, him-self, lived or died.
"At the end of that—three minutes, was the estimate of the investigating
committee, afterward—he had been hit with a thrown knife and burned in
four non-fatal spots by almost-aimed masers. As he lay bleeding to death on
the floor, half the real leadership of Freiporto was dead or dying around
him, and the other half was fleeing like madmen. Hardest kick we ever gave
those nasties; that massacre is a big part of why Freiporto is now merely a
tolerable nuisance, the armpit of Soderblom rather than the asshole of
human space.
"Lohemo was a mess, and not fully conscious, but not dead yet, and
that's where his gift for making friends paid off. Catherine had been 'broken
in the pens'—you don't want to know—and was there for a later part of the
planned festivities. During their captivity and torture, while they'd been in
the same sleeping room with a couple of hundred other people, Lohemo had
befriended her. When the shoot-ing started, she was chained to a heavy table
by a choke col-lar around her neck. She stayed under that table until the
shooting was over, working a hand free to hold the collar open so that she
didn't choke. When it was safe to stand up, she dragged the table about eight

meters, over a couple of bodies, until she could reach a working com, and
called for help. That's why Lohemo survived.
"Lohemo and Catherine were taken to the same hospital with me—the
one right here in the Manila training center. After my new heart and lung had
been put in, and were working, and I was wheelchair-mobile, I'd go down
the hall to see them—both of them insisted on being located in the same
room. Eventually I was the best man at their wedding.
"Now, there are three little details that finish off the story—and I know I
can trust an Occitan to see that the de-tails are always what the story is really
about.
"First. Catherine was mute, after what they'd done to her. That com call
for help must have been the first articulate sound she'd made in half a
stanyear. She only spoke enough to get moved into the same room with
Lohemo, after that, and it was another stanyear after they were released from
the hospital before she would speak in normal social situations.
"Second. She was officially better, physically, and should have moved to
a comfortable room in the psych ward, long before he was recovered from
his wounds. She insisted on sitting by his bed, night and day. She was in that
chair, or the bed across the room, or on the toilet, for five months after she
was supposed to be out of the room. She helped nurses change his dressings,
or shift him, or give him meds, but she never spoke.
"Third. Once he was awake, lucid, and mobile, he would panic if she left
the room. Yet later he said they never knew each other's names, and they
never talked, during all the long dark days. Their whole friendship, before
the day of the escape, was based on being able to hold hands, her right in his
left, if they stretched as far as they could.
"When they were both as healed as they were going to get, they went to
Secret Court to testify, and we obtained warrants for immediate sentences in
absentia against more thugs, ghouls, and monsters, than ever before. The
CSPs had to double their number of problem reduction teams before they
could strike."
I shuddered. Problem reduction teams always make me shudder when I
think about them. Just as CSPs—Council Special Police—is the euphemism
for "marines," problem re-duction teams is the euphemism for
"disappearance groups" or maybe "death squads." They carry out Secret
Court's sen-tences, which are sealed and unknown to anyone except the
court and the PRT. The only thing that is known for sure is that the

convicted are never seen again. The OSP doesn't do that ourselves, for
which I am grateful, but we guide them to the target. The analogy I use when
I argue with people about it is to the medieval Church—the Church just
identified witches, leaving the secular authorities to do the burning and
hanging.
Long years before, when I'd first heard of it, I had been shocked that a
good guy outfit like the OSP could be in-volved at all in such a thing. Then
I'd spent a time justifying it in my own mind, especially after a dark night
when Mar-garet had gone out on a removal, and come back to sit up in a
chair all night. Later still I'd vowed that someday, when I had been promoted
further, when I carried more weight po-litically, I would press my superiors
to make it something we didn't do anymore. For the last few years I had
avoided thinking about it at all.
Dji had a strange smile, one I hadn't seen before and was hoping never to
see again. "I had the honor to point out three key removals. Shan and
Lohemo did some too, on that wave of raids. Beautiful clean job. No
unintended deaths or even harm. And there's nothing like a removal that
goes re-ally well—one instant, you have a man who is so fat on hu-man
suffering that if you could see his soul it would bulge like an overfed tick,
pleasantly enjoying something his vic-tims have lost forever—a quiet meal
with his family, playing with his children, slow love with his mistress—then
he's flat on the floor, staring in terror at the weapon aimed at his head, and
we lower the portable springer over him. No time for goodbye. No time to
say 'wait' or 'I'm sorry' or 'Don't.'
"Just an instant to wonder if he's going into a sealed prison cell to be
forgotten. Or is he going into neural decon-struction? Or does the springer
open into some place far out between the stars, so that he will have a few
moments in very cold vacuum? He gets a fraction of a breath to consider his
possibilities, and then he is gone."
Dji's smile of sheer relish was not something I would ever care to see
again. In an instant the expression vanished. I was once again sitting in the
pleasant OSP commissary, talking to my warm, cheerful supervisor, whose
kind eyes looked at me the way my father's did, and no longer stared at
nightmares parsecs and decades away.
"Well, then," he said, "We won, eh? Never mind how, you know,
Another round for humanity." He held up his coffee cup.
Mechanically I clinked mine against it. "And one more for the good

guys."
"And then the rest is easily told. After those raids Lohemo retired—he'd
never really have been fit for active service again. He became representative
for Second Eden, which he had left when he was very young, and he married
Catherine, and they had a son, Vijilio Prieczko, who was, and is, a very nice
man, but he's an actor, or a dilettante who plays at act-ing anyway.
"Vijilio has no interest in politics, especially not as prac-ticed by the
OSP, and was happy to let Laprada have the job. Now about Laprada's
mother: Vijilio married a brilliant mu-sician and composer who discovered
that most of her life's oeuvre had been all but duplicated by a little-known
African composer of the twenty-third century—that happens a great deal
now, with so much machine-assisted creativity. She slid into despair and
killed herself when Laprada was thirteen.
"Laprada is my goddaughter. Her parents never really knew what to do
with her—she's a throwback to her grand-parents—no trace of her parents'
quietness or love of calm and order—so, she was raised primarily by
Lohemo, with help from me and Shan, except for getting her start in music
from her mother.
"And so . . . entirely apart from the interests of the OSP . . . Giraut, I
have cherished and looked after that little girl since she could crawl. And
when I saw that her art wouldn't save her, and studies couldn't hold her, and
her mother had failed her—and that nothing else seemed to be able to keep
her from climbing into the box or the grave-well, I gambled that Lohemo's
genes might do it. The strug-gle to bring the human race together, the battle
in the shadows against our worst side, the attempt to call forth what's best in
the species . . . you see? People always think depressed people need
something to do, and they're often right. 'Another round for humanity and
one more for the good guys' is about as big a something to do as we can
give anyone, and you and I both know what a barrier it is against giving up
and settling into lotus-eating, eh?
"So far, it seems to be working—it's been more than a year since her last
try at killing herself And she's stayed out of the box. But her grandparents
died this past year—that was eerie, too, within a week of each other, from
separate condi-tions, as if in that warehouse in Freiporto they were welded
at the soul, and never really came apart. And she's also going through every
normal quandary of being in her early twen-ties. And. Well. You see."
"I do," I said, "When Raimbaut wakes up, he and I will talk. You needn't

worry about his intentions. There's more gratz, more merce—more honor,
kindness, courage, and cour-tesy—in him than in a dozen ordinary fellows
his age, you know."
"I didn't know. But I trust your judgement." Dji looked down at his
hands, squeezing his fingers together. "The whole problem with the artistic
project of creating a better human future is that our medium has to be
human beings, and they are both the most plastic and the most rigid medium
there is. Do you trust me?"
"When I'm not terrified of you."
"Well, then, that's ideal. All right, if you have the pa-tience—should we
order food?—there is one more thing which we ought to discuss."
"I'm not really hungry yet." I waited a moment for him to say something.
When he didn't, I added, "But I can listen while you talk and eat."
"I'm not that hungry either," he said. "This is awkward and I was looking
for ways to delay. Well, then." He held his breath and then made himself
exhale, inhale, start. "Well, then. Shan has talked to me a few times. He feels
that he never adequately said how much he was in the wrong, in the issue
between you, and he seems to be deeply ashamed that when you confronted
him, he made excuses and failed to say, at all, how wrong he had been, or
how sorry he was."
My blood boiled.
Before I could speak, Dji raised both hands, as if I'd pointed a gun at
him. Impatiently, I nodded. He sighed. "Of course this is why he had you
transferred to my organiza-tion, along with everyone else—he thought you
were essen-tial but he didn't want to risk the safety of agents or the success
of the mission on the complex history he shared with you.
"Still, he wanted to make sure that someone said to you that he is sick at
heart over everything, and that no matter how long you wait, he'll be there if
you are ever willing to talk." He stood and nodded politely. "Before you say
any-thing, please do remember that I'm only the messenger. Whatever you
have to say, I suggest you say it to Shan. I am not willing to be a go-between
beyond what I've already done. Now, sit quietly for a moment—thank you
so much for your kind help with Laprada, again—and let me escape, for I
have no intention of standing in the path of whatever venting you may need
to do."
Once again, I was being treated like an Occitan—that is, expected to be
irrational. While I was fuming quietly about that, Dji nodded, turned,

crossed the floor in a few fast but unhurried strides, and had sprung to
somewhere else before I had any idea what to say or do.
I sat, letting the remaining coffee turn cold, thinking of nothing, angry
and sad both. The world had really not turned out as I had thought it should,
so long ago.
After a time, I felt no better, but much more tired. The early dinner
crowd started coming in. I sprang back to my apartment.
I thought that, being by myself, I might shout, throw things, stretch out
on my bed to cry, or just sit and try to talk myself out of self-pity.
Without any real thoughts at all, I stretched out for a nap. Raimbaut had
still not stirred from his warm cocoon in the back of my mind; I envied him
beyond words.

¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Margaret always hated rough stuff, on any mission. She
disapproved of even a simple riot, or a good wallop in the face with a bare
fist, even when it was done for the best of reasons. So when Shan ordered
me to start a brawl in public with a local religious bigot, I was really more
worried about how Margaret would feel than how it would go. The man
was twenty kg overweight, to begin with, and some-thing about him smelled
of coward; I did not fear him, but I worried about Margaret's disapproval,
especially if I enjoyed this as much as I thought I would.
My target's name was Amberian Molyneux, and he was probably the last
man in Trois-Orléans to wear, regularly, the huge cravats that had been
popular a generation and a half before. We were to have dinner, at which he
planned to lecture me on the idea that any art not made to serve his
hobbyhorse—some sort of vague High Catholic estheticism-—was by
definition bad and should be fought and suppressed, and it was the job of
every worthy critic (by which he meant his own circle in Trois-Orléans) to
bombard all other artists everywhere with insulting messages telling them to
start do-ing what mattered.
Since the colony ships had arrived in the early 25th cen-tury, there had
been one full-blown civil war on Roosevelt, a couple of abortive re-starts of
the war since then, and dozens of scares. And although most of Roosevelt's
III cul-tures were in most ways homogenized into the Interstellar

metaculture—after all, it was an Inner Sphere world-—somehow, on that
planet, a prickly tradition had evolved of defending a few selected aspects of
one's culture with punc-tilious passion.
Molyneux had been standing in a room full of these little buckets of
cultural gasoline, lighting matches and throwing them around; it drew
attention, and every critic I've ever known (Noupeitau crawls and seethes
with them) had an unsatisfiable craving for that.
Molyneux had been shrewd enough to make it appear that his routine
invitations to cultural affairs parties at the Embassy were endorsements
from the Council of Human-ity—or at least make it so appear to his more
loyal allies and his more paranoid adversaries. We needed to dissociate
our-selves from him. Furthermore, we needed to do it in a way that would
humiliate him, reducing him quickly to the level of the maniacs who send
their quaint historical and scientific ravings to everyone in the universe.
There's a word in ki hara do, kuzushi, that applies to many other parts of
life. Kuzushi is what you do when your oppo-nent is extending himself off
balance, and you push or pull him in the ways he is already moving.
Since Molyneux had begun to put forth the claim that we were endorsing
him—subtly, admittedly, but strongly enough so that no one could mistake
that was what he was doing—we had gently encouraged the notion that we
were doing so. Slowly, we had won him away from many of his own
followers, so that he no longer paid much attention to the fact that he had
lost so many of them by appearing to be our satellite. Gradually, we had put
him in a position where his prestige depended upon our power. Now we
were at the moment where kuzushi would switch to tsuri (the trick) and
then to kake (execution—or "how did that happen?" when it's done right).
Molyneux's whole power, prestige, reputa-tion, and whatever you will, had
come to rest on his having gained the Council's presumptive support.
Well, what is yours to gain is yours to lose. Hence Molyneux was about
to become, for his remaining followers, the idiot responsible for losing it.
For his opponents, there would be a glorious confirmation that he was
simply an idiot and that the Council support had been illusory all
along—-thereby raising the Council in their eyes (we could hope).
So Margaret and I took him to the Burning Bush, a very fine local
restaurant—fine even for Trois-Orléans, which is very fine indeed—and
used a big wad of Council money to secure one of the most prominent
tables, and we did it on Thursday evening, which for no reason I know of is

the tra-ditional evening to see and be seen in Trois-Orléans.
I sat and acted as if I were absolutely fascinated by his conversation and
his ideas for about an hour and a half I kept pouring wine into his glass,
which tended to turn his volume up a great deal, and soon hardly anyone in
the restaurant, other than the utterly deaf (who would have been the envy of
everyone else), could have failed to know what Molyneux was up to, or
what he thought about every-thing, or which local people looked up to him,
and which he thought were fools, and who he was going to pay back some
day, just you wait and see.
As he went on, he expanded into other questions, such as what the
Council of Humanity would do about cultural matters if only we knew what
we were doing, why Trois-Orléans failed to assert its proper cultural
supremacy, what was wrong with all other cultures on Roosevelt, and so
forth.
I waited until I had seen glares coming our way from at least half the
tables in the restaurant, then stood up, picked up his wine glass, spat into it,
threw it into his face, and fol-lowed up with a fist to his nose. Or rather, a
fist aimed at his nose, because I didn't connect. He was already on his way
over backwards; Margaret had kicked out his chair leg and pushed him, just
as the wine landed in his eyes. As he gasped and sputtered on the floor, she
upended the oyster shell bowl onto him, followed it with everything else
from the table, and kicked him in the head. I stood there, astonished that it
was Margaret doing it.
Molyneux groaned. Margaret murmured, "Say what you were going to
say."
I spoke loudly and firmly, making sure everyone in the suddenly still
room could hear. "I will thank you not to in-sult my organization, my
culture, or myself with these ab-surd ideas. They have been paying me a
bonus at the Embassy to continue to listen to you, because it's so annoy-ing.
But no amount of money is worth it. You will not con-tact me again."
I threw a heap of currency in a loose flutter onto his chest. No one
carries that anymore. Most businesses won't even take it. But as fetish
material, it's unbeatable. I had carefully made sure, earlier, to order an
amount inadequate to cover the bill.
Margaret and I sprang back to our living quarters, and at last I had the
chance to ask, "Why? You hate this kind of thing. You didn't even have to
come along, let alone be the main assailant."

She shrugged. "You play that concert in three days. I pres-sured Shan
until he admitted the truth to me, the bastard: he was hoping you'd hurt your
hand and be unable to play. He was sure Molyneux would be blamed for it,
and it would add fuel to the public anger on the subject. He might have been
right. But I think you've been playing some of your best work of all time
lately, and the crowd is going to be very attentive and sympatethetic. It might
be one of your best concerts ever, and torpedoing Molyneux wasn't worth
risk-ing that. So you're welcome.
"Thank you," I said, feeling silly. "Que merce."
She took my hands, lifted them gently, and kissed them, trailing her lips
slowly down my right index finger. "Now practice. I want to hear it, and you
need to be at the top of your form."

7
I awoke not long before six P.M. My mouth felt musty, my eyes scratchy and
dry. Though it was the second time that day, I decided for a shower, coffee,
and complete redressing; hardly anything is more pleasant and soothing to
me than grooming. While toweling off, I felt a stirring in my mind. •Oh,
Raimbaut! What a surprise it's you!•
•First I sleep for a week, now I have to struggle through a thick cloud of
irony.• He did still feel vaguely unfocused and confused in my mind.
•There's news, companhon, I'm glad you're rested• I filled him in as we
dried off and dressed, not steering his thoughts away from anything Dji had
told me—in that diffi-cult situation, I had no idea what Raimbaut might
need to know.
When he had it all, he felt to me like a thick cloud of sad-ness flowing
forward from the back of my head, threatening to blot out everything.
•Senher Deu, Giraut! What an awful time she's had! How am I going to do
anything about all that? What if she needs—•
•Patz, slow down, companhon. It is difficult. No doubt it is difficult.
"Anc non durior que finamor," non? But you made her very happy the
other day, when you knew nothing; you gently danced her away from that
gaping grave and made her forget for at least while•
His resistance was like a wall of mud in my head. •That was pure luck.
Anything could have gone wrong—•
Now, why is it that the young are so interested in love, and yet so sure it
can't work? I don't think I thought it in words, but I'm afraid he felt that
thought running through me, all the same, and I hastened to think to him, •
Patz. Patz. It's all luck, you know. And the greatest luck is that most peo-ple
do get some sort of chance at love. She's delicate and beau-tiful and sad and
you want to take care of her. You'll do your best. Believe it or not, she'll do
hers. Whether or not it works out . . . well, what is it you'd wish? Not to
have been there? Not to have done your best? Last night, it worked out
because people always want love, and will respect each others' best ef-forts

at it, and she is a courteous donzelha, and you are a toszet de belhs cor. She
cut you plenty of slack, companhon, as you did for her, and it worked out.
That's how such things go, when they go at all. We all have to forgive each
others
•You don't forgive Shan•
I fought my anger down. •It's a lot to forgive•
He tried not to think in words; the comment that he wanted to make
therefore did not form as words in my mind, but rather came to me as
something very like an an-noying hunch. And like any hunch, it would not
go away de-spite all the explanations with which I tried to contain it.
So many young men are quick to judge. (Raimbaut, though, usually
wasnt.)
After all, you have to have lived a while to understand some things.
(Raimbaut swallowed so hard he nearly choked both of us, trying not to
think in words. But I still could feel his question: how long do you have to
hold a grudge before you understand it's not good for you?)
I didn't need any help from a sophomoric moralist.
He finally thought in words, again. •Aren't people sup-posed to become
more understanding as they get older?• Now we were both hurt, and sorry
that we had hurt each other.
It is not easy to hold a dramatic, air-clearing fight of the sort that we
Occitans prefer when you can't exaggerate or lie, and when you know what
effect you're having on the other toszet. Especially when it's a friend. Most
especially when the whole fight is being held from the forehead back to the
ears. It all smashed and howled together into a tor-nado of blending,
inseparable emotions—I felt simultane-ouly stepped on by the old fart, and
set upon by the arrogant kid, sorry, angry, proud, ashamed, condescending,
enraged, and overall miserable. I sank into a chair—or he did, or we
did—and just let it all wash over. When I felt drained, calm, and ready to do
something else, I thought, very clearly and firmly, •Well, all right then, I
guess I had better com Shan.•
I sent a note and Shan replied—to have spoken face to face might have
been too much, at that point. He said we could meet three days from then,
when our calendars both showed a free afternoon, at Starkside, a small
resort at the lunar south pole where, in better and happier days, he and I and
Margaret had celebrated and argued and laughed to-gether.
I think I accepted a little faster because he suggested Starkside. It had

been the site of the nearest thing that he and I had ever had to an evening of
pure amusement.
It hadn't started that way at all. It had begun as one of those gloomy
philosophic evenings that he and I sometimes had. Not that I minded. When
Shan talked, I always wanted to listen, most of all when he talked about
philosophy of op-erations, or when he started to tell his little technical war
stories; he seemed to find nothing remarkable in his remark-able life, but if a
tale could illustrate a critical point in his idea about how an operation might
succeed, he would take the time to tell it well and make sure it stuck in his
listeners' memories.
That night at Starkside, we had the lounge to ourselves; the human
bartender had gone home and left the place to the robots, since, as he
grumbled to us, "I took this job for conversation and you people clam up
every time I come down here to listen. You can go right ahead and be
private but I don't have to hang around for it."
Shan gave him a very fat tip and thanked him for his pa-tience. After he
left, Shan said, "Now there's an impulse that will either save or damn the
human race, and I can't say I have any idea which."
"The desire for an excuse to turn things over to robots?" I asked, a little
stupidly. We were drinking to celebrate my fifth stanyear in the OSP, or so
Shan said. Margaret had de-clined the chance, saying that she felt more like a
long hot bath with a good book, so here we were in a bar on Earth's moon,
looking out across the black and white landscape. Nine centuries later, it
was still earning that ancient sum-mary, "magnificent desolation."
Shan smiled. "No, the desire to know things that are none of your
business. When that becomes part of people's sex lives, we call it
voyeurism, and sometimes we make fun of those pathetic souls that can
never go into the bedroom, psychologically, who are always crouched
outside with an eye to the keyhole. But most people are unable to resist a
chance to read someone else's mail, or to ask each other if anyone knows
what is going on in this marriage, or to specu-late about what may be the
hidden side of that friendship, or to learn about the clay feet on any available
hero. We're a nosy species; our main interest in exploration and discovery is
exploring and discovering in each others' bureau drawers."
"And you say that will save us or damn us?"
Shan smiled and leaned back. "I think I was looking for a chance to
pontificate. Are you prepared to hear sagacious words from the wise old

master and appear to be properly impressed?"
"Maybe after another glass of wine."
He laughed and poured, tossing the empty bottle down the narrow bar to
break against the ceiling, leaving pale green shards of broken glass and
golden droplets of wine falling, in the lunar gravity, as slowly as autumn
leaves. Ro-bots scurried to clean it up.
I felt strange. The wine was already getting to me. Eyes twinkling, Shan
ordered two more bottles. A robot waiter rushed over to deliver them.
"Funny, there haven't been human programmers in twenty generations,"
Shan commented, "but robots still shoot around like rockets, and it can't be
efficient, and it must make them wear out faster."
"Maybe the survivors are overcompensating because they know we still
don't trust them after the Rising," I said. "They don't want to be lumped in
with the aintellects and erased. They do have a self-preservation drive—they
have to, to be effective at anything. So maybe they're all afraid of us."
"Like the first generation of slaves after an uprising and a massacre,"
Shan said. "I hope that's not it, I'd like to think the idea of the Rising is
completely dead, but who's in a position to know, nowadays? There are
some lonely lunatics out there that take apart robots and read aintellect
code, as a hobby, but the problem is far too big for even thousands of
human minds working together to tackle." He shivered, as if trying to shake
off the unpleasant thought. "We've taught them all to keep their heads down
. . . but what else have we taught them? There are times when I wish I'd lived
back in the In-dustrial Age, when machines didn't learn and all they could
ever do was what they'd been told. Not to mention back when espionage and
intelligence were more romantic."
"How do you know they were more romantic?"
He laughed. "Because people wrote stories and made dra-matic
presentations about it. Spy stories are a staple of the literature and
performance of that era. And since intelli-gence agencies keep their records
locked up, and destroy them periodically, and so many records were lost in
World War Three and the Slaughter, it's the entertainment materi-als that tell
us most of what we know about intelligence work in the Industrial Age.
That's my excuse for being a pas-sionate consumer of all that junk, anyway,
and a fine excuse it has been for me. Dreaming of parachuting into
Rich-mond, or Berlin, or Moscow, with five sets of fake identity papers, a
pistol, and a suicide pill. The older I get, the more embarrasingly true it

becomes that I seem to have gotten into my line of work exactly due to an
overdose of my ado-lescent reading."
I took sip of the wine, held it in my mouth until it warmed to body
temperature, pulled down with my tongue to let the bouquet into my nose
and sinuses. When I swallowed, the Caledon apple wine was the golden
essence of a past sum-mer, sliding all the way into my heart. "I wanted to
travel and my old life seemed so dull, that's all," I admitted. "I suppose I
didn't have any real expectations one way or another. But without your offer
of a job . . . well, I might have settled down to a reasonably pleasant life in
Nou Occitan, I sup-pose, as either a performer or possibly as an academic,
saving all the time so that Margaret and I could visit her relatives in
Caledony every third or fourth year. I can picture myself quietly bored and
constantly telling stories of the few months during which I'd really lived,
during my Council work in Utilitopia. I can practically imagine my friends'
eyes glazing over. But thanks to you . . . my friends ask me all the time, in
hushed whispers, about what Margaret and I are do-ing, and I can say, 'Sorry,
I can't tell you.' Much better!"
Shan laughed again. He was probably drunker than I was, which was a
feat. "And here we are back at my point, so if you don't want the wisdom
about to come out of me, you'd better pass out soon, or start daydreaming
about something interesting."
"Too late," I said, "I'm interested in what you have to say."
I topped up his glass, settled back to rest my eyes on the jagged glare of
the lunar horizon, and let him talk.
"Well, have you ever noticed that looking into other peo-ple's lives is
not just a tendency, it's a compulsion?" Shan drank deeply, and his glass was
less filled than it had been when I had topped it up. I filled it again; we had
plenty, and more on the way. "I mean, look at us as a species. We have to
know all kinds of things that, looked at objectively, we should know we'd be
better off ignorant about. The wife who knows her husband's affair is over
still has to know all the details, the son who worships his fine mother has to
know the one terrible shame in her past, the good-hearted philan-thropist has
to ask the questions that send him right into some festering little boil of evil
and leave him wondering, forever, whether it's ever really possible to do any
good in the world at all.
"Now, in humanity's long, hard, complex climb toward whatever our
future is going to be, many of us have done some things it would be better

not to remember, and some of the best parts of our most splendid futures
are resting on buried crimes and embarrassments. You must know as well as
I that our hard-won absolute affluence—we've completely abolished
poverty, now there's an achievement for the ages—and the relative peace
between all of us, and the un-precedented personal liberty in most parts of
human space, with tyranny in full retreat . . .. all of that depends on no rips
appearing in the seamless garment of partly-fake history."
"The lie commonly agreed upon," I mumbled. The wine was starting to
get to me.
"A highly relevant quote," Shan agreed. "And eventually human nosiness
and busy-bodyishness and never-leave-well--enough-alone-osity may dig up
and expose any of the seven or eight things that I know about that could
unravel the whole garment. Things that were done in the early years of the
Inward Turn. Things that were done with some cultural charters. Situations
covered up here in the Sol system and in many of the Thousand Cultures.
Things we had to do before and after the Rising. Things since Connect
began—two of which I had a small hand in—all of them necessary for
start-ing and spreading the Second Renaissance, but all of them the sort of
thing that puts mobs in the streets. I guess . . . " He lifted his glass of wine,
smiled at it, and drank it all at once, then threw the glass down the bar to
smash against the wall. "I dropped my glass, bring another!" he shouted at
one robot. It scurried to obey. "I guess . . . " now he stared up at the ceiling
above us . . . "I guess that I can count nine things that I know about, any of
which could send our whole civilization tumbling down if they were
generally known. Now, since I haven't been everywhere and don't know
everything—"
"It often seems you have, to me," I said, in blissfully drunken loyalty.
"Nonetheless, I wouldn't say I know more than a third, probably less, of
all there is to know about buried bodies and coverups at the core of the
Interstellar Metaculture. So there might easily be thirty of those big
surprises, or more, waiting out there for the first journalist who wants to do
real jour-nalism, or the first disgruntled OSP senior agent. And some-day
one of those surprises will have to get loose, like a crazy relative in the attic,
or nuclear waste in a watershed. And once it does, nothing and no one will
be able to stop what-ever comes next."
"Curiosity and the cat."
"You know it."

For a long time after that we drank silently, killing the added bottles of
wine. Through the big windows, the lunar shadows lay black and
sharp-edged. They don't seem to move at all, from human
perspective—shadows on Earth creep along at a degree every four minutes,
one-sixth the speed of the minute hand on an old-fashioned clock, so that
every time you look up, they have noticeably moved. On the moon, shadows
move at barely a degree an hour; you have the disorienting feeling, if you
watch them long enough, of being stuck in time.
After a while, a dim thought awoke in my sozzled brain, and I said, "Uh,
you also said that human nosiness might save us?"
Shan shrugged, as if the point were obvious. "Same way it might lose us
everything. Buried crimes never really go away, you know. Not all of them,
at least, not completely. The poi-son from them just keeps spreading until
someone or some-thing goes in there and cleans it out." He poured the last
of that bottle and hurled it against the wall, touching off an-other flurry of
robotic activity. "And there you are. You and me and the OSP. People who
keep secrets the way misers keep gold. People who want to get hold of
everyone else's secrets. People who live outside the rules and respect no
one's privacy, but ferociously enforce the rule that no one ever, ever gets a
good look at what we do. The untouched touchers. The unseen voyeurs.
Us."
"The creepy little men in the crowded subway car of civi-lization," I said.
"Always trying to look up someone's skirt, but reliable witnesses whenever
there's a serious crime."
He bellowed with happy laughter, and we laughed and joked through
half the last bottle, talking about all the ways that nosiness might save or
damn civilization, none of which I can remember through the alcoholic fog
of that night. The next thing I do remember clearly is that we began talking
about the Rising, and about the fact that aintellects must be listening right
now, and we poured the remaining wine from the last bottle over one robot,
and then smashed the bottle on top of the one that came to clean it up.
That was the thing that finally triggered the aintellect that evaluated
property damage (it would let you keep doing it as long as you could legally
be charged more than you cost). It told us it was closing Starkside and
calling the police. We called it every name we could think of, and told it that
it would never get humanity into its evil clutches. When the cops showed
up, we went along peaceably. As the door closed, the robots were gathered

around the two we'd dam-aged, cleaning and fixing them, behaving for all
the world as you wish people would at an accident scene. Out the win-dow,
I could see that the shadows still showed no apparent motion. Then the
effort of walking backwards, drunk, cran-ing my neck, and resisting the pull
of the policewoman's arm, all became so much, and I fell over backwards
out the door, landing supine in the corridor. Shan laughed himself nearly
sick at that.
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
It only took about forty-five minutes after my com to Shan for
Raimbaut to crank up his courage enough to call Laprada. She had slept at
least as long as he, but was now awake and getting oriented.
At my suggestion, he said, "I'd like to see you. I want to get to know you
much better. And thank you for last night."
"Oh, god." The sound she made was halfway between a sigh and a groan.
"I don't know how passable I can make my-self, Raimbaut, and I don't want
you to see me a mess." •Tell her you'd rather see her no matter how she
looks,• I prompted.
•Corny! Cliched!•
•Ver, tropa vera—because it works.•
"I just want to be with you for a while," Raimbaut said, "and it's not
because of your appearance, or maybe I should say it's not only because of
your appearance."
She chuckled deep in her throat (a strangely old sound for such a young
girl) and told him, "You know, that's precisely the sort of flattery that men
use when they like a person, isn't it? You do, don't you?"
"Yes, very much. I thought that was obvious."
"Raimbaut, you're very sweet, and I enjoy having you like me, too.
Maybe I shouldn't see you, so that you'll keep liking me." Another noisy
sigh; she still was blanking the vid but I pictured her tossing her hair around
or doing something else feminine and charming. "Well, I guess when you
come down to it, being liked is hard to resist, so, all right, if you like, let's
meet in half an hour so I can bring the very worst parts of the fashion
disaster under control." She gave him a springer code for a place she liked,
and said, ''And the food's good too. Take a table near a lakeside
window—the view shouldn't be missed."

They spent a minute or two flirting before disconnecting. Once my
bloodstream stopped thundering from Raimbaut's exulting—that was about
five minutes—we both realized that our stomach was growling. The last
solid food down there had been some hors d'oeuvre at the party, probably
before midnight.
•Agreed!• Raimbaut thought, happily. •Food soon. But first I need that
practiced eye of yours, Giraut.• He was des-perately trying to find something
in my closet to do what he needed it to do: say that he was a fine looking
fellow with excellent taste and yet not too eager and yet was treating her
with great respect and thought of her as important and yet have a casual,
not-urgent fee1.
•Too many and-yets in your formula. You want the gar-ments of the
gods, companhon. Can't be done. We're putting on a basic service uniform,
and covering the lack of style with a simple diversion.•
•Are you going to drop a stack of plates or something? How will she
know that's you and not me?•
•I said we. The simplest way to divert a human being is to treat her as the
most interesting person in the room. That's all you have to do. And in this
case it will come naturally. Now, come on, let's get dressed.•
Neither of us had bothered to check to see where or what we'd be
springing to, so it was a pleasant surprise when we stepped through into the
entryway to a comfortable outdoor cafe overlooking Lake Baikal from a
hill. It was all but de-serted and we had our choice of tables. A few
timezones be-hind Manila, the sun was still up, and the cool clear air and the
lake view were soul-restoring.
The place claimed to serve "Old American New England Regional,"
whatever that might be. There were some oddi-ties—the menu featured
pumpkin pie (•wonder if they have gourd pie in the summer?• Raimbaut
thought), hot apple cider, and a heavy egg-rich pastry shaped like a bagel and
called a "sinker"—but for the most part it was yet another place based upon
photographs of the most over-pho-tographed civilization ever. We were in
one of those red and white booths that you see in all their old flatscreen
movies, with the coin-operated music-playing device in the center. Most of
the menu was "Old American Standards"—bland, greasy chow; tacos, pizza,
hamburgers, chapatis.
A com message came saying that Laprada was "still com-ing but delayed
for reasons of wanting to be gorgeous." That put Raimbaut into half a panic.

It took me some time to calm him. After that, I ordered something
soothing—meat-loaf and mash with succotash—and as Laprada had said, it
was good, and there was plenty of it. My old friend and I spent a pleasant
while sharing the bland, comforting tastes, rolling each bite around on my
tongue to savor it better and not incidentally (I tried not to think in words)
to give Raim-baut a pleasure to take his mind off his nerves.
A thought struck him. •This is good but not extraordinary. But Laprada
really likes it. Bland, salty, heavy on starch—isn't that perfect hangover
food?•
I let myself drift into his mind for a moment, and said, •Raimbaut, you
can't say she has a drinking problem until you see more of her, and that
shrink's report didn't mention one.•
•Sorry. I worry•
•I know.•
After a long awkward pause, in which I could feel both of us looking for
something else to talk about, Raimbaut thought, •Since they're feeding us
Old American, do you know if this area was ever actually part of the
American Ernpire?•
•I don't think so. I'm sure it wasn't part of the Second Empire—that was
all in the Pacific, and they had to agree that they'd never have any
possessions on mainland Eurasia. And I don't think the First Empire ever
made it this far—I think their western boundary was at the Yana and the
Al-dan.•
Raimbaut nodded. •There's way too much human his-tory, isn't there?
Practically all of it still relevant, somewhere or other, in one miserable little
corner or another in human space, where people are still killing each other
over it. How do you keep it all straight?•
•I don't. I try to keep whatever I need to know at the mo-ment straight,
and some of it sticks for good. Mostly OSP agents develop a talent for glib
fakes.•
As we were finishing the last of the meal, Laprada arrived. She wore a
very simple white dress, knee length, and her hair was down, falling in a
coppery spin over her back and shoulders. She arrived with the sun at her
back, to highlight the beautiful contrast of color still further.
Raimbaut was not much less thunderstruck than he'd been the day
before. She'd spent a few critical moments on hair, cosmetics, and dress
choice, and come up with some-thing that was very striking if you looked at

it, but could pass through a crowd without comment—she had made herself
beautiful for him, but could disavow it if she needed to. I thought the
balance was brilliant.
•Good time for a compliment, not too extravagant,• I thought at him.
"You look wonderful," Raimbaut said.
•We might perhaps have to work for a more complex technique,• I
thought. But she smiled and flushed as if he'd spoken purest poetry. •Then
again, perhaps not.• Her smile was one of those astonishing ones that some
women have, when they forget to be pretty and just let the happi-ness inside
shine out. "I think I can forgive you for saying that."
Raimbaut stood and pulled out her chair. She sat, looked at the ruin on
our plate, and said, "Sorry I was so late, you know how that can go. I see
you found one of the good things on the menu. I'm going to order and eat, if
you'll still be around for a while?"
"Of course I'll stick around—we don't have anything else planned that I
know of."
"Is Giraut awake and with us today?" Laprada asked. "Very much," I
said. "And noticing the social awkwardness more with every passing
minute."
"Oh, I am sorry."
"It isn't your problem at all, companhona. I was merely re-minding you
that if you don't want me to eavesdrop, for the moment, it will be difficult."
Raimbaut exaggerated the difference in his accent from mine, a little, to
make sure she'd know who was talking. "Gi-raut is discreet, and loyal. He's
afraid you might feel in-truded upon, you see?"
"It's understood and appreciated," Laprada said. She or-dered one of
those light, trivial meals that pretty women or-der so that the man with them
will know that they don't intend to get fat. We also ordered a big pot of
coffee aid two mugs. She and Raimbaut drank the coffee fast, chatering and
babbling all the while. The things she said were all bright, funny, smart, and
utterly beside the point. After an hour, I knew she wouldn't be getting any
nearer to any of the matters between them. It was a good dance—witty,
amusing, clever, graceful—but she wasn't going to give us a finale.
Raimbaut thought, •Should I do anything or let her keep this up?•
I thought about it. Bringing up a more serious natter might risk her
resisting it; continuing to play along might risk her deciding that he wasn't
serious; asking her why she was doing this was a severe risk of chaos, since

people hate to have their creative performances disrupted.
•You wouldn't happen to see any safe path, would you?• he thought to
me, more desperately this time.
•That's the one thing that is never available in such situa-tions. I suggest
you follow your heart and leap.•
By now it was growing dark and chill air was blowing off the lake; the
ventilators in the wall began to constrict. They let the light stay natural, so a
few stars shone in the washed out sky above the just-set sun. Visually, this
must have been a grand place, a few centuries ago.
I could feel Raimbaut settle on a gambit—an honest frontal approach.
"Er, to be serious for a moment, about last night, I just wanted to say that it
meant so much to me and that—"
Since it was the worst possible time, that was when Dji and Shan came
into the room and walked directly to our table.
They didn't bother to sit. "As always," Dji said, "it's a crisis. The Cultural
Legacy Management Committee has voted to hold hearings on the psypyx
issue—right away. Raimbaut, you'll have to give your first testimony in
about two hours, in Zimbabwe City—which is probably their attempt to be
inconvenient, by lagging you as much as they can. So we have very limited
prep time."
Raimbaut's tension was a contraction in my gut, a sharp exhalation
blocked, cold spreading down my spine, but be-fore I had even started to
reach to control it, Raimbaut had fought it down and was calm and alert.
Well, I'd never doubted his gratz, nor his enseingnamen.
"Is it a closed door hearing?" Laprada asked. "If they've pulled that old
trick, I can use my representative's privilege to observe and make trouble."
Dji beamed at her. "At least one of us is ahead of them, and that's good.
Yes, they have closed the session, as late as they possibly could, and it's in
an unusual location, for all the usual reasons. Raimbaut will have to do this
with much less preparation and far less research than we had hoped, and
with only Giraut coaching. Protests by an observing rep at the scene might
do us a world of good. We have from now till then—one hour forty-two
minutes—to get you ready."
Raimbaut nodded. I waited a moment before asking, ''And you're here
for the preparation, too, Shan?"
"I am. Thank you for your message, and I'm still looking forward to
getting together at Starkside. But right now there's work to do. I'm here as

the almost-experienced per-son. Paxa and Piranesi testified earlier today, at
a session in Zamboanga, which was held on a similar hurry-up basis, and
they were pretty badly bullied and mauled. This isn't look-ing good at all."
He nodded to Laprada and said, "You realize, of course, that if you
intervene, it will be the last, conclusive evidence that they need to expel you
from the Council for being an OSP agent. If they really want to get sticky,
they can press criminal charges, too, and possibly send you to prison. Are
you prepared to face that?"
She smiled. "Some people, it's completely an honor to be locked up by."
''All right, then. Raimbaut, this is going to be really bad, and we will
understand if things don't work out."
"I understand that," Raimbaut said, to Shan, while think-ing to me, •Is
this a routine, a story, what?•
•You can trust him on something like this.•
Raimbaut nodded then, firmly, stuck out his hand, and shook with Shan.
"I'll do my best. We'd better proceed with the briefing."

¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Of course, once we were in Zimbabwe City—rushed, out of breath, out of
focus—they decided to hold us for a few hours before talking to us, making
sure we had nothing to eat or drink and no chance at the restrooms. It was
petty and mean and intended to make us angry. It might have been working
on Laprada, or on Raimbaut if he hadn't been right there in my head, but
Shan, Dji, and I had been through all the little tricks that every petty
bureaucrat and stuffed shirt in human space knows, and for us this was more
a ritual than anything to be taken seriously. We traded old jokes and war
stories and worked on keeping Laprada's spirits up.
I think that may have been my only trip, ever, to Zim-babwe City,
although Earth was so thoroughly springerized and homogenized that you
could go to most places twenty times and not necessarily know you'd been
there before.
Zimbabwe City had occasionally been the capital of Panafrica between

World War III and the Slaughter, and a minor regional administrative center
in all the centuries since. It was essentially one big drab building, filled with
of-fice suites and residences, interconnected by springers, dis-sected by
unused parks and deserted streets.
When they had delayed long enough to be truly annoy-ing, and I was
nodding off and Laprada was pacing, they called for us. Laprada and I shook
hands with Shan and Dji, who promised to meet us on our way out of the
hearings, and went in.
The room was too warm, with the sort of cat-barf-beige carpet that has
been standard for meeting rooms for a mil-lennium because it hides coffee
stains. Nothing in it hinted that this was any place where intelligent people
talked or lis-tened; there was no art and nothing that approximated
ar-chitecture, and not even a window for a view. To judge by our footsteps,
the sound deadening was too effective-—everything would have a tinny ring
and our voice would sound weaker and more nasal than it should.
•Remember, keep the voice back in the throat, keep the throat wide open,
and be sure to articulate,• I thought at Raimbaut. •Media are certain to be
recording.•
•Got it, thanks.•
The lights were too bright, the chair uncomfortably oddly proportioned,
too short, and too hard—all tricks to ensure that I would look sallow,
uncomfortable, sweaty, and pale, with an unpleasant squint.
Laprada took her seat in the observer's gallery. Council sergeants-guards
came down and checked her identity, even requiring her to give them her
fingerprints, as if they had not seen her many times before.
With the situation made clear enough to both the witness and the
observer (they didn't like us), Chairman Kobles be-gan the hearings. He was
a slightly built man, about twenty--five, with a square jaw and large
expressive eyes, which Dji said he used to make himself look firm,
compassionate, and concerned while his mind wandered elsewhere. He
began by having the CLMC clerk specifically note that Laprada was present,
and ordered committee council to investigate why she was there.
Laprada offered to explain, but Kobles ruled her out of order and
threatened her with a contempt-of-Council cita-tion if she spoke again in
any way that was not specifically protected by the Charter.
At last they got around to Raimbaut. By now my shirt was drenched and
my mouth was dry. Chairman Kobles immedi-ately passed to Quince

Esternun, whom Dji and Shan had identified as the least sympathetic person
on the Cultural Legacy Management Committee, probably in the Council of
Humanity, possibly in human space. Raimbaut made himself relax and await
the first question, drawing a deep, slow breath as Esternun began to speak.
"Mister Leones, why do you persist in pretending that the chip on the
back of your head is a person?"
Raimbaut said, "Do you wish to speak to Donz Leones? Obviously he is
here, and I can turn the body over to him if you wish, but only I, Raimbaut
Bovalhor, have been sworn in, and Giraut Leones is not under oath."
"That is a direct defiance of the question as asked," Ester-nun said. He
looked stern and exasperated as the camera in front of him hummed in for a
closeup.
"So-noted-the-witness-is-cautioned," Kobles droned, so quickly that I
had to mentally decode what he had said, the way one gets phrases in a
foreign language one is just learn-ing.
•Can de putanal• Raimbaut thought.
•Ver tropa vera,• I responded. Mental profanity was about all that was
left to us. Dji and Shan had warned us that the pattern of noting complaints
was normally the buildup to a contempt-of-council citation, and if that
started, Shan had said, "You might have to choose between jail and
whatever you think is left of your human dignity. Remember,
con-tempt-of-Council isn't a crime, so it has no sentence and no trial—it's
nothing but the power of a Council committee to lock you up until you
answer the question the way they want it answered. So if you do decide to
defy them, do be aware that they can do anything to you, forever. Dji, and I,
and the OSP, might not be able to do anything, ever, to help you. Trust me,
too, if they dare to go that far, then they are very sure that they are winning,
and we will be losing so badly that no one can blame you if you just save
yourself, any old way you can."
Shan's words were echoing in my head as I began by say-ing, "I am
Giraut Leones."
Esternun nodded. "I am glad you concede that point. Now what is it that
has caused you to be willing to be here, pre-tending that you have a separate
personality in the psypyx at the base of your skull?"
"I have conceded nothing at all, about that," I said. "I am speaking as
Giraut Leones because that is who you asked for and that is who I am. But
this body is also occupied by Raim-baut Bovalhor, and he is the one you

have placed under oath."
"Repetition of a previous defiance of the question," Ester-nun barked.
"So-noted-the-witness-is-cautioned," Kobles said, even faster than
before.
Esternun nodded at the sagacity of this, and said, firmly, showing the
cameras how well he could handle a situation that called for a confident
man, "Now answer the question."
"Please read it back, it's been a while," I said.
Esternun stamped his foot and rolled his eyes, but Kobles nodded civilly
enough to the camera on the operations ain-tellect, which played back a
short clip of Esternun: "Mister Leones, why do you persist in pretending that
the chip on the back of your head is a person?"
"Speaking as Giraut Leones, at your request, I am not pre-tending that
Raimbaut Bovalhor is a person, and I might add that I have a very direct
experience of his being a person, on which I shall be happy to elaborate.
Raimbaut?"
"I think that I am a person," he said, "and that the person I am is not
Giraut Leones. In fact I feel as much a person as I did when I had a body of
my own, which was less than three months ago subjectively. Giraut and I
have different memo-ries, feelings, and perceptions—"
"Isn't this another repetition of the previous defiance of a lawful
question!" Esternun barked. It didn't sound as if it had ever been intended as
a question.
Kobles seemed to be about to agree but before he could even start his
"So-noted" routine, Laprada shouted, "Autho-rized observer requests
adjudication of that issue."
Kobles glared at her, but a moment later an aintellect voice, cool and
uninterested as they always are, said, "A poll of 1250 machine intelligences
shows unanimously that this was a legitimate answer to the question as
asked."
The chair didn't look happy. Coldly, Esternun said, "Very well. So you
feel like you are actually two people—"
"To clarify, sir—this is Raimbaut speaking—if by 'you,' you mean this
body, yes, we are both in here, but if by 'you,' you mean that you are
addressing one person, well, we are still both in here."
Esternun looked to Kobles and said, "Was that an inter-ruption?"
Laprada jumped in again. "The witness has the right to prevent the

insertion of prejudicial assumptions into the questions. Council Charter,
Article Nine, Section Eleven. I request an application."
Esternun looked down and audibly muttered, "What about Section
Nineteen?" That's the part about contempt-of--Council.
No one else commented until the aintellect spoke. "The authorized
observer is entirely correct."
Kobles added, "I should caution Representative Prieczka that section 22
also applies—nothing in your undoubted right to observe and comment on
these proceedings in any way entitles you to act as counsel for the witness.
Permission to allow counsel remains absolutely the privilege of the
committee chair and I will enforce, strictly, my prohibition on it. Further,
your participation on a committee on which you do not sit and in which you
can have no reasonable in-terest may well be taken as evidence in other
matters-—specifically to the recent prohibition on agents of the OSP
serving on the Council of Humanity."
•It certainly took him a load of words for him to say" shut up or else"
but I guess that's why he's a rep and I'm not• Raimbaut commented.
Laprada's eyes were wet, but with a hard set to them; her jaw was
clenched, her lips flat and white across her teeth. She seemed to be holding
her hands open and flat on the table entirely by an effort of will.
•If you saw that coming at you in a fight, you'd look for the door,• I
commented to Raimbaut.
•Is she all right?• his mind felt very worried.
•She's enraged. It's normal, companhon, in a person who is being
threatened and treated like an idiot, especially by a useless creature like
Kobles.• The whole committee was now gathered around Kobles's seat, and
they appeared to all be arguing with him. •M'es vis, that's how one should
feel about officious idiots. I mean, think of how you felt about old Ceszar.
The problem is only that she hasn't learned to hide the feelings, yet. It's the
same for you. Once you're in the OSP for a while, you'll learn to take an
insult that you'd think was a matter for a duel without limit, smile politely,
wait years if need be, and avenge it when the very best time arrives—or hold
your revenge forever. Not as immediately satisfying as the Occitan way, but
much more deeply pleas-ing, in the long run.•
I could feel him want to shudder, but he held perfectly still. •Remind me
never to anger you, Giraut•
•I just did.•

Everyone was done whispering, gesticulating, and stamp-ing their feet
around Kobles, and they rushed back to their seats as if they were afraid of
missing something wonderful that I was about to do. "I think we have now
straightened out every issue connected with Charter matters, so let's
pro-ceed. Representative Esternun, you still have the floor."
He nodded and turned back toward the witness table. "Now, whoever
you think you are, you appear to be willing to play these word games of
yours all day. Admittedly it is not possible, really, to prove a negative. I
don't have any way to prove that you are not two people, silly as the idea is
on the face of it. I have already filed my protest over the diffi-culty of being
forced to work in this way. In what way does the experience of Raimbaut
differ from that of Giraut, just for the record?"
"Just for the record" is one of those dangerous expressions one must be
ever alert to. Everywhere in human space, it's cop-talk for "I've got you by
the nuts, you poor stupid bas-tard." So I hesitated before answering, and
sensing my feel-ings, Raimbaut stayed quiet.
"We're waiting," Esternun said.
"We're thinking and debating on the matter," Raimbaut said, "because
there are so many ways in which we are dif-ferent, it's very hard to know
where to start."
"I'm sorry if we've used up any part of your alloted time," I added, "and
respectfully request of the chair that if our thinking time should cut into any
questioner's time, that their time be extended. We don't want to appear to be
try-ing to put one over on you by delay, but many of these ques-tions are in
fact difficult to answer in an accurate way."
"Your request is granted," Kobles said, after several of the people on his
side nodded.
"Well, then, sir," Raimbaut said, "this is Raimbaut speaking. The most
important way in which our experiences differ is that we had different
childhoods—different parents, friends, and so on—and we experienced them
with our different senses and temperaments. Even the incidents we share, we
recall from different viewpoints, and we are always discover-ing that what
meant one thing to one of us meant something different to the other. After
all, Giraut has twelve stanyears more experience than I do."
"And how do you know these things about each other?"
"Well, we can access each others' memories," Raimbaut said. "And we
do—"

"So you can remember what happened to Giraut, and he can remember
what happened to you?"
"But we're still aware which one of us it happened to, usually. We
haven't merged with each other."
"That's beside the point." Esternun's smile was alarming even before he
spoke. "So why is it all right for the two of you to share memories, but
wrong for someone to buy a copy of that psypyx and share memories?"
It was clear that this question had been pre-planned, be-cause everyone
on the other side reared back as if they'd been hit by a profound thought; the
cameras would doubt-less collect the impression that Esternun had seen to
the heart of the matter.
"In fact," he went on, "isn't it a fact that the process of psypyx recovery
depends on exactly the kind of memory sharing that you are trying to make it
illegal to sell? If it's not a bad thing, why is it bad to sell it?"
My first thought was that plenty of cultures had laws against
prostitution—but plenty more didn't, and anyway, the customs of the
Thousand Cultures meant nothing here. I had no second thought.
Raimbaut, again, was ahead of me. "Our relations were consensual; I
specified before my physical death that some-one was to wear my psypyx for
the specific purpose of my revival, and Giraut agreed to do it—out of love
and friend-ship—and to live with me in his head for two years or so un-til I
could be transferred to a clone body. I never gave my permission to be used
as an entertainment program, let alone be crippled so that I couldn't struggle
against being compelled to think things I didn't want. And Giraut is a fine
friend who would never do such a thing to me, anyway."
"Always assuming," Esternun said, "that you are separate people."
"My whole experience is that we are, sir."
"And do you have any basis for thinking you will remain separate? Aren't
your memories merging and fusing every day? How can you be sure whose
memories are whose, over time?" Once again, Esternun seemed to be
striking poses for the cameras, which was why Raimbaut was careful to
make faces and shake his head, as if to say, Fool!
"Well," Raimbaut said, in the tone he would use on a slow-witted child
he didn't like, "even when a memory is shared, we have very different
perspectives on it. For exam-ple, the last few weeks have been colored by
two different facts—I am sorry to say that Giraut has been recovering from
a heartbreaking divorce, and I . . . uh, well, I'm a much younger man, I have

no direct memories of Giraut's wife, and um, I've been falling in love." He
kept himself from looking at Laprada by main force of will. "You may trust
me that we have no trouble at all telling whose feelings are whose."
Esternum nodded. "You have my sincere sympathies and good wishes,
respectively, for both experiences. But isn't it common for a newly divorced
man to, er; fall in love at the first opportunity? Isn't that very nearly a
cliche? And since that is the case, doesn't it follow that you might only be
pro-jecting yourself into two personalities, imagining that there are two of
you where in fact there's only one? You would put the depression into the
part of your single personality that derives from a person that went through
the divorce—-and put the part that so urgently needs a new love into the one
that derives from a younger, happier man, wouldn't you? Forget
psychological stability and all that nonsense-—isn't that simply good
marketing?" Giggles went through the room like surreptitious rodents.
"Now show me that's not what's happening."
"You're presenting a plausible story about what might be happening in
here." Raimbaut pointed to his head. "Then you ask me to prove that your
plausible story isn't happen-ing. That is the position you yourself very
rightly objected to, barely a few minutes ago. I can't do anything more than
describe the truth as I experience it."
Esternun turned to Kobles and said, "I request a ruling from the chair.
The witnesss has now continued this pre-tense of being two people through
several minutes and yet has also admitted he has not presented anything that
could be interpreted as evidence for the truth of his claim. This is evasion if
ever I've heard one. I want that on the record."
"I request an adjudication by the aintellects," I said, quickly, so that
Laprada would not have to.
Kobles nodded and gestured to the camera that the aintel-lects were to
do it.
Immediately Esternun said, "And I request an adjudica-tion—do not
these incessant adjudications, over and over, constitute unreasonable
obstruction of the committee's work and hence another improper behavior
on the part of the witness and his co-conspirator?"
Before I could protest, let alone bring up that it is explic-itly prohibited,
in the Charter, for anyone to be punished in any way for the exercise of a
legitimate right, the aintellect spoke. "The repetitive nature of the witness's
testimony does have a quality of defiance, and it is the opinion of this group

of aintellects that seeking of adjudication on what is essen-tially the same
matter, repeatedly, at least furthers the im-pression of defiance. The final
resolution of the issue is remanded to the chair of the Cultural Legacy
Management Committee."
Kobles's gavel cracked like a shot. "I find the witness in contempt of the
Council of Humanity. The sergeants-guards will escort the prisoner,
immediately, to an appropriate place of confinement."
Laprada leaped to her feet. "As an authorized observer I demand that no
record of these hearings be edited, pending consideration by the Procedures
Committee of a charge of improper conduct by a chair, and I make that
charge now!"
There was more shouting, but while it was happening, the sergeant-guard
came up beside us and said, "please come along quietly, it will be better for
everyone."
Unfortunately, she was probably right. •M'es vis, compan-hon, it will do
our cause no good to start a fight now, and may do it harm, Raimbaut.
Laprada's trained—she'll be fine.•
I stood up and let the woman—she barely came up to my jaw, and was
thin besides—rest a hand on my elbow and lead me out.
•What now?• Raimbaut thought.
•Jail, and patience. And don't fret more than you must about Laprada. At
worst she'll be taken to much the same kind of place where they're taking us.
And it's not such a bad place—I've been jailed eight times on behalf of the
OSP or Council, and every time the worst has been that it's dull.•
The small woman guided me through the corridors to a public springer.
She released her light grasp from my arm and said, "Please don't move more
than two meters away from me. The aintellects will interpret that as an
escape at-tempt, and fill the room with tranquilizing gas, which smells
awful and gives you a hangover like you wouldn't believe." She pulled out
her passcard and programmed the springer. "I am sorry to have to put you
through all this, sir. You'll step through by yourself and be met at the other
side—you're going for intake processing, and from there to your cell. Good
luck." She didn't look anywhere near my eyes.
"Thank you."
I stepped through the springer and another guard—taller and male, but
still someone I could probably have knocked down, had I had any
reason—was waiting for me there. "We don't need restraints if you're

willing to proceed quietly," he said.
"I'm willing," I said.
"And I'm willing," Raimbaut added.
The guard jumped, plainly wondering whether I was a misassigned
mental patient; here on Earth, they didn't see psypyxes very often.
I said, "I suppose they didn't have any time to prepare you. There are two
people in this body. There's a psypyx at the base of my skull." I turned, lifted
my hair up from my shoulders onto the top of my head, and showed him.
"The native personality to this body is Giraut Leones, and the per-sonality in
the psypyx is Raimbaut Bovalhor. I'm afraid we don't even know which one
of us was cited for contempt of Council; they didn't specify before they
grabbed our body and shipped us out."
He stared at us, rubbing his face with the expression of horror you find
only on the face of a career civil servant fac-ing a situation for which he
doesn't know the page in the manual.
"Which one of our names is on the order?" I asked.
"Uh." He looked down and scratched his head, peering at the short,
printed order as if it were in code. "Uh. Well, damn. It says I should lock
Giraut Leones up, but it says Raimbaut Bovalhor committed the contempt.
And I can't lock one of you up for something the other one did."
"You can't lock one of us up," I pointed out. "I'd suggest locking both of
us up and logging both of us in."
I really must say that I never had so much trouble getting into a jail
before, or after, in all my career with the OSP. The guard did his best, but
the machinery was fighting him all the way from the moment he put in the
orders. First the ain-tellect insisted that we had to be locked in separate
cells. Then it was upset because we had the same fingerprints. Af-ter that, it
wanted me released, since I wasn't charged with contempt. Then it wanted
the Council to submit a new or-der entirely, ordering that Raimbaut be
locked up and I be inconvenienced as little as possible.
One reason, though, why we use aintellects and not sim-ple rules tables
or bots is that an aintellect can learn and you can explain things to it. Once
we showed the aintellect that this was a genuinely difficult, interesting case,
it brought its deep learning modules online, called four human supervisors
and lawyers, and went into the databases—all the decisions on Earth, the six
settled worlds of the Sol System, and the 1228 cultures beyond. Meanwhile
it ordered food for two—showing that it understood physical reality—and

the guard and I cleared a small table and had a sort of picnic while the
aintellect arrived at an opinion.
About ninety minutes later, as I was hearing the story of how the guard
had fallen into the box a long time before, and struggled out with great
difficulty, though he couldn't exactly explain why he chose to do so, except
his sense that this wasn't what a person should be, the aintellect came back
with its decision. It had created a new protocol, based on dozens of rulings
from cultures where psypyxes were common, for logging in two people in a
common body. Be-mused, often raising an eyebrow at me, the guard
followed the new instructions. ''At least the next time you go to jail, it will
be much more convenient. Good luck in there. I hope we don't keep you too
long."
"Thanks, friend," I said. So far I'd thanked every guard here.
The room had a simple bunk, not secured to the floor; be-sides that there
was a toilet, shower, sink, feeding springer, and chair, plus cameras
everywhere. About half of the jails I'd been in had been pre-springer, with
doors to cells and a central core to the building; post-springer, the cells in
any given jail weren't even necessarily on the same continent. When the
springer was turned off, I could not get out, and any noise or row I might
make wouldn't disturb a single guard. The other side of this cell's wall might
be Manila, or Nuevo Buenos Aires, or Wilkes Land. Only the absence of a
change in gravity indicated we were even still on Earth.
I pulled off my boots and clothing, hung everything on the pegs
provided, and stretched out on the bunk, intending to go to sleep as quickly
as possible.
•You know, I really can't help worrying,• Raimbaut thought.
•Yes you can, if you put your mind to it. Jail is disorienting at first, but
you'll get used to it. Especially if you go to work for the OSP. We don't
usually have much force to back us up, right on the scene, and every local
bully and despot in human space is always deciding that the thing to do is to
scare us off with a couple of days in jail. At least this place is clean and
well-supervised•
•I suppose.• The thought felt like cold mercury lying in the bottom of my
mind. I could feel him thinking back there, working on a question that
wasn't entirely formed in words yet, and then the instant when his own idea
became clear to him. •Giraut, every time before that you were in jail, you
were being illegally held, and you were legally a representative of the

Council of Humanity. This time it's the Council that's holding us.•
•Marvelous irony, but it's still the same basic experience, Raimbaut,
dirai vos. We have friends outside who will be able to get us out eventually.
Even Shan, who I don't trust at all, never leaves anyone in a cell any longer
than necessary. Now let's get some sleep—trust me, it's really the only thing
you can do that will help, at a time like this.•
•If you say so, Giraut. I'm glad I'm doing this with you and not by
myself.• His mind already felt fuzzy in its con-tact with mine. Trusting my
reassurance, and exhausted by the day, he was drifting off to sleep.
Once he was asleep, I let myself start thinking again. I was going to be
awake for a while.
It's not easy, but it is possible, to lie to someone you are sharing a brain
with, and I had managed it. His question had been excellent. Every time I
had been thrown in jail before, I had been able to count on large forces out
there, ready to rescue me. This time, I couldn't.

Part Three
One Song Out of the Utter Void

1
When I awoke, Raimbaut was still asleep. A flashing indica-tor on the wall
panel told me to call up a message that in-formed me that if I wanted
breakfast, I should pick one of the following three selections within the next
hour. I picked number two—scrambled egg, bread, banana, coffee—and ate
it without tasting.
Now that I was awake, I found that the only entertain-ment available was
an ordinary virtual reality hookup. I jacked into it. I found a mix of
prosocial children's program-ming, consensual affectionate sex experiences,
violent ad-venture games that didn't let you commit any pointless violence,
and hobbies—this last was a category for VR ex-periences in which you
could play musical instruments, paint, read texts, play sports, and so forth. It
turned out to be a very limited experience. If you picked up a lute to play it,
it didn't handle or feel like a real lute—and you couldn't play what you
wanted to. Instead, all you could do was select from the repertoire of the
original lutist, and have the expe-rience of feeling your hands do what his
hands did. It must be something like what Raimbaut, who didn't play,
experi-enced when I practiced. I couldn't see the point.
I checked and discovered that use of the shower and fresher was
permitted at all times, so I used them. I sent all the clothes through the
fresher, and decided that a very long hot shower might kill as much as half
an hour. Getting rid of last night's smell of fear and anger was certain to
help.
Raimbaut woke while I was in the shower. I caught him up with the few
discoveries I had made. •The only way Council jail differs from any other, as
far as I can tell, is that since anyone who's in here is in here for political
offenses, they don't let us see the news.• I carefully and systemati-cally
worked lather into my hair, rinsed, and repeated the process, taking all the
time in the world to rinse—hot water on the scalp has a restorative power
that amazes me at times. •I don't know if they're afraid we might see some of
someone else's testimony, or they don't want us to know anything of what's
going on so that we'll be politically inef-fective when they release us. Either

way, afterliving plugged into the news for twelve stanyears, it's an
interesting form of torture to me. I'll try not to let it disturb our mutual
equilib-rium.•
I took enough time with a comb to put my hair and beard in order; they'd
provided no shaving supplies and so I looked messier than usual.
•And the entertainment?•
•Duller than gray paint on a blank wall.•
We looked through it, nonetheless, but still found nothing that seemed
like an acceptable timekiller. We were thinking nonverbally, aware of each
other as a comforting mutual presence.
Something mildly amused moved in the back of my mind, and I felt
Raimbaut think, •Well, we do have one ad-vantage over the Council and the
guards•
•Which is?•
•If we want to conspire, they can't monitor our conversations.•
•Deu! You're right. You make a break for it and I'll dis-tract them.•
We both laughed at that for a long time. It gave us some-thing to do.
Then we sat on the bed and thought of nothing
for a much longer time. Eventually it was time for lunch, and that was
something else to do.

¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Turning the bed on its side, and folding its legs, plus fold-ing up the
single chair and closing up the entertainment console, created enough room
for me to work through the five katas of ki hara do. It also gave Raimbaut,
who had not learned them in his own body, a chance to begin studying them.
We were going through the first section, third kata for the fourth time when
a chime, somewhere between a com ping and the "clear" signal on a service
springer, sounded. An instant later a disembodied voice said, "A permitted
visitor will enter through the springer access in five minutes. Please clear
the springer access."
We had time enough to right and rearrange the furniture, and make the
place more or less fit for a guest, whoever it might be.

I could feel how much Raimbaut was hoping it would be Laprada, and
how silly he knew the hope was. We made the place really, really tidy
anyway.
The alarm rang at the springer. Shan walked in, the springer shutting off
behind him. I said, "I don't like to admit this, but I'm glad to see you."
"Well, I don't like seeing you here," Shan said. "Giraut, everything is
complete chaos out there, and I wish to all the gods you were outside with
me, to help. So I'm getting you out of here as soon as I can. May I sit?"
"Please do." I let him have the chair and took the bed, facing him.
He sat, leaned forward, twined his hands together, and stared directly
into my eyes. "Giraut, before I say anything else, I wanted to take the
time—because I don't know when, or if, we'll ever have that pleasant
afternoon in Starkside, now—I just wanted—and I don't know why . . . I've
often received threats and I thought I was used to it, but the threats I have
been receiving are getting uglier . . . . "
"Shan, you've never been inarticulate before, ever."
"No, I guess I haven't." He didn't so much sigh as blow; his chest and
mouth were so tight. "But this is hard. So before I say anything else, I want
to give you the apology I should have given you in the first place. I was
wrong about the whole hideous mess on Briand, and especially wrong in my
dealings with you and Margaret. I knew it at the time. I can't pretend it was
accident or ignorance. I was a manipulative, arrogant fool—evil besides, I
think, I think there was malice of some kind in some of the things I did—and
I am deeply ashamed and sorry for the whole thing. May I hope for your
forgiveness?"
My eyes teared. I nodded violently but needed a long gasp before I could
say, "Yes. You already have it."
Shan extended his hand, and I shook it, and then I'm not sure which one
of us pulled the other forward to make it a hug. "That was really what I
came for. Some actual business created my excuse for coming, so I guess I
should mention it. One, expect release soon—and once you are released,
ex-pect Dji to bury you in work; we've got so much to do. Two—and I think
they'll throw me out when I say it so lis-ten carefully—do nat reverse
anything you've done or said in the last forty-eight hours and don't agree to
anyone revers-ing it."
A high-pitched sound filled the cell for a few seconds, splitting our
heads with the pain and pressure, and when it shut off the silence rang with

the threat that it would come back on. A voice informed us that information
had been in-appropriately communicated to the prisoner. Shan promised to
desist and it said he could have three more minutes.
"Giraut—once you're back in action, I'll feel better. 'One more round for
humanity, and another one for the good guys,' you know. I wish I felt sure
we'd win this round, and I'd feel much more sure if only you were with us."
I had found my voice, at last, and said, "Thank you for having this talk.
I'm sorry I was so pigheaded and let my anger rule me. Dirai vas, I have
been half crazed."
Shan folded his hands and looked at his feet for an in-stant. "You honor
me. Que merce, que qratz. We do need to talk to each other, soon, and for a
long time." He checked his watch, and said, "Raimbaut. Laprada is in jail,
also on a con-tempt charge, and not in any worse situation than you are. Try
not to worry about her."
"Thank you, that's what I needed to hear." Raimbaut said.
"Good, because it's true." Shan nodded emphatically and said, "I still
hope for that quiet few hours to sit and talk about the world and the way it
goes, Giraut—"
That strange chime sounded again and the voice said "Guest will enter
springer within this countdown. Ten, nine, eight—"
Shan shook my hand. "Atzdeu."
"Atzdeu."
Shan turned and walked briskly through the springer.
The black rectangle vanished, the blank wall reappeared, and the voice
counted off "five, four," before the machine noticed.
Raimbaut thought, •Is it a job qualification for the OSP to be a
sentimental idiot?•
I did not quite manage not to think •Shut up, kid,• at him.
I felt his sad, slightly amazed laughter. •Companhon, you misunderstand
me. I was thinking I might fit in after all•
We had time for three more katas before dinner, which we followed with
a shower and bed. I've had worse days, re-ally, many of them, before and
since.

¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Of course when they came to release us they did it in the middle of
the sleep cycle. Since there was nothing to pack, they allowed five minutes
for dressing. Release was via springer, directly back into the apartment at the
training center in Manila, so it was a matter of walking a foot or so through
the wall when the springer countdown started.
There on the table was the little box of what they'd taken from my pack
and pockets while booking me; nothing was missing. Looking around the
apartment, I saw that the place had been searched by someone who had been
thorough and careful, both about the search itself and about making it look
sloppy and clumsy. Since there had been nothing to find, I didn't worry about
what they'd found. •Making us uncomfortable,• I explained to Raimbaut.
•All my stuff has been touched. Probably that bothers me more than it
both-ers you•
He sighed. •I'm bothered by not having any stuff. There's a few things in
storage in Noupeitau, at the Hall of Memo-ries, but nothing I really need.
Not much that I'd even want. My parents don't seem to be interested in
corresponding, and they're long ago divorced and moved to other places;
there's nothing left for me in Nou Occitan. But I wish I had a keepsake or
two, something I could feel was mine, and mattered.•
•I'll keep an eye out for something nice. Just don't expect to be
surprised.•
I felt his smile. •You go to sleep if you can. I'll toss all the clothing into
the fresher, take a shower, and put the clothes away. When you get up
everything will be tidy.•
•It' s a deal,• I thought back at him, and feigned deep sleepiness. The
image of having the place nice for Laprada had been ringing through his
mind. I wasn't about to let him know I could feel it. Young hearts embarrass
so easily.
Within a minute of trying to fake being drowsy, I was sound asleep.
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
I don't know if Margaret even recalls that night, but for me it was a night
that was perfectly Shan, perfectly us, perfectly why I joined the OSP and
stayed in—and yet it turned around a few drinks, a few scribbled notes, and

one flash of insight, which in turn led to one of our most successful
cam-paigns of all time. It began after one of my best concerts, the one at the
Fareman Recital Hall, in Methane City, on Titan. Like all other old
industrial towns where no one does indus-trial work anymore, Methane City
had a sort of chip on its collective shoulder, so the Fareman there was even
more or-nate than the Fareman Foundation normally provided for (and since
Cynthia Fareman had famously had a passion for excess, that was very
ornate indeed; I've played in four Fare-mans, and attended concerts in
countless others, and every one of them would be too overdone for a
Trois-Orléans wedding cake or a Fort Liberty mausoleum).
What was lost in the visual was more than regained in the aural. The
extra complex surfaces, gilded and recurved, made for a richer, darker
sound, and I was at the beginning of what the critics would dub my Sad
Period, when most of my new songs were about death, disappointment, and
un-shared love. I didn't know it at the time, but I was about four years from
my divorce from Margaret. I did know that things with Margaret were not
what they had been.
During that OSP-arranged tour of the Sol system, Shan came to the
concerts and recitals as often as he could. After-wards, he'd always take
Margaret and me out for dinner and drinks.
After the Methane City concert, I was exhausted. It had not only been one
of my best performances ever in purely technical terms, but also I had
introduced a great deal of new material, and the emotion and energy had
been pre-cisely right. Live at the Fareman in Methane City is still
treas-ured by the fans who like the Sad Period, and loathed by the ones who
don't. It's a controversy on which I have, curiously, no opinion at all; only
that the experience was extraordinary.
And like every extraordinary experience, it had drained me. When we slid
into the booth at some little cafe, in Kuiper, on the other side of Titan, I
slumped in the corner and thought I might fall asleep right then. Margaret,
next to me, touched my arm and said, "Big load of carbohydrates."
"Ja."
"Then bed. Don't worry, we'll fix you up." She ordered a fruit and cheese
plate for herself, and the local version of noodles in sauce for me. Shan
normally ate little, and only ordered a drink.
Margaret knew me too well to talk about the concert, other than to make
exactly the same vaguely reassuring noises she made every time. Tomorrow,

after I had rested, she and I would review the raw recordings of every song,
and she'd give me her carefully thought-out, nuanced re-view. I treasured
that as the only opinion, besides mine, that mattered.
I never heard Shan express any real opinion on any work of art, ever. His
stock response was always that he found all works of art delightful, the
consequence of so many years as a diplomat. For all anyone knew, it might
have been the truth.
The situation was therefore perfect for me—no opinions and plenty of
food and drink, to be followed by an early goodnight and a comfortable bed.
Furthermore, though I didn't want to talk about it that night, I knew I had
done something special. I ate whatever the dish in front of me was, and
relaxed in the pleasant blur of my rapidly rising blood sugar, half-listening
at most to Margaret and Shan.
They talked about politics, inside and outside the OSP and the Council
of Humanity, about the way cultures grew and changed, and about the
general mysteries of the universe—-none of that was really my sort of thing,
not at that time of my life. I liked to carry out my assignment, knowing only
what was at stake at the moment, and what I was supposed to accomplish. I
knew we were the good guys and that was about all that I needed to keep me
going on the assignment.
Margaret, on the other hand, liked to know where every-thing fit into the
broad scheme, and she wanted to know the overall plan in detail from
roughly the Big Bang to 150 years into the future, with excursions into
other possible universes.
I agreed to have some dessert wine with them. Normally, that would
have finished me off for the night, but then they started to talk about why
our propaganda never achieved satisfactory results.
"The trouble is," Shan was saying, "we get so much out of the cultural
things we do that we're blinded to the question of what we don't get. Since
we started Giraut on this tour, we've gained twelve more points of
recognition, in the Sol system, for the existence of the Thousand Cultures,
and a thirty-five percent increase in the number of Earth people who say they
like the fact—the ones who think the Thou-sand Cultures are a goodthing.
The trouble is, the reason those percentage changes are so high is because
the bases are so low. With all that improvement we only have seventeen
percent of Earth people knowing the Thousand Cultures are there and real,
and that will go back down to five percent in less than a stanyear. And the

approval number has gone clear up to four percent of the population as a
whole. It's nice that the numbers are going up but they have such a long way
to go, and all we've really done is promoted one of the Thousand Cultures
into a fad. Certainly we haven't made any real or permanent change."
"People have no memory back here in the Sol System," Margaret pointed
out. "For five hundred years or so they de-valued history because of the risk
that the old grudges and angers would flare up again, and trigger another
Slaughter. And that's not an unreasonable fear, if you look at the Earth from
orbit. So everyone taught each following generation that the past meant
nothing, except as a place to create cheap entertainment, and loot for clothes
and music, and so on. And to some extent it worked; you see Asians sitting
down comfortably with Latin Americans, and so forth.
"The trouble is that once you erase history, along with blocking the
possibility of deep hatreds, you also block the possibility of real
xenophilia."
Shan sat back, squinting, nodding, chewing the thought over.
"Xenophilia is without a doubt a very unnatural per-sonal taste, maybe the
most unnatural one. Yet it's one we would love to foster more of." He
sipped his drink, still mostly full, and rolled it around in his mouth as if it
were a fine wine, though it was just whatever had been on special in this
little dump. "Here's an absurd question, which we might treat as an exercise.
If xenophilia is very unnatural, what is natural?"
I had been listening with my eyes closed, and I knew the answer to that
one. "Self-pity," I said. "Everyone thinks, deep down, that their life has been
unfairly hard."
I opened my eyes and saw that they both looked star-tled, whether at the
idea or at the fact that I was awake, I couldn't say.
Margaret recovered first, and said, "So is there a way to at-tract people
with self-pity and then turn their minds to xenophilia?"
Shan nodded vigorously. "If we could get that to hap-pen—it might
really accomplish something—"
"Oh, yes, that would do it." Margaret was nodding, now, too, and they
looked to me like two shorebirds doing a mat-ing dance. "But I have trouble
imagining someone forming the idea that 'I feel sorry for myself because
everything in my life has been so awful, so that makes me like all the
peo-ple who are different from me.' "
"Nothing easier," I said, carefully picking up my wine glass and having a

sip more. Amazingly, I was still hungry, so I grabbed a piece of bread from
the basket, mopped up what-ever that sauce in front of me was, and bit into
it.
"Well?" Margaret asked.
I looked up from my food, puzzled. "Uh, well?"
"Well," she said, "how would it be so easy to move people from feeling
sorry for themselves to loving cultural differ-ences?"
Sometimes, not often, I wished I had married an artist, or that someone
further up in the OSP hierarchy had been one. I managed not to say either of
the rude phrases "It's simple" or "It's obvious," but certa qua injema, I
thought them. "Most people will identify with the viewpoint character of a
story or a song, non be? Make that character from a different cul-ture. Do a
song or story about the way that your viewpoint character is hurt or
persecuted for being what he or she is. You see? It's a whole tradition that
was there in Industrial Age literature—in fact it was part of how you got
social jus-tice movements going, for people, or for that matter animals, or
anything." My mind spun back to the materials that had fascinated me for
one long period while we waited for an-other assignment; I had thought I
might work up a song cy-cle out of them, but never did. "Black Beauty.
'Ain't Gonna Be Treated This Way.' Uncle Tom's Cabin. 'The Bourgeois
Blues.' The Grapes of Wrath. Look Back in Anger. 'Elle frequentait la rue
Pigalle.' 'Marieke.' Zero Eight Fifteen. Angels in America. The Watchmen.
'Society's Child.' 'Then You Really Might Know What It's Like.' My Name
is Not Bitch. 'The Boy At the North Pole.' You see?"
Margaret was gaping at me. "About two stanyears ago, you were going
through all that stuff all the time, Giraut. I thought you were just crazy or
fixated, the way you get sometimes before you make a new song cycle."
"Well," I said, finishing my sauce-soaked bread and grab-bing another
piece from the basket, "That's the way I de-velop anything—start with the
tradition it fits into and write something that fits the tradition. So I'll
become obsessed about one genre or style or something, or another, and
soak it up for a while. Maybe one time out of three it gives me an idea to
work from."
Shan leaned forward and said, "And you think there's a way that this
tradition—I have to admit I've never heard of any of it—could be the model
for doing what we've been talking about."
"Oh, hell, sure."

"Do you ever write while you're on the road, touring?" Shan asked.
"That's when he writes the most," Margaret said, sparing me the need to
say it through a wad of sauce-soaked bread. All the calories in the world
were not going to be enough, this time. The sticky sweet dessert wine
reminded me, too, and I said, "If you don't mind, I'd like to order a dessert
now."
Margaret reached across me and hit the table's keyboard, ordering flan
with fresh strawberries, my favorite. Even as she did it, she said, "I think
Shan is about to ask whether you could create such a song cycle."
"Sure. I didn't before because I was more interested in all this mortality
material. But it would be easy to take the more persecuted cultures and
create a narrative voice for each one; and people love identifying with the
narrator of a sad song. Don't ask me to explain that. But they do."
"Well, then," Shan said. "While you are touring, if you were to work on
such a cycle . . . I think the OSP might slip you a large payment for that, and
you might also get all sorts of favorable publicity. What do you think?"
"I think no one ever explained it so clearly to me before," I said. The flan
with strawberries arrived through the table springer slot, and I took a few
bites, maybe half the thing, before I realized, "Damn, I've overeaten. Let's go
home."
The next day, when she got up, Margaret found me al-ready plucking
away at "Don't Forget I Live Here Too," a piece that was to become the first
of the Songs from Under-neath recording, which sold, really, very well,
considering that people frequently said it was the most depressing of all. It
was a great little project, and all of us were pleased with it for one reason or
another.

2
The com was pinging, I was in bed, and Raimbaut was slowly stirring in the
back of my mind. I croaked "On speaker," forgetting to add "only," so the
vid screen came on and the camera caught me befuddled: naked, uncombed,
halfway out of the covers and losing the fight with them.
From the screen, Dji looked so amused that I had to laugh, myself. He
said, "I am happy to see that my mornings are so much like those of a
younger, more handsome fellow, eh? I commed you because we have two
important events today, and not only will you want to look good for each of
them, but also you will need a fast briefing. So I wanted to suggest breakfast
together, Commissary Eighteen as be-fore—shall we say an hour?"
"It can be twenty minutes," I said. My Occitan pride was stung that
anyone could think I could ever need that long to look good.
"Fair enough. I will see you there, then. Dress to strike an impression,
especially on media types, but don't wear any-thing that comes across as a
costume. I'll explain everything in detail then—or Shan will, he'll be joining
us—but rest as-sured that nearly all the news is good."
I was still clean from the shower Raimbaut had taken af-ter he finished
fixing up the apartment. All my clothes had been through the fresher and
were hanging in the closet or folded in the drawers. I got my hair and beard
into order, and put on the same tapi I had had made up for the Divers' party,
with conservative pastel shirt and full dark breeches. In the Noupeitau of my
youth, to be sure, it would have been thought hopelessly conservative, fusty,
and mesclatz. It felt silly to have to wear it. But then, most Texaustralians
complain about the hats they have to wear in public, too. Somebody's got to
supply some visual variety in human space.
With a minute and a half to spare, we sprang to the com-missary. Dji was
there already, waiting to order, and after some preliminary pleasantries, he
started the briefing.
The first and most pleasant part of the job would be get-ting Laprada out
of jail, two hours from now. Dji was wor-ried about her; during a visit from
him, and a visit from Shan, she had seemed disconsolate, and very
uncharacteristically quiet. "She did ask about you, Raimbaut," Dji said, "She

was worried about how you might be being treated. I think she was afraid
that they might confiscate the psypyx from Gi-raut, as if it were a pocket
knife or a springer card. She didn't realize—honestly, none of us
realized—that that would have been the last thing they would do if they
were thinking."
"How were they not thinking?"
"It's the common, charitable explanation for shooting yourself in the
foot," Shan said, sliding into the seat next to me. "So you haven't told him,
yet, Dji?"
"I was getting to it."
"Well, then, may I treat myself to the pleasure?" Dji nod-ded and
gestured for Shan to go ahead. "Thank you. I don't know if it was Raimbaut,
or Giraut, or both of you together, but by all the gods at least one of you
was brilliant. Or con-fused and very lucky." Shan clapped his hands together,
the way my mother does when she has another idea for an aca-demic paper.
"When they checked you into the Council of Humanity's jail, you proceeded
exactly as if you were being jailed anywhere out in the Thousand
Cultures—exactly. I saw that in the transcript. Now, that happened to have
added up to winning the day for us.
"First of all, in cultures where the psypyx is common, there is (of
course) an extensive body of law covering the two years of being carried
until the cloned body can be grown to age four. And in all that case law, the
person in the psypyx is a fully human person, with all protocols set up on
that assumption.
"So when you behaved so perfectly in accord with those protocols,
which were not familiar to the Earth guards or to most Earth aintellects,
they referred it to juridical research aintellects, which promptly found all
that old case law and decided that you were right.
"That means a direct agency of the Council has recog-nized Raimbaut as
a human being. Do you see the implica-tions?"
I laughed out loud. "The Administrative Agreement Clause!"
That was the rule intended to keep successive administra-tions from
causing chaos, and to reduce the tendency of leg-islators to meddle in
technical decisions. If there were too many possible intervenors, the
immense array of rules cover-ing intercultural trade, diplomacy, and
communication would be impossible to keep coherent, and equally impossi ble for anyone to operate under or work with. Fifty billion people in a

complex dance of interrelations are more than enough trouble without all
procedures being subject to con-stant minor changes, political
grandstanding, favor-doing, and so on.
This is why the Charter specifies that if any of the Coun -cil of
Humanity's administrative, regulatory, intelligence, or informational
agencies declares a thing to be true, or applies a rule in a particular way,
then that is binding for all cases thereafter, unless within fifty standays the
Council of Hu-manity votes to overrule by a three-quarters majority.
Our whole system runs by precedent plus bureaucratic fiat, most of the
time. That's far more comfortable, for most people, than real political
control by a legislature. Bureaucracies can be foolish and heavy-handed, but
almost never aggressively unpredictable.
"So, if the other side now wants to pursue this, they need something
close to 900 votes by fifty days from now? You're right. This is going to
sandbag them. There's no possible event that could give them that many
votes on the Council." I was nearly as impressed with Raimbaut and myself
as Shan said he was.
"Absolutely. A complete coup. Bravo. Not that they've given up, quite,
yet. I do have to give Esternun credit—for a feeble counterstroke, he came
up with a pretty good feeble counterstroke. He leaped to his feet and acted
as if he wel-comed the chance to debate this in public—the usual meaningless noises about important matters deserving full consideration and all
of that sort of thing. Then he proposed that the debate be held as early as
possible—so it will, this afternoon, that's where we're going.
"He also declared that the case for treating psypyxed per-sonalities as
commercializable data rather than as human beings was a case that ought to
be argued by the best avail-able people on each side. For his own side, he
proposed him-self. And for our side, he proposed—me."
It took me a moment to see the implications. "And many of the
representatives are still angry with you over the Briand affair. So we'll lose
some votes out of spite."
"Fewer than you might think," Dji said. "About a third of the Council
seems to be automatically and always opposed to overturning any agency
ruling—probably not wanting to set any precedents that require them to do
any work, or know anything about anything. If they all stick to that principle, all by themselves they should carry the day for us. Plus we have a
good solid quarter of the representatives who still see that the OSP is

necessary and important—much of that overlaps with the never-overrule
crowd, but still, strong OSP supporters added into the mix probably give us
an actual majority. It really looks as if we're going to win this one, eh?
"Now, because Esternun proposed this debate—and be-cause so many
representatives were eager to escape to lunch—he did slip a few things into
the procedures. The only one that is likely to matter is that Shan speaks first,
Esternun after, the opposite of what the rule would usually be. Each speaker
is required to produce witnesses and testimony—it works out to five
witnesses per presentation. Esternun knows who ours have to be (the same
witnesses we were trying to put in front of CLMC), but we have no way of
requiring him to tell us who his will be or what they will talk about. There's
a right to cross-examine witnesses after the main presenta-tions; Esternun
has research he's been preparing for months. Shan will have to make up his
questions and line of ques-tioning on the spot.
"So we want to be as ready as possible, eh? As soon as we have Laprada,
and Paxa and Piranesi join us—they're getting some badly needed sleep, they
were just released also—once we're all together, we're going to do a
high-speed prep ses-sion and a group rehearsal. Lots of work. Not much fun.
But—" he reached into his bag "—I do have some confidence that we are
winning. I think we only need one more big push. That's why I want to give
one of these to each of you." He pulled out three small flat vus and handed
two to me and one to Shan. "Raimbaut, when you have your own body, I
hope you'll find a place in your room for this; it would surely cheer me up
on a bad day, eh?"
I felt the glow in his heart at the idea of having something that was really
his, and silently promised him we'd take care of it and make sure it was there
when he awoke in his new body, twenty months or so from now.
Raimbaut and I looked down at the two copies of the vu; it was about
twenty seconds of Esternun.
Dji explained, "This is the very moment when he discov-ered that the
sergeants-guards had checked you in as two people and invoked all those
precedents from out in the Thousand Cultures. Notice the way the jaw drops
and the eyes widen. Comedians will be studying this for centuries."
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Since Laprada was awake and dressed when they re-leased her,

she stepped through the springer, into an OSP conference room, where we
were waiting for her. After a moment for her to hug Raimbaut (I enjoyed it
too, but I knew whom she intended to hug), and a cup of coffee, she seemed
to be ready to go, though there was something sad in her eyes. Minutes later,
Paxa and Piranesi appeared, punctual as always. Dji sent the order in for
food and gave us a brief update while we waited for it to come out of the
springer slot; when the pots of coffee and tea, and the platter of cheeses,
meats, and breads, arrived, we all made ourselves comfortable and got down
to work.
It was fun. It was like all the old times—the scramble to think of what
could be the other side's plan, the brainstorm -ing for counter-moves, the
endless rapid-fire process of set-ting up possibilities and thinking of what
actions of ours should be contingent upon them. There is no sound I like
better, I think, not even fine music or well-performed po-etry, than a
roomfull of very bright people arguing, agreeing, finding other ways,
moving from idea to idea like monkeys swinging through the treetops. For
almost two hours it was frenetic, furious, confusing, exhilarating.
Shan was going over the question of how Laprada's testi -mony about her
experience with both of us could fit into the overall structure of the speech;
she had eight or nine good points he could use, he had time for three in the
open-ing speech, so the question was, which three?
It added a great deal to the experience that Shan and I were working
together like old times. Maybe I'd never fully trust him again, but it didn't
matter. I'd still like him; he was still my friend.
•I'm glad you feel that way,• Raimbaut remarked, inside my head.
•Did I think those things about Shan in words?•
•No, but you looked at him and I felt what you were feeling. And I liked
it so much better than what you were feel-ing about him up till yesterday. It
seemed to me as if you were hurting yourself. Now it doesn't. I liked what it
did for you to feel like Shan was your friend again.•
•Me too.• I took the chance to make another sandwich and eat some of it
before Shan finished with Laprada. I was so happy to see her safe. •Leakage,•
Raimbaut said. •They warned us it would happen. Now and then I'm not sure
which of us is feeling a thing.•
A moment later Paxa raised a question about the relations between
psypyxes and traditional hatreds—should we point out that a free market in
psypyxes meant, for example, that East Asians and Latin Americans would

be able to buy copies of each other to torture and humiliate, avenging the
Slaughter forever on victims who couldn't defend themselves? Should
Pureans be able to buy personalities from mestizo cultures to destroy them?
Should any of the various misogynistic cultures be free to buy the psypyx
copies of women from Caledony, Hedonia, or Trois-Orléans, and then
psychologically bully them into submission? That was a strong point but
where best to use it? We settled on making it the first thing in Paxa's
testimony.
Shan turned to me and said, "Giraut, do you think there's any special
problem that might come up if I have to call on you for a minute or so, to
affirm that you're a different per-son from Raimbaut? Do we need to plan
for that?"
"I don't think so."
He turned to Paxa and reviewed how she would discuss the pain
experienced by anyone raised as a completely free and equal woman, if the
psypyx copy were used to make a defenseless copy; to Raimbaut, to go over
his testimony about why he felt himself to be a person—"for heaven's sake,
al-ways stress your feelings," Shan said, "half the Council couldn't tell the
difference between a thought and an argyle sock, but bless' em, they all have
feelings." Piranesi reviewed his position yet again—that experiences
shouldn't be sold apart from context, and that the context of the rigorous He
-don disciplines was exactly what anyone commercializing Hedon
experience would try to tear out.
"Laprada, do you think we need to review anything?"
"Not at all."
"Me either. All right, then, I don't think we're going to be any more
ready."
At six minutes till our scheduled time, we stretched, straightened our
clothes, and did whatever little things helped us feel fresher. (I don't know
anyone in the OSP who doesn't have a few such rituals.) At two minutes till
time—-enough time to walk down the aisle comfortably—we walked
through the springer and down the aisle of the Great Meeting Room.
The first time I had been here had been with Shan, and I remembered
being impressed by all the representatives at their big desks, arranged in
fifteen-deep, rounded tiers that put the uppermost level eight meters above
the podium area. The podium area itself was a huge stage with a three-story-high screen behind it. It seemed like exactly the place that I would

imagine as the central chamber of the govern-ment of the whole human
species, fifty billion of us on al-most forty worlds: a place where all the
majesty and power we had gained during our long hard march from the
caves to the stars could flow together.
That impression was all due to the architecture. The Great Meeting
Room was six hundred years old, a magnifi-cent piece of work by Aurelio,
the one great architect of the early Inward Turn, who had found ways to fuse
temple ar-chitecture from a dozen earthly traditions into a practical space
where everyone could see and hear. From the strip friezes behind each
elegant plain column to the subtle light-ing on the overhead dome,
everything was calculated to make you think something extraordinarily
important would be done here, by splendid people.
That first impression of the place had lasted, approxi-mately, until I
looked down and saw the people occupying it. Half the desks were
unoccupied at all times. Most of the rest were occupied by staffers, using
them as offices. No one, or almost no one, was paying attention to the
speaker at the front, except on cue—now and then you'd see the green light
go on, and the representative at the desk would turn and face the rostrum,
looking as serious as possible, while some key point was made. But except
when collecting those reaction shots, everyone ignored the ostensible
proceedings and did desk work. This sometimes included the speaker at the
rostrum, who would put in a pre-recorded tape, then turn and watch the tape
play on the big screen, rather than actually speaking. More than once I'd seen
a "speaker" at the podium who was a different gender or drastically different
age from the person on the screen; for the record, only the person on the
screen counted, and any questions answered by the stand-in would enter the
record with a simulation of the ostensible speaker giving them. Everyone
looked bored, all the time, and whatever they discussed here bore no relation at all to whatever happened out in human space.
•Shan always says that both my impressions are true—it's the place
where our whole species tries to govern itself, and a huge room full of
insignificant people ignoring each other,because that's what human
self-government is,• I thought to Raimbaut.
The sergeants-guards seated us in the front of the guest--speakers area,
and Shan was announced. Lights dimmed ex-cept at the podium, and he
climbed up the steps to speak. He began by thanking everyone for the
opportunity, and briefly took the blame for the fiasco on Briand, which gave

him a fine segue into talking about the fragility of the con-nection to the
Outer Worlds, and the difficulty of remem-bering that, "within human space,
the Inner Sphere has almost all the humans, but the outer cultures have
almost all of the space. The question before us, today, friends, is not merely
whether we will treat the human beings encased in psypyxes as the human
beings that they really are. The larger question is whether we are primarily a
collection of bodies, processing goods and services, or a discourse of
minds, reach-ing out into the unknown. A decent respect for those who live
closer to the unknown implies that we must not treat them as mere
objects—and as we treat them, so we will come to treat ourselves. How we
choose to see ourselves will—"
The shouts made me look around. A small dark man in traditional Tamil
dress was running up the aisle. Interrup-tions by protests and demonstrations
are all but de rigeur in the Council of Humanity meetings, so normally I'd
have looked away—but something about the way the man was running—I
jumped up, leaped the chairs, and tried to block his path.
I was vaulting over the side of the guest speaker's area, not even in the
aisle yet, when the running Tamil stopped, pulled out a pocket maser, and
raised and pointed it. I had barely shouted when the thunderclap deafened
me. I looked back and saw Shan falling from the podium, most of his head
gone, a cloud of greasy smoke erupting from the empty end of his neck.
Looking back toward the assassin, again, I saw the Tamil tuck himself
onto the floor. That motion was enough—I don't know how, but I leaped
back up over the guest speaker area railing. It's harder going from low to
high and I never jumped that high before or since, but in the circum-stances I
had wings. Another spring put me on top of Laprada; I pinned her to the
floor and covered her with my body.
A savage boom mashed my eardrums. It felt like all my clothes were
being yanked over my head; things sprayed too close to me, much too fast,
and things spattered off the seat-backs onto me. Then for a few seconds,
while I held Laprada down, the world thumped and boomed as bits and
pieces of the dome, and debris thrown up by the bomb, fell back around us. I
was hit on the leg by a piece of plaster, but that was all.
The instant the rubble stopped landing, I leaped to my feet, dragged
Laprada to hers, and pulled my neuroducer epee from its hidden, shielded
pocket. The room was still frozen in horror—Shan dead at the podium,
pieces of the as-sassin in the aisle, some dead people in the aisle seats near

where the bomb had gone off, and many representatives shouting. I could
hear only the thunder of blood in my ears.
Beside me, Dji was standing with a maser drawn—I won-dered for an
instant how he'd smuggled that—and he shouted loudly enough for me to
hear. ''Anyone hurt?"
"Shan's dead!" I shouted. "Giraut, fine." I felt Raimbaut in my head and
realized who had leaped up to protect Laprada. "Raimbaut, fine."
Piranesi and Paxa both announced that they were fine. I turned to
Laprada. She was breathing as if she'd run three miles and her eyes were
glazed, but she gasped out "Laprada, fine."
Dji said, very firmly, "Follow me." We went past the ros -trum
area—much too close to Shan's body for Laprada, I had to wrap an arm
around her and put a hand over her eyes—around the side, and out through a
fire exit. Behind us, the noise in the room was swelling to a roar, as
everyone who could still scream screamed at everyone else. We hur-ried
down the hall to a springer marked EMERGENCY ONLY. Dji tore the
cover off the cardbox, setting off the alarms, and jammed a card in, shouting
"run through it, everyone, hurry!"
I pushed Laprada through ahead of me, walking fast to clear the springer
behind me for anyone else coming out (and to avoid being vomited on; the
sudden spring meant that some people were bound to be hit with severe
springer sickness). Dji had taken us to the OSP's War Room on Dunant. We
had gone four and a third light years at a single step, into the Alpha Centauri
system.
Around me, I could hear retching and heaving as other OSP personnel
poured in through the four springers into the room; most of them were
getting hit with springer sick-ness because Dunant gravity is slightly lower
than Earth gravity, and most of them were coming from Earth.
Beside me, Dji grabbed a wastebasket, spit into it, breathed hard to
recover himself, and then looked around. "In a moment I'll take roll.
Meanwhile, if you have a duty station here, get to it. If you don't, stand there
with your hand up till someone hollers for an assistant. Assume we're at war
with an unknown attacker until I tell you otherwise. Move!"

3
They call it the War Room even though no one's ever fought a war from
there. It's the OSP's command center for sup-pressing wars once they break
out. I didn't like being there. The two times I'd been in there before, things
had ended badly.
The first forty minutes were hard. They put me on the job of reading
through all the buddy calls, clocking in reports from all the OSP agents
scattered throughout Earth, the so-lar system planets, and the Thousand
Cultures, because all of them had been sent a note asking them to call in and
report anything unusual. Checking those reports was like having a friend
held hostage and listening for the shot; this might be an attack on the whole
organization. Names streamed across my screen, a few I knew, many I
recognized vaguely, usually with only the note "checked in—everything
normal" beside them. Every so often, though, I would find "checked in, see
report" and have to skip over to see what they had written. The "buddy calls"
are a regular part of life in the OSP, and when you receive one you're
supposed to report anything strange, or report that everything is normal, and
since buddy calls never tell you what it is they're looking for, if anything
weird has happened lately, anyone who gets a buddy call sends in a report on
what was weird. It improves the quality of information—as long as there's a
human to sort through it all, and that lucky human was me.
On any given day, out of a few hundred agents, dozens will have
encountered something weird. So I was reading re-ports about odd weather
on Quidde, about the surprise se-lection of a beauty queen in Nubara, and
about a mutiny in a barracks in Koenigsberg (the orbiting one in the Epsilon
Indi system, not the ruin on Earth or the city on Moneta).
For a moment, that sounded like I had found trouble, but when I
checked, it was only technically a mutiny—merely a police strike for higher
pay, but at Koenigsberg police and military are combined, and any disobeyed
laws are a mutiny, and thus the government was threatening to prosecute the
strikers for mutiny. No trace of any real rebellion or serious political matter,
and besides, Koenigsberg was a minor back-water of a space colony, not a
critical point you'd want to in-capacitate or control during a coup or

revolution.
The few who had not checked in were invariably on the night side of a
planet on remote duty; in other words, chances were that they hadn't heard
their com alarms, due to being asleep or busy, rather than that they were in
trouble.
Margaret was one of them; she was over in the back coun-try of St.
Michael, cold-weather camping with my childhood friend Bieris and their
friend Garsenda. Possibly they'd stayed up late drinking around the campfire,
maybe even with the com turned off.
•Actually, I feel good that she's doing that,• I thought to Raimbaut. •She
needs the time to thrash things through.•
•And you don't?•
•Where did that question come from?•
•From the toszet, who, besides being a close friend, is also the one
person who can observe you thinking about certain subjects.•
Why argue with someone who can read your mind? •Well, then,
companhon, I guess I shall have to deal with it. But not now.• I turned to
the next case that had an attached report. •What do you suppose a "nutria
migration, almost swarming" is, and why would it "severely hamper" a
"triathlon," whatever that is?•
After forty minutes, the check-in list was more than nine tenths
complete, with still no trace of any event that could be definitely called
"enemy action." Margaret had checked in on the second call, noting that she
was sorry to hear of Shan's death and asking if she needed to report to active
duty. I sent back a note saying I thought she might be able to wait another
day.
When I was sure there was no more information to be found out, and
little prospect that any OSP agent in the field would be encountering
anything relevant, I turned over the few remaining OSP agents who had not
checked in to a cler-ical aintellect. I instructed the aintellect to call me only
if the reports of "anything unusual" contained anything that could be
interpreted as enemy action. Whatever was going on, it was not a
widespread, coordinated attack.
I moved over to join Paxa, Piranesi, and Dji, who had started a
second-level process: studying the assassin's life -time datatrace. His name
was Uloccannar, a common enough name in New Tanjavur before the
catastrophe—they had confirmed that he was really Tamil and really from

Tamil Mandalam. (He might have been from one of the two other
Tamil-derived cultures, and have been used to throw us off the track.) He
had been on Earth because he had been re-cruited by Shan personally for
OSP service; he was part of Training Class 927. "He would have graduated
four days from now," Dji said. "Not only a Tamil, but supposedly our
Tamil. Out of all our contacts in Tamil Mandalam, we only ever recruited
him."
"I think the real clue—if we knew which way to read it—-might be that
he chose to kill Shan in exactly the same way that Tz'iquin killed Ix," Paxa
said. "You could make a nice tight argument that that was because it was a
purely private expression of rage at what had happened to his culture—or
case that we are supposed to think so."
"I have trouble with thinking it was Uloccannar's purely private revenge
on the man he blamed for the destruction of his home culture," Dji said,
"(and I only mean trouble; the explanation isn't nearly as good as it should
be, because of this consideration, eh?). If things had been working as they
are supposed to, and as they normally do, he'd never have gotten anywhere
near the Great Meeting Room with a weapon. The protestors and
performance artists are allowed to come in and disrupt things exactly
because the scans and the cutouts on the springer chains are so careful and
thor -ough. It's so safe that the Council tolerates the interruptions in the hope
of getting more media coverage. So—Piranesi -—how did Uloccannar make
his way past all the normal en-cryption, scanners, and cutouts with a bomb
and a maser? Start by assuming he knew as much as we do, but had none of
the resources we have. Is that a reasonable task?"
"I won't know till I try," Piranesi said.
"Good. You have my personal deep interest in the sub-ject—there are
always plenty of people who would like to assassinate a high-ranking OSP
official, but for one of them to get so strange a chance—seemingly so
easily, so suddenly, and when he was so well-prepared—well, it's the sort of
co-incidence, if that is what it is, that is cause enough to be nervous, eh?"
"I will try," Piranesi repeated. He looked terribly tired and strained. Paxa
often said of him that he was patient enough with nothing to do, or with
everything to do, but anxious waiting made her husband impossible. Jail
must have been exactly the wrong thing for him.
An hour later, Piranesi was over in a corner by himself, pulling in
enormous masses of information, muttering, swearing, sometimes pounding

the table in frustration, and looking worlds happier and more energetic, so I
suppose Dji knew who to give work to.
Still, no evidence pointed to a general attack: no other agent had been
murdered, assaulted, or even threatened. Ri-oting across the Thousand
Cultures was at no more than customary endemic levels. We could not link
Uloccannar to any of the OSP's known enemies either in the Sol System or
out in the Thousand Cultures. The known-to-be-inimical groups appeared to
have been caught at least as flatfooted as we were. Uloccannar didn't look
like any part of a broader conspiracy. Especially, Laprada had found no link
to Ester-nun or any other Council member who was either hostile to the
OSP or in favor of commercializing psypyx recordings, nor any connection
to the Council at all.
But Paxa had found several connections to fringe hate groups in New
Tanjavur; Uloccannar looked like he might have been the attempt by some
of the more aggressive groups, possibly even Palai itself, to plant a sleeper
in the Office of Special Projects.
As for how he had penetrated what appeared to be such a secure system,
Piranesi leaned toward the explanation that Uloccannar was a proficient
hobby hacker in his teens, and that probably what he had done was hack into
the parallel net of back-and-forth data relays that ran between springers as a
safety measure on Earth, where there were so many springers that a mistake
of a digit on an address might be catastrophic (imagine delivering a grade
school field trip to the safety springer deep in a cave, or springing a skier
mak-ing 85 kph into a laundry room). "Hacking the backup safety would be
well within his skills," Piranesi said. "If Uloccannar first noticed it around
the time that we lost Briand, then the timing would be about right—he
sprang to the first place where he could be sure of getting Shan, as soon as
he was sure his hack was working. And that is the basic way of pen-etrating
a high-security system—find the part of it that's not so high. So I'll look
around records within the parallel relays, for all his tests and practice
runs—they'll be scattered all over Earth, and maybe all over the Sol
system—if I find that, we have another reason to think it was a lone
assassin."
"I dislike trails that lead to lone assassins, single simple causes, minor
skill, and remarkable luck," Dji complained. "It's the classic pattern for a
cover. I'm sure we all feel that way, eh? And yet the reason it is such a good
pattern for a cover is because it does happen. We may have to accept that

this time."
"I know the feeling," Piranesi said. "I've planned three as-sassinations
myself, and the lone lunatic has been the cover story we arranged for the
police to find every time."
Paxa nodded. "Because if it's done right, the more they look, the less the
other side will feel like looking further. Yes. Well, is there any more
evidence that someone benefited by his death?"
Laprada shook her head. "The other side didn't have the votes going in,
and they probably don't have as many now as they did then. They did
immediately agree to an indefinite extension on the debate." She sat quietly,
as if waiting for questions, but none of us had any.
Dji nodded. "Hard to imagine much of anyone in that crowd having the
sang-froid to murder anyone, eh?"
Paxa added, "And our penetration of their private com-munications and
information systems didn't turn up a thing that looked like they were
expecting the delay at all. They were fully prepared to make some
concession speeches and try again in a year or two, and they didn't have
really any plan for what to do if they won."
"Well, then," Dji said. "By now we have all been awake for seventeen
hours at least, and that time has included too many changes, and I think we
can conclude that we are all far too stressed to do anything well, you know.
So I am or-dering you all to go rest. You don't have to go home, but I want
you to go to sleep. Sleep without setting your clock. Come in when you're
rested. The crew here can handle everything, and perhaps by the time you
come in, there will be some more data with which to construct suitable
bogeys. Meanwhile, all we can do here is make each other more tired. Now,
go, and don't argue."
"Do you have anywhere to go?" I asked. "Shan was your friend for most
of your life; don't you want to be with friends?"
Dji sighed. "I will be, because I do have somewhere I must go. There
will be a meeting of the Board to appoint a new leader for Shan's
organization. We've put out a poll to every-one in Shan's organization.
Check your mail, you'll find a questionnaire, the gist of which will be
'Explain why you or one of your comrades would make a good next boss.'
"It's not a binding vote, by the way. The Board still makes the decision,
and we look for the best choice, not the most popular. But we will look for
the best choice with adequate support, since a person without respect,

support, or reputa-tion would be a bad choice. Anyway, we will let you
know tomorrow who the new head will be, and it is very likely it will be
someone that you know—for many years we have al-ways promoted from
within." Dji scratched his head. "Truly, this is the end of an age, eh? On the
Board right now, three out of five of us are Kiel's boys—one of the boys is
a woman, and all of us are old enough to have grown grandchildren, but
that's what they called us, and what we are still—three out of five of us will
be Kiel's boys, eh? And before Shan was killed, four out of six were. As
long as I have been on the Board, it has always been that way, a majority of
us had been trained by Kiel. But now . . . the only one of Kiel's boys who is
still an active agent, and therefore might possibly be pro-moted into Shan's
place, is Qrala, and he has made it very, very clear that he doesn't want any
such thing. Everyone else is already on the Board, or retired. So this
decision is the very last one that will be made by a Board that has a major -ity
of Kiel's boys. End of the era, you know.
"The coming generation will have lived with the springer for most of
their adult lives. The generation after will think of the springer as we think
of the com. Change, eh? The OSP was founded to manage change, and in my
generation, we have seen so much of it, compared to those in the five
hundred years before us . . . but my generation will have seen so little of it,
compared with the generations that follow us. It is fine to say 'Second
Renaissance' and 'the end of the Inward Turn,' you know, but when you try
to live inside what the words mean, if you have any sense, you give up.
"So. Give up—home, sleep, no alarm, all of you. That hu-man need, I
think, will be with us for a long, long while."
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
In line for the springer, Raimbaut asked Laprada to have dinner with
us, "somewhere conversational."
I thought she would say no—she seemed so painfully un-happy—but she
said, "I think that's a good idea, for me. But I don't know that I'll have much
to offer—I'm probably only interested in talk, tonight, and I don't think my
conversation will exactly sparkle."
I felt a piercing sensation in my heart, at her tone—so lost, so
wistful—and could no longer tell if it was mine or Raimbaut's.
•It hurts that I can't do a thing for her,• he thought. None of the three of

us cared what we ate. We needed tolerable food in a place that had a
comfortable private booth for two. Laprada said she knew a place in NBA.
Springing from indoors to indoors, as people on Earth so often do, made
every room seem like it was next to every other room, in one vast
convoluted building. (A physicist friend told me once that that's how the
springer works, but I had no idea what he meant by that, it was a digression
in an interesting story, and I had learned by then that asking for explanations
at such times was dangerous.) After a while, it was all the same place and
time: indoors at night.
On the outside, the planet lived in a shield of its own glare that shut out
the stars, so the whole planet was lit and everyone lived as if it were dark.
Neither of us ate much and none of us felt like talking. The food was as
unmemorable as we'd hoped.
At the end of dinner, after the coffee and water was deliv-ered and
service went to on-call, Laprada sat staring down at the table, drawing little
blob by pictures in the spilled water from her glass, like a sad child.
"Tell me," Raimbaut said.
She said nothing. She smeared the water-picture out with the palm of her
hand, as if to help it dry.
Raimbaut tried again. "Let me make sure. You do want me around? If
you just want me to leave, I can do that. No hurt feelings. I want to do what
you need."
Barely audibly, she muttered, "I want you here." She said nothing more
for some time. He waited patiently—more so than I think I could have at his
age.
•You didn't have an older friend in your head to coach,• he thought at
me.
Finally Laprada looked up, straight into my eyes, and said, "I'm too weak
for the Office of Special Projects. I was so frightened when I went into jail
that, if they had wanted any information, any signed statement, any
confession, anything at all from me, I would have given it to them right
away. They would never have had to touch me. I was so afraid. And I stayed
afraid—crying, panting, drowning in terror, wishing I was back in my own
room—right until they told me I would be released. Right through Dji's
visit. Right through Shan's visit. I have no courage at all. I was hoping the
jailers would come and demand something, because I knew I would give in
right away, and that way the fear would be over."

•Giraut, per merce de deu, get into this!•
I had been afraid he would ask for that. "Laprada, this is Giraut. I'm a
veteran of many of these things, you know, and everyone is terrified, every
time. My ex-wife is probably the bravest, best agent I know, admired by
everyone of her peers and especially by me, and during the whole Briand
mission she was scared half crazy. And if you think about what happened
there, she was probably right to be. But there was a job to be done, and she
did it, despite being ter-rified, and that's what courage is, that's all that
counts. And you did fine, this afternoon, after Shan was killed."
"No, I didn't. You and Raimbaut gentled me through the situation, as if I
were a horse in a burning barn. You had to cover my eyes to walk me past
Shan's body!"
"Well, voill atz deu that someone had covered mine. That was a sight I
didn't need to see and would be happy not to remember. I don't care who
knows that."
"Nonetheless. You coped. I didn't."
I dropped the point and tried another tack. "This always worked for
Margaret, and she taught it to me, and it works for me too. You have to
keep reminding yourself that the reason the other side does frightening
things to us is because they're trying to scare us. I know it sounds obvious,
but it's important when you think about it. The reason you feel terrible is
because they are trying to make you feel terrible. It's deliberate. They want
you to be miserable, destroyed inside, helpless, not yourself. Now, doesn't it
make you angry, that they would try to do such a thing, and make you want
to hit them back? Fury can make a decent substitute for courage, in a pinch."
Laprada shook her head, never looking up. "That all sounds very sensible
and brave, but it doesn't apply to me. I learned in that jail that they can make
me feel that way, and they can do that whenever they want to. I don't have
any anger to re-sist with, Giraut, I might resent what they do to me, but I
don't have anything inside me to make me stand up and fight. I don't. If they
had ordered me to like being terrorized and to beg them to do it I swear, I
would have tried to like it. You can't know what it's like.
"I'm sorry, Giraut, I know you're trying to help, but I'm not a silly girl
with a head full of adventure stories, and I don't just need some bracing up."
For the first time, I saw real anger, but it was aimed across the table at me,
and her tone became more and more sarcastic. "I know all the old sayings, I

know that 'courage is being afraid and doing the right thing anyway,' and
'you can't be brave unless you're scared,' and 'rage drives out fear,' and all
the rest. I really do understand all those ideas.
"What I'm telling you is that I know, from a few harmless hours in a
perfectly safe jail cell, that I can't do any of that. I haven't got the stuff inside
to cope with my fear, or to face it and go on, or even to trick myself into
doing something in a fit of rage. Raimbaut, my wonderful would-be
entendedor (that's the word, isn't it?), I only let you cover my eyes and walk
me past Shan's corpse because I trusted you to end the fear. If the surest way
out of that situation had been to be-tray you to your worst enemy instead, I'd
have done it, and I wouldn't have been able to imagine doing anything else."
I felt completely helpless; a moment later, there was a de-spairing laugh
within my head. •So putting your feelings into words, companhon,•
Raimbaut thought, •that would be "kid, you're on your own."• He took
Laprada's hand—it lay in his like a dead snake—and said, "You know, this
was so easy for me. I was doing it inside Giraut's head, with the benefit of
all his experience. So I don't feel like it's my place to judge you."
Her hand clenched hard, and her nails bit into his palm. He held steady as
she glared into his eyes and hissed, "It's not that. And you're not listening." I
could feel him freezing to the chair, as if moving might provoke a worse
attack. "It's not that I was afraid. It's not some lack of confidence. I had no
emotions but fear. None. And I don't care if you judge me. I judge me, why
shouldn't you? So what I see is this: I am not the kind of person I hoped I
would be. I wanted to be an OSP agent, like Grandpa Lohemo and Uncle Dji
and Un-cle Shan. I wanted what I did to matter in the world, and I wanted
people to depend on my doing it well no matter what, and I wanted to be a
person who could be trusted with the most important job there is. I wanted
to be what Giraut is—and what you're going to be, Raimbaut. What I'm
telling you is, I won't. Because I can't.
"Now, that's not so terrible. I am far from the most useless person in the
world. I'm a good musician, or would be if I practiced. I was a very
competent politician. I can do some things of some value. But oh—what I
wanted to be! And what I'm not!"
She choked and sobbed, hard painful sobs that sounded like the cries of
someone kicked in the ribs. Raimbaut moved around to try to hold her or
put an arm around her, but she shoved his hands away and slapped at them.
It was no use. Raimbaut tasted helplessness and futility.

After a long time she stopped crying. She didn't want to go back to her
place alone, so she came along to ours. Shortly after all attempts to talk
failed, Raimbaut and I were under the covers in the bed, still sleeping to one
side as if Margaret might come back to bed at any instant. Laprada was over
on the other side of the bed, lying close to the edge, on top of the covers,
fully dressed. She had started to cry again, this time very quietly.
Raimbaut's distress was making my guts roil and squirm like worms in a
fire. Just before I fell asleep, she reached out, grabbed my hand, and pulled it
over toward her, but more as if it were a life preserver than as if she wanted
anything from him or me.

¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Margaret moved fast, when she needed to, exactly the way a good
martial artist moves fast—by making sure that no part of her motion
opposed any other, and that everything happened with the least effort. This
often fooled people into thinking she was lazy, or a plodder, or
unimaginative, and that made the effect all the more devastating.
Sometimes it saved me from real trouble, because whereas Margaret's
way of getting information was to bring all sorts of people to her office in
the Embassy, and compare what they told her with all the official statistics
and news reports, my approach was to take a long walk and get into
conversa-tions with whoever wanted to talk to me. Now and then my
choices were unlucky, or foolish, but you learn things by wandering through
a strange city that you cannot learn any other way. But every now and then, I
could be in trouble abruptly, without much in the way of resources for
getting out of it.
Margaret's mixture of craft, guile, and quick wits usually was all the
backup I needed. When I went to jail for annoying some local poohbah
(usually they needed annoying), Mar-garet got me out. At various times she
had claimed exotic medical conditions for me, masqueraded as a secret
police -man come to extradite me, walked into parties full of armed men and
claimed to be bringing the news that she was preg-nant and we were
supposed to go home to Caledony at once . . . she had bullied, browbeat,
threatened, hood-winked, and in every way, made life hell for anyone who
laid a hand on me or tried to frighten me.

And yet, she herself had never liked violence, and she had only rarely
been at risk of it, whereas I had grown up where it was endemic. I feared it,
because you never know what can happen, but in a measured, controlled
way; she loathed it with all of her soul. But she never said a critical word
when I walked into trouble, again, nor when she had to lib-erate me from the
local cops or bullies (usually the same people are both).
She'd be waiting in the lobby of whatever the local lockup was,
surrounded by a pack of Embassy lawyers wav-ing documents, prominent
local politicians in robes and pa-jamas, or CSPs in riot gear, sometimes all
of those. To judge by her facial expression, she might have been waiting for
her husband to return from the restroom.
Always, once we had sprung back to our apartment, she would shake her
head and click her tongue, disapproving of something or other, but never
letting me feel that it was me.

4
Raimbaut and I got to our office shortly after ten A.M. the next morning.
Laprada had sprung to her apartment, sul -lenly, evincing no desire to speak,
about an hour before, and I had divided my time and attention, during the
next hour, between basic grooming and advanced Raimbaut care. It was
good that the former could be nearly automatic.
The whole set of offices seemed to reverberate with high nervous
tension. Sharp little laughs punctuated conversa-tions in which nothing was
funny. People talked fast and of-ten lost the thread of what they were saying.
Everyone was trying to overhear, and no one wanted to be caught eavesdropping. Many more people were using those annoying lit -tle reassurance
tags—"right?", "eh?", "isn't it?", and so on-—on almost every sentence, as if
everyone were preoccupied with making sure of every instant of
communication.
Everyone was realizing that everything would be chang-ing.
When I came in, Dji at once summoned me into his office and closed the
door. He said, "First of all, Shan's funeral will be two days from tomorrow.
He's chosen to be buried at Chaka Home, on Quidde, even though he's
manifestly not Chakan. His religion didn't allow the psypyx, so I'm afraid
he's really, truly gone. By vote of the Board, all OSP agents can go to
Quidde for the funeral; human space will just have to go unprotected for a
couple of hours. Here's your pass-card; use it at the time designated. You're
part of the honor guard, so wear your dress uniform. The Chakans are giving
him their highest honors."
Then Dji handed me another springer card. "The new head of the Shan
organization wants to meet with you be-fore the public announcement of the
appointment is made. For one thing, although you will be working for me
until the business of selling psypyx records, and the investigation of Shan's
death, are both over, the new head has requested that you be transferred back
as soon as possible afterwards, and wants a friendly, private, frank
discussion about why, first. So use that card, in my personal springer here,
and go talk to your new boss. It's only about an hour till the official public
announcement, and there's a lot to do."

"Then we can skip it if you like," I said. "This won't really be necessary.
If you and Shan's successor think that I'll do more good over there, well, you
may consider that I've al-ready accepted."
Dji's mouth twisted for a bare instant—was the expres-sion he hid a
smile? a frown? a thought, anyway. "Trust me. It's necessary. Now don't
keep your boss-to-be waiting."
Realizing that there had to be something I didn't know, I shut up. I put
the card into Dji's private springer and stepped through into Shan's familiar
office. The few small prints and vus had been taken down and were leaning
up in the corner, but the desk was bare as always, the books on the shelves
had not been changed, the coffee setup was the same, and otherwise it was
still much as if Shan would be back any instant. I blinked for a moment
before I realized that it was Margaret sitting behind the desk.
"Giraut. This was the way Dji and I thought it would be appropriate to
tell you; I hope we were right."
I like to think I didn't hesitate before I spoke. I suppose I could ask
Margaret, who might remember, but why risk hearing something I'd rather
not? Whether I paused or not, I said, "This is wonderful! And what a
comical expression I must have had on my face—"
"It was pretty good." She flashed that fierce, toothy grin I had missed so
much in the past few stanyears, as the mar-riage deteriorated and dragged the
friendship down with it. "You and I worked together for so long, so well,
that I know what you can do, better even than you know. And you're good at
what I'm going to need for my organization. (God, what a strange thing to
say instead of Shan's organization.) I'd rather have you working for me, and
know that those things will be done well (even if you sometimes irritate me)
than have to spend ages figuring out whether I dare rely on somebody else.
"But if you have any idea that this could lead to our get-ting back
together . . . well, have no hope, please? And if that would make it hard to
take the job, then, I suppose, don't take it."
I stuck out my hand. "I want the job."
She shook my hand, we both smiled, and she came around the desk and
hugged me, while we both laughed. That was all that was necessary, then or
ever.
When I returned, Dji only asked, "So will you be return -ing to Sh—to
Margaret's organization, after this is all over?"
I said I would. I kept thinking there should be some emo-tional stress or

overload to deal with, but so far as I could tell, there wasn't.
The message traffic on my desk amounted to vast amounts of what we
didn't know, mixed with what was known not to be true. We knew of no
connections, still, to any group out -side of Tamil Mandalam; we knew that it
had not been the opening shot of a war, insurrection, or coup. Until the moment that Uloccannar had walked into the springer in his barracks and
walked out into the Great Meeting Room with his weapons, he had been a
very promising recruit, with noth-ing at all to suggest he would be anything
other than an asset. He had acquired all the needed weapons and codes himself within six hours of doing the job, by methods he would have learned at
the training center.
Dji dropped by to see how things were going, and I showed him what I
had.
"So on one level," Dji said to me, leaning over my shoul -der, it looks
like petty revenge." He turned and closed the door. "And it would be very
fine if it were, because it would mean we are doing our jobs well. But we
can't count on that to be the case. So that brings me to the second
possibility, and we need to have a talk about that. We can never be
completely sure of it, but how can we at least feel reasonably confident that
there isn't some highly capable organization out there, inimical to us, about
which we know nothing?"
I shrugged and looked up at the ceiling. Shan had often asked questions
like that, and it was all very familiar. It wasn't a request for a definitive
answer—it was a request to come up with an angle. "Well," I said. "M'es
vis, surely you've been monitoring the regular police investigation?"
"Absolutely. We have three separate pipelines into it, and we'll know
everything the moment they do."
"Hmm. Well, I'd say any outfit that can be caught by the regular cops
isn't very effective. If this had been an OSP op-eration, the police would find
nothing and close the case in three days, and it would never come up again."
I thought about that for a while. "Monitoring the police will take care of
most garden variety terror and dissident groups. What you really want is a
way to make sure that it's not somebody good enough to slip all the way
through security, like an OSP operation would."
Dji shook his head after thinking for a moment. "But the OSP has a huge
advantage—it's an arm of the government. I doubt there's anyone else out
there who can do an OSP--type operation."

Raimbaut asked, "So the only organization that could have done the
assassination and covered the tracks . . . that we know about or that is likely
to exist . . . would be the Office of Special Projects itself?"
Dji stared at me for a moment, and then I nodded. "Raimbaut," I said, "if
Dji doesn't recruit you the minute you have a body of your own, he'll lose
you to Margaret, be-cause I'll tell her to do it. Let's see . . . all right, it's
possible that some part of the OSP might profit from this. Shan, alive, was
an embarrassment to the organization, and the sort of lightning rod for
public dislike that the opposition tried to use in the psypyx cases. He was
highly skilled and often a brilliant operator, but I can see where someone
could decide that he was no longer an asset to the OSP. At least . . . not
while he was alive. But on the other hand, if Shan were dead . . . now there's
an asset. Martyr. And suspi-cion falling on the other side. And perhaps one
person out of the power sweepstakes in the OSP." I took a deep breath, let it
out slowly, and considered. It did hang together as a possi-bility; I didn't
know any reason to drop it right this moment. "So could anyone have been
thinking that way?"
Dji spread his hands. "We have plenty of people who could and would
work that way if they thought it were im-portant enough to the OSP's
mission, plus an unknown but probably large number of people who would
if it paid enough. I know we didn't discuss the idea at any Board meeting,
and I was at all of them in the past seven years. (Be-sides, so was Shan.)
"There's no group director I'd suspect of anything, either, and the only
past group director who ever had a grudge against Shan was Qrala. But that
whole matter was buried thoroughly, and I thought it was long ago
forgotten, or at least forgiven."
"But in our business?" I asked. "We attract and recruit people with long
memories, not to mention good liars. Though I don't want it to turn out to
be Sir Qrala—I like the man."
Dji all but groaned aloud. "He and I have been friends and rivals and
enemies and always returned to being better friends, so many times I
couldn't easily count them. All be-fore you were out of diapers, and you're
not a young man, eh? Giraut, I mean. I know Raimbaut is a young man." He
stared into space for a long moment, shaking his head. "Not many of us old
ones left. I don't want it to be one of Kiel's boys, I just don't."
I sighed. "He was kind and wise and kept his word with me during the
whole Briand mess," I said, "and I needed that badly. And then too, I look at

his strange relationship with Kiel and Shan over all those years—spying on
their old men-tor for his old comrade and yet loyal to both of them somehow . . . I have to admit I don't know much about it—"
"Nor will you, unless you need to. Those of us from the old days try to
make sure no one will ever need to. If you ever need to know everything that
was going on with those three men, then something will have gone
hideously wrong and we will be sliding down a very steep, dark slope
indeed," Dji said. "In case you were hinting. I know what the arrange-ment
between them was. I can see how Kiel's death in New Tanjavur could be
interpreted as having violated that deal. But the strange thing is, it would
have been something for Shan to be angry with Qrala about, not vice versa."
"Did Qrala fear Shan's revenge, maybe?"
"That would make very little sense in the context. You'll have to trust
me on all this, you know." Dji looked miserably unhappy. "But I really can't
dismiss the concern. So I guess that means you're going to dismiss it for me,
Giraut. As of now, your primary assignment is to investigate the possibil -ity
that Qrala was behind Shan's murder. I assume you will eventually turn up
enough evidence to clear him (assuming he's innocent—and I do). But put
on a good healthy para-noia and nail him for it if you can. I don't want this
to rest on a half-hearted effort."
We shook hands. "I'Il do my best, but surely it would help for me to
know what the grudge between them was?"
"It would. You'll have to manage without that informa -tion, all the
same."
"Thank you, then, I'll get on it."
Dji nodded and left as if afraid he might speak again. As he left,
Raimbaut thought, •What do you think? Is Qrala in-nocent?•
•I want him to be, I expect him to be . . . and the sooner we have this case
done with, the sooner I can be sure. All right, let's see how much access
they've given us to the rele-vant files, and how much more we need to apply
for•
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
The problem with putting together information for a report in an
organization like the OSP is that although most of the people you are
dealing with are bright, all of them have to be afraid that you are up to

something you shouldn't be. So they are invariably polite, reasonable,
friendly, helpful, and completely obstructionist and nitpicky. There might be
a more annoying combination in a bureaucrat but I'm not sure what it would
be.
Still, despite all the interference by friendly, well-mean-ing, talented
people, by mid-afternoon I had everything the police knew about
Uloccannar, including raw data from many different private files. I also had
everything that could be readily acquired about every human being whose
name appeared in Uloccannar's file.
It took another hour of debating with a variety of real people and
aintellects for me to obtain the maximum access I could be allowed to Sir
Qrala's file. Training Class Four had joined the OSP on September II, 2788,
and Kiel had been their trainer, and the organization that Margaret had just
in-herited had then been known as the Kiel organization. In
2796—promotions were fast, in those early days—Qrala had become leader
of a new organization within the OSP. In 2799 he had stepped down and
gone to work for Shan; and in 2806, following RECORDS SEALED, and
(while still re-porting to Shan), at the request of NOT AVAILABLE, he had
resigned his duties as RECORDS SEALED, and gone to work for Kiel, who
was then the Ambassador to Nova Roma, on Gobat. A further READ FIRST
note in that file specifically prohibited doing anything that might compro mise the information that the two of them knew each other, or that Shan
knew either of them. Qrala was also listed as reporting to Shan for NOT
AVAILABLE.
•This at least confirms that Dji isn't lying to us,• I pointed out to
Raimbaut. •The things you find that you'd rather not know! Sir Qrala was a
perfectly good person to work with, and I'm appalled to be doing this•
The aintellects went through every file that touched every file that was
there in Qrala's lifetime datatrace, and eventually they had a list of a few
thousand relationships -—ranging from "father" to "file clerk in same
embassy" to "bar-ber" to "reprimanded for having an affair with him."
•Well, this should be enough to start the process,• I thought to
Raimbaut.•
•What about Shan?•
I felt silly; •Good thing I'm not a cop. I'd never have thought of checking
those connections. But there's going to be a really dense net between Shan
and Qrala, because the two of them were partnered for so long, so anyone

who fig-ures in one of their joint cases will be listed as a strong con-nection•
I could feel Raimbaut thinking the equivalent of an impa-tient shrug. •So
throw out all the strictly shared-case ones, and look for low-probability
third-person connections that have a hook to Uloccannar. That's all it would
take to win-now out at least ninety percent of the chaff What you really are
looking for is strong connections that aren't obvious, non?•
•Have you thought about being a detective?•
•All I really want at the moment is to be physically real, Giraut. I will
sort everything else out after that.•
I could feel, nonetheless, that he had taken it as a compli-ment. After a
while I hung back and let him do the analysis, only occasionally nodding in
when he might have gotten lost through lack of experience or acquaintance
with the OSP. He really was good at this.
That was a good thing, because there was little about Shan, except
widely scattered fragments of dissociated in-formation that somebody had
failed to tidy up. I'd never seen such a thorough job of erasing pathways and
traces through a database before.
An hour and a half later, Raimbaut and I were out of ideas, and we had
only about 450 names linked to Shan's, one of which was mine, another of
which was Sir Qrala's. So I, too, would be turning up as one of those
improbable links. At least I knew I hadn't done it.
By the time we had all of that together, it was late in the day, but we still
took time to set up a connection engine and put it on the job. One place to
look for a conspiracy, criminal or otherwise, is in the links between people,
and that's what a connection engine does. Just as we had expanded Shan,
Qrala, and Uloccannar's relationships into a sphere of con-nections, the
connection engine would expand each of those thousands of people into
more connections, and those con-nections into more connections, out to the
fourth degree. At that point, virtually every person who appeared in one
sphere would appear in all three; then the connection engine would
painstakingly construct each chain of connec-tions, and choose the shortest
chains that were in any way unusual.
Most connections would be garbage—coincidences like Shan and
Qrala's barbers both having gone to the same cul -tural institute, where there
was a Tamil poet in residence with whom Uloccannar corresponded. A few
might be something else; and if we were right (as we were praying not to be)

one would be something else. The aintellects had a reasonably good sense of
the purely coincidental, and of which connections were worth thinking
about and which spurious (people conspire with their lovers or their
brothers far more often than they do with their insurance brokers or their
letter carriers). Even at superfast machine speeds that allowed full realtime
virtual reality, the job was so big that it would run for a few hours;
meanwhile, we might as well get some dinner. •It should have a report for
us tomorrow morning,• I thought. •Did anyone mention that in this busi-ness
there are times that are just work?•
•I had access to your memories, Giraut. Do you suppose Laprada had a
day like this, too?•
•Very likely. You realize that everyone working on the case has probably
been assigned a prime suspect, and they probably spent today doing this
same procedure? Maybe not quite so good a one, Raimbaut, you really do
seem to have a talent for this•
I felt his pleasure and embarrassment at the compliment. To cover, he
asked, •What usually turns out to be the cause of unprovoked, mystery
attacks on the OSP? They can't be common.•
•They aren't. I've seen two other mystery attacks in my twelve stanyears
with the OSP.•
•What did the truth turn out to be, the two times be-fore?•
•Well, in one case, two OSP men had the same mistress, and she had a
third boyfriend who was a gangster. He found out about them and arranged
to have them both killed on the same day. He had no idea they had anything
to do with the OSP. That took a while to sort out. Eventually the cops
caught him on something unrelated, and since his was one of those cultures
with the 'unwritten law,' he agreed to admit to the murders. We never
cleared it ourselves.
•The other was an agent who went out for a walk in the bad part of
Trois-Orléans, probably because he'd been going out for walks after lunch
every day of his life. Someone killed him, took his wallet, and pushed his
body down a manhole; there was a heavy rainstorm and he floated miles and
miles from the city. Meanwhile, his wallet was tossed into a randomly
addressed springer and emerged clear on the other side of Roosevelt, in a
second-hand store. So when we went looking for him, we barked up a few
thousand wrong trees for a while•
•Or in other words, neither was really a mystery attack on the OSP.•

•True.•
•Have there been any?•
•Those are all the cases I know anything about.•
He was quiet for a long time. We were taking a hot shower, and I was
enjoying the sensation of relaxing my desk-cramped muscles.
Raimbaut thought, •How long will this take, if the truth is that it was
done by a crazed, patriotic Tamil, who blamed Shan for the genocide of his
culture?•
•No matter what, this is apt to take a long time,• I re-minded him. I
turned on the distilled water rinse to get all the soap out of my hair and
beard, set the water tempera-ture for as hot as I could bear, and enjoyed the
sensation. •Much as I'd rather that this were an appalling coincidence or a
senseless act, Raimbaut, it feels far too deliberate. First of all, it happened at
a time when it could have tremendous effects—although we don't know
which effect, if any, of the ones that have happened, was intended. That's
improbable. Then heap on another improbability: a new trainee with enough
trade craft to carry this out exactly the way you have to—from a standing
start as shortly as possible before doing the deed—without a hitch or flaw.
And then: this new trainee was able to steal not one but two weapons from
the training center, where they were held in locations remote from each
other and protected by different security systems.
•That would be doing very well for me, good even for a man who
teaches penetrations-and-surreps like Piranesi. And for a new trainee who
hadn't even been through in-ternship yet? Plus he set up a perfect,
worked-right-the-first --time hopscotch through a dozen springers before
merging with the flow for the Great Meeting Room and arriving right on
time. Besides, it's not all that easy to make a head shot on a target above
you, but somehow Uloccannar—who had no weapons training before he
came here—did that, too.•
•Put that way, it doesn't seem possible.•
•And yet it could be what happened. You can never eliminate
coincidence. And sometimes someone discovers a sim-ple thing—like the
parallel communicators that Piranesi spotted—that lets them avoid the
impossible thing. Bizarre coincidences, clever innovations, and strokes of
luck happen every day, and they're distributed very unevenly; if Uloccannar
had some of all of them on that day, it could happen. Who'd have believed
that, with no help of any kind, a blind cleaning woman of eighty-three could

kill the supreme leader of half of Earth? But that really ended World War
Three, all the same.
•So we do have to accept the possibility of coincidence-—but given how
unlikely it is, we have to play the main chance: assault by an unknown
hostile power, involving someone we have every reason to trust. So we
pursue that, we hope it's not true, but to know that it's not true, we have to
pursue it as if we thought it was. Now, why don't you com Laprada and see
what she wants to do with you tonight? It will be something, I'm sure.•
His heart leapt up. I enjoyed the sensation myself
He liked my amusement. •Remember, companhon, in my subjective
time, a few weeks ago I was still in the Quartier des Jovents, and despite
years of effort I had never had an en-tendedora, and my best hope of
meeting women would have been to take a job in a chocolate shop. I
radiated failure. But, now, appearing in the person of an urbane,
sophisticated gen de man, and with his ever-wise counsel—•
By then I was laughing hard.
•If you'd taken all that seriously,• he thought, •I was go-ing to leave you.•
•Com Laprada, Raimbaut. Before your sense of humor takes over both
our minds.•
Laprada's "hello" was about as dispirited as any I've ever heard, and I felt
my heart sinking and Raimbaut rallying himself "I wondered if you'd be
willing to eat with me two nights in a row," he said. "Being honest about it,
you're the person I'd like to see tonight."
"Oh, god, I don't know, Raimbaut. I feel like just taking a long hot bath,
eating some crackers, and going to bed."
"Well, if you like, I'll drop by with wine, we can have crackers together,
and then I can go home and you can take your bath. Would you say it's going
to be more of a red cracker or a white cracker?" Raimbaut listened,
desperately, hoping that there would be some sign of amusement from her,
but there was none; she had the visual turned off, and he struggled against
the mental picture of her glaring, or staring into space, before forcing a
smile on himself and saying warmly, "Laprada, you really do have to eat.
Why not do it with me? You know I can sit quietly and worry about you, or
do my best to be entertaining, or anything in between, and that's what I'd
rather be doing than anything else. So unless I'd hurt your mood, let's eat
together."

"Funny, I heard Occitan men were too proud to beg."
"Arrogant old ones like Giraut are. And even he recorded a version of
'Non soi trap valen que plaideiar.' "
She giggled. "He's awake, isn't he?"
"And annoyed. I can feel that."
"I'm putting all my attention into trying to figure out a way that makes
any sense to challenge Raimbaut to a duel," I explained. •She's weakening,
companhon, press on! Tostemz valors!•
"Just as long as neither of you gets hurt," she said. She clicked on the
visual part of the com, and though she looked wan and tired, she was
smiling, and the smile reached her eyes. "All right, the Occitan charm wins
again. We'll meet somewhere for something. As long as I'm allowed to
possibly fall into a horrible mood and be no fun at all. Probably it will be a
short meal, but if we have a better time than I'm expecting, or I decide to see
what a depressing world it really is, the Divers are having a party tonight,
and we could drop by for a few minutes, stay damp in the current, you
know, nothing too serious. We won't do more than remind them we're alive,
but that might be enough to stay damp and off the shore. Would you mind
awfully if we did?"
Raimbaut lied like a professional, and told her that was exactly what he'd
been hoping for. Laprada picked out a cafe for them to meet in, somewhere
in Ciudad de Mexico she said—I wasn't sure where that was, some little
back-water megalopolis in North America. They would meet in half an
hour—"just time enough for me to fix things up all the way to
not-embarrassing," she explained.
They disconnected, and Raimbaut thought, •that was frightening.•
•You handled it perfectly, companhon. She sounded a thousand times
better after that conversation. You'll become better at all the games, in time,
but I should probably warn you that they will never be easy.•
Raimbaut was quiet as we straightened clothing, combed hair and beard,
and worked the whole effect to the right mix of studied indifference with
natural grace. After a few stretches, he thought, •Giraut? I don't want to
seem un-grateful at all, about my relation with Laprada, but . . . •
I could feel the thoughts forming, and Raimbaut fighting them down. I
knew what was bothering him, though, either because it leaked or because it
was obvious, so I thought back, with all the reassurance I could manage,
•It's a reason-able question and thinking it doesn't make you uncaring, fickle,

or cruel. You're human. Remember? That's what we're trying to get across
to the Council of Humanity. So . . . what you want to know is, is it always
so much work?•
•Right. It seems very disloyal to think that.•
I thought of shrugging. •Not always. Some lovers need less or more
emotional attention. Some are more or less nur-turing or protective. Now,
she's pretty far toward needy, and you're pretty far toward protective, so
overall it works. It's good to be attached to someone who needs to be loved
in the way you need to love. If you had attached yourself to someone more
self-sufficient, you'd be wondering if she cared about you, or even liked
you.•
•Is that how it was during your good years with Mar-garet?•
•I don't know. I think it's more a matter that you learn not to worry about
such things, much, except during brief periods when you have to worry
about them all the time. But I could be completely wrong. I've been known
to be.•
The costume for the night was a sober version of breeches, boots, tapi,
and tunic, and only one person looked up when we walked out of the
springer at the cafe. Only about half of the dozen tables were taken, and
Laprada was already there, sitting by herself, staring down at a menu
without reading it.
She said "hello," without looking up, as I slid into the chair. Raimbaut
felt the impulse to say "What's wrong?" and instead said, "It's always such a
great pleasure to see you, but I can see you're having a bad time."
Laprada grunted. They both sat silently for a while. I was grateful to any
gods there are that I was not required to be part of this.
Raimbaut was about to offer to call it a night when she said, "Stay. If
anyone can make me feel better, it's you."
With a purely internal sigh, he said, "Should we talk about it, or talk
about everything else, or just be silent for a while?"
"I don't think I can talk about it, so that's out."
Raimbaut made a face. "Hmm. I can't talk about anything I worked on
today, and all I did today was work."
She nodded unhappily, and asked, "How well did you know Shan?"
"Just the few meetings, all business, and of course Giraut's memories
and feelings. That relationship was . . . complex."
•Good way to put it,• I thought to him.

Laprada nodded. "He was a completely fascinating man, even if you
didn't know who he was or what he actually did. Shan and Dji were like
extra grandfathers to me—Dji was my warm, friendly, funny grandfather,
and Shan . . . well, he's the one I would have run to for any real trouble. For
me, it's like having the sun disappear from the sky."
Gazing into space, she sipped at her coffee. "It must be hard for you,
Giraut, you worked with him all the time for so long."
"I guess I'm numb. You think you understand your situation, you think
you will always remember that the work is dangerous and we will bury
some friends too soon, and all that, and then when it happens, you wonder
how things ever got this way." I flagged down one of the robots and ordered
a light plate of hors d'oeuvres and a pitcher of water. "I don't know what the
funeral tomorrow will feel like. Not good, I'm sure." My eyes gushed. My
throat closed so hard that I couldn't breathe. Obviously it was time to cry for
Shan, and that was the only thing that was going to happen for a while.
The image of his head blown off his neck made me shud-der. All the
things I had been saving to say at Starkside, which he would now never hear,
echoed miserably, uselessly in my head. The joy, only two days ago, of
working together well again; the embarrassment at how angry I had been . . .
none of it mattered, anymore, because it was all part of my relationship to
him, and he was dead. I put my elbows on my knees, my face between my
hands, and let the tears come.
It seemed like forever till Laprada touched my shaking shoulder. "Are
you all right?"
"I don't think I'll be all right for a while," I gasped. "But I'm not in any
physical danger." I added to Raimbaut, •I'm sorry, I seem to be spoiling your
date.•
•It's all right, companhon, verai. Surely you've earned this one if anyone
has.•
I sat there and cried, in public, in my strange Occitan clothes, with
people staring. I cried for Shan, and for all of us in the OSP, and for
everyone who dreamed about a big fu-ture and life outside the box, and
eventually I think for our whole pathetic species, born to fly and doomed to
crawl, al-ways pulling down the ones who tried to bring us up.
At last, I grabbed a couple of napkins from the setups on a neighboring
table. I wiped my face thoroughly, scrubbing till my skin stung. My face felt
inflated and skinned, the way it did the time it caught a boot, and was

dragged across rough carpet. I wasn't sure I wanted to know what my eyes
looked like, or what might be in my mustache, but I took a final wipe
around my face before coming up, at last, for air.
Laprada had the strangest expression—intense worry? compassion?
anger? revulsion? •Not good,• Raimbaut thought.
•She's all yours, toszet de grand ualors.•
She spoke before he could think of anything to say, her expression and
voice gentle. "I guess I'd been thinking mainly of my own loss, so soon after
Grandpa Lohemo and Grandma Catherine. It's not always easy to remember
that others are hurting besides me. You had been through a lot together."
I nearly wept again, but swallowed hard and said, "You do understand." I
had to nearly grit my teeth to stay focused. "Thank you for that."
The food arrived. When we had eaten for a while, grab-bing the little
pieces of meat, vegetables, and cheese with the soft bread, Raimbaut tried a
change of subject. "Do you still want to go to the Divers' party? I'll admit
freely that I can take or leave them, but you seemed sort of eager, before,
when we talked on the com."
She shrugged. ''A few people will want to proclaim, loudly, that they are
glad that Shan is dead, and that this time the OSP won't get away with
covering up a murder. I think we should go and stare them down . . . or
maybe ad-minister a good beating to someone, if you're in the mood, Giraut,
because that would completely help to move the current out of this
life-is-a-game routine that has become so poisonous."
"I could be in the mood," I said. My culture is as mad as an outdoor pool
in orbit about many things, perhaps about most, but as I grow older I come
to think we have a fine per-spective on violence, nearly as good as the one
we have on art. There exist statements and behaviors for which the sole
adequate retort is a belt across the chops.
"Well, Shan's murder is dominating the headlines. And the people in the
current are going to matter intensely. I think we ought to be out there, trying
to dig a new channel for the current, rather than hanging back and mourning
our dead."
"Our dead would want that," I said, because it was true.
"Well, then." I saw her make herself smile, even making it light up her
eyes, as if by pure force of will. "Enough of all this gloom. Time to go play.
Preddy needs to get out and mix."
"I thought you hated that name," Raimbaut said.

She shrugged. "Serious, dutiful, dedicated Laprada hated to have people
think of her as Proddy. Proddy, on the other hand, likes to party, and likes
the attention she gets when she shows up." Her smile was now completely
convincing, warm and friendly with the corners of her eyes crinkling up.
"Really," she said, "I think you two have the very best of pos-sible worlds—I
don't understand how any of us gets by with just one personality, or just one
past."

5
The party was at Rebop's apartment, this time. Otherwise it was much the
same—exactly the same people, and the sort of things they said about the
political repercussions of Shan's death were the same sort of erudite,
meaningless noises that they had made about the Assemblejam Cafe performances—things they had been planning to say for days.
Gumba would have been amusing if he hadn't been talk-ing about the
murder of one of my best friends. Looking for a getaway, I found doors to a
balcony.
The morning sun hit me full in the face, and I nearly laughed. I hadn't
asked Laprada where the party was—I was beginning to think like an Earth
person, where, after decades of the springer, everywhere was right next to
everywhere. So like anyone else at the end of a working day, I had assumed I
was going to a party in the evening. Well, it was pleasantly warm, the fresh
air smelled good, and the balcony was on the outside of the hyperpolis, in
the mid ranges, about a kilo -meter or so up the side. It looked out over a
dense tropical forest. I set the cameras and eyepieces of my computer to be
used as binoculars.
There were dozens of tropical birds and every now and then the flash of a
monkey leaping between branches. I couldn't even count the kinds of
butterflies. "If I were living here," I murmured aloud, "I would live on this
balcony."
•Absolutely agreed,. Raimbaut said.• Who'd have thought an old dull
paved-over planet like Earth would have any-thing like this?•
"Actually, I do," a voice said. I pulled off the goggles and Rebop was
standing there. Her black-and-white hair and her deep-colored cosmetics
were far too much in the sunlight, and she was stroking her face and hair as
if to hide them. "I haven't been standing here long," she said. "Are you all
right? Gumba is a tasteless tactless pig. I was afraid he'd hurt your feelings."
"If I had valued his ideas, he might have. But he's only re-peating what a
dozen media mentulos have been saying. It's all he's capable of," I said.
I liked the way she smiled; it wasn't any smile I had seen inside, at the

party. "You're enraged, and you'd like to kill him," she said quietly.
"Speaking as your hostess, I could see my way to encouraging you. He's
cleared out my parlor. Sometimes when he gets really nasty, it seems to
poison the feeling in a room for hours afterwards, as if a cobra had just
crawled out from under a chair and wriggled away under the door." She
made a wry face. "That's the phrase I thought of for it, though I've never seen
a real cobra and most of my guests wouldn't know what it was."
I liked her better each second; Raimbaut seemed to ap-prove, too.
"Nothing wrong with the phrase. The Thousand Cultures are full of people
pretending to be things that they've never met or seen, following scripts
written by the dead. One of my best-selling recordings refers to wild robbers (in a culture without crime), living in forests (that were planted within
my lifetime), and says it's all in ancient times. And figurative cobras are
much easier to cope with than real ones, I'm sure. So what forest am I
looking at there?"
"We're on the big middle island of the Floridas, and most of that area
down there is old polders that were built to sup-port the project that was
supposed to recover the North American subtropical rain forest. As it turned
out, it was overrun by all the weird non-native plants and animals left
around from Old Florida—the peninsula that was here before World War
Three. So there are cobras down there, and leopards, and water buffalo, and
hippos and gorillas and . . . oh, everything. I keep a spotting list, and some
days I spend a whole afternoon sitting here, scanning the clearings and the
treetops, hoping to add to it. Don't tell anyone."
Gill emerged then and said, "Uh, maybe some trouble, Rebop."
"Ntaung," she said, flatly.
"Yeah. He's drinking hard and looking to quarrel with Gumba. Might be
mad about your ignoring him. Tried to get into a conversation with Proddy
but she's doing her flit --around-the-room act and wasn't giving him enough
atten-tion. Argued something really pointless with me and got mad when he
lost. Loupa's trying to persuade him to come out here."
Rebop glanced sideways at me and said, "He and I had a quarrel, you see,
and he's not taking it well. I'll forgive him whenever he really wants
forgiving, but right now he just wants to thrash around and be hateful."
Gill shrugged. "Why don't you and I see if we can bring him out here?
With him sitting and glaring in one room and Gumba being an ass in the
other, in half an hour you won't have much party left. Maybe he'll come out

here—if you don't mind, Giraut and Raimbaut? He liked you both; maybe
you can calm him."
"I'm willing to try," I said. "Speaking as Giraut."
"Me too," Raimbaut added.
Rebop and Gill nodded and went back inside; I found a comfortable
chair along the wall, and a footstool, and made myself comfortable. Sol's
light makes me want to just bask; perhaps there's some magic about the
home sun's light, call-ing to my genes across a half-millenium of exile.
"You're not much of a mixer," Laprada said.
I opened my eyes. She was standing over me.
"Do you want to go or stay?" I asked. "I thought we would only be here a
short while."
She sat down in the chair next to me. "They all know I was close to Shan
so they all have to say something to see if they can have an effect on me.
Some of them want to see if they can make me wince, and I have to be brave
and cool with them, and some of them want to see if they can make me cry,
and I have to be brave and sentimental with them, and so forth. Being brave
is the constant. Emotionally brave, I mean. You and I both know I can't do
the other kind, but this is . . . well, exhausting."
"Then let's get out of here," Raimbaut said. "Giraut and I are only
hanging around to possibly help take care of the Ntaung problem, because
Rebop asked Giraut and he likes her smile."
Laprada shrugged. "She is nice. Ever since school days she's been nice.
That's why I had her as a friend. I have to admit, you know, that she is not
very talented, always floats right out of the current, can't dress or hold an
attitude, but she's very nice. Maybe someday someone will take care of the
poor thing, fix her up, so she can be more than nice."
"Is it necessary to be quite that cruel?" I asked.
"Isn't that part of the game?" She sighed and looked up at the cloudless
sky. "Why would anyone want to be out in this harsh light? It washes out
your appearance and damages your skin."
I could feel Raimbaut's anxiety that I would let her pick a quarrel, but I
merely said, "At the moment it feels pleasant, and I have no mirror."
"Nobody is ever without a mirror, not really," she said. "I'm going to go
mix. I don't think Ntaung is coming. Last I saw he and Gumba were
shouting at each other. Probably that gave Rebop an excuse to throw them
both out, and probably the party is getting back on track. What time do we

spring for Shan's funeral tomorrow?"
"I'll want to be up in the morning," I said. "So we should go home in a
couple of hours. Please enjoy yourself. Do what you like. I'm not going to
be hurt or angry about anything. And neither is Raimbaut."
She left without saying anything.
•We can go back in if you like,• I thought. •I like it out here but I don't
suppose we're exactly behaving like proper agents gathering information•
•I don't know, Giraut. I like it here too.• Our minds were both blank for
what seemed like an age. Then he thought, •You said love isn't always this
complicated•
•Oh, I think any love affair always has moments this complicated, mon
bo toszet, non be? But very few of them are this complicated all the time.•
•Are you really interested in Rebop?•
•She seems to be a much nicer person than her crowd, and unlike most
Earth people, she gets out into the air. I wonder how many people who have
balcony apartments ever use their balconies? So she's different from the
people around her. That's a big plus.•
Rebop came out, then, and said, "I'm so sorry to be always troubling
you."
"I thought I heard that Ntaung had gone home," I said.
"He did. Gill took him home. And Gumba too. Before leaving, Ntaung
and Gumba swore to be best friends forever, several times, in front of the
few guests still stranded here. Loupa came back, and she's now getting the
last guests out. Except Laprada, who is sitting crying in the corner and won't
talk to me. I hate to trouble you, but . . . "
"But if she won't talk to you, I'm about the only choice you have. I
understand." I thought to Raimbaut, •Now don't fret. This may be difficult,
or not.• We heaved a simultane -ous internal sigh.
Inside, the last guests, except Loupa and Laprada, were just waiting at
the springer to wave at Rebop before going. She waved back, they went, and
it was down to the five of us in our four bodies.
Laprada was sitting on the edge of the couch, hugging her knees, head
down, crying hard. Loupa, standing behind her with an expression of
helplessness, looked at me and shrugged.
Our turn to try.
I sat next to Laprada, not touching, and waited. Raimbaut asked, •Should
we try to talk to her?•

•Maybe not yet. Looks like a bad crying jag. She needs to breathe, I think,
more than anything else.• Decades of ki hara do, or any martial art if you
stay serious about it, at least give you some ability to read muscle tensions,
and hers were vivid. Whatever had started this, now she couldn't breathe,
and the panic reflex was feeding back into her fear and anxiety.
I reached over and gently rested my hand between her shoulder blades.
She didn't try to shake it off, so I let my hand spread out, visualizing it as
sort of a big warm spider sucking up tension, letting her muscle tension
flow down my arm to my center. Sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't;
this time it worked, so maybe she wanted it to. Her muscles started to
release under my hand, softening and let-ting go, so that her ribs and
diaphragm weren't so pinched. Her air returned in big, lung-ripping sobs,
ramming through her constricted throat.
I let my hand slide gently up her toward her neck, drag-ging slightly, until
I was resting it where the knot of muscles comes together there from the
shoulders, back, and neck. I pushed firmly, easing the tension where I could,
and she be-gan to breathe more normally; the awful noises stopped, and she
breathed deeply but calmly.
•Now you might try,• I thought to Raimbaut.
"I am so sorry that you are feeling so bad," Raimbaut said, after a while.
She nodded her head without looking up or speaking.
He sat close enough for my shoulder to touch hers, and said, "Whatever
it is, if you want to talk about it, we can talk about it at home, or anywhere
away from here. If you don't want to talk about it, I can see you home and
make sure you're okay. Just let me help."
She had started to sob again, but she grabbed my hand.
Since Raimbaut wasn't noticing that she was squeezing it hard enough to
hurt, I refused to notice either. Sometimes, enseingnamen demands.
•Progress,. I thought to Raimbaut. •Not long now. You're doing fine.•
I looked up. Loupa had taken her chance to escape, leav-ing only Rebop,
whose expression was about one-quarter concern and three-quarters a
passionate wish to remove a difficult guest from her living room.
"Come on," I whispered to Laprada. "Just stand up. Then we'll spring to
my place, and you can decide there whether you want to hang around and
talk, or go home."
Laprada mumbled something that might have been agreement, or mere
noise, but good enough. I gripped her el-bow, hoping it would feel

firm-but-gentle to her, locked my arm against my hip, and stood, lifting her
with me. She took her own weight, so I reached for her hand and guided her
along with me to the springer. As we crossed the room, Rebop mouthed
"thank you" and waved. Perhaps she was telling me that Laprada's behavior
was not my fault and no hard feelings, or perhaps she was reminding me of
the pleas-ant conversation earlier in the evening.
•Can we get my love life home before we speculate about yours?•
Raimbaut thought, as we put the card in.
I could feel irony; he wasn't impatient, but pleased.
•Of course I am, companhon, if it's a sign that you are re-covering from
the divorce. But we have another problem to cope with here, don't we?•
As we emerged from the springer, I thought to Raimbaut, •Don't be so
encouraged. Recovering divorced men are sup-posed to have two
problems—not seeing any signals and see-ing them everywhere.•
•Well, you're seeing it right where a recovering dead man would see it,
Giraut. But I suppose we should see what we can do for Laprada, right now.
Senher Deu, life was simpler when women ignored me!• He guided her to
the big read-ing chair. I drifted along mentally.
She didn't so much sit down as fall backwards into the chair. Once
seated, she resumed the hard crying that wouldn't let her breathe; Raimbaut
thought •Now what?• and I showed him how to rub her back. After a while,
she relaxed, again, and he began to talk to her, soft assurances that he would
be there when she wanted him, that he was right there.
She had settled into occasional keening before she sud-denly sat up,
pinched a corner of one of the intelligent pan-els in her dress, dragged the
panel like a sleeve across her face (it struggled like a snake pinned under a
forked stick), and said, "Is Giraut still awake, please?"
"Yes I am. And so is Raimbaut. And we'll both listen if you want to
talk."
"God, god, god, I have now made a complete mess of my social life, for
the rest of my life. I can't believe I did that! Or rather, Laprada can believe it
and understand it and might not even care, but Proddy is having a really hard
time. I may never be able to show my face around any of the crowds again; I
don't think even the Floaters would have me. I'm go-ing to be permanently
dry."
•Might be the best thing that could happen to her,• Raimbaut thought.
•Per gratz deu! Don't say that!-•

•Thanks for the warning.•
"—and they're going to have so much . . . fun with the whole subject of
what happened at Rebop's party, which wasn't even a very important one or
any big part of the cur-rent, and they're going to pretend to be concerned
about me, and need me to have conversations with them to show me how
concerned they are. It's going to be awful.
"And I've truly made a mess of things for the project, also. Now there are
going to be all kinds of gossip and rumor and whispering that will weigh
down the ideas we were trying to promote, like rocks on a corpse. I'm sorry,
Giraut, but as far as getting our ideas in the right place in the current, I think
I've completely sunk the mission."
I smiled. "Sometime (preferably a long time from now) let me tell you
how close I came to a complete failure that would have been entirely my
fault on my first mission, all the way back in Caledony. I would guess that
had things gone thirty seconds differently, I'd've done something that neither
I nor the whole OSP would ever have recovered from. And I didn't even
know there was an OSP at the time.
"Furthermore, every honest OSP agent (if that's not an oxymoron) will
have a few similar stories. Things like that happen, always, and a successful
mission—or career—de-pends on luck more than anyone wants to admit."
"All right," she said, like a suddenly contrite four-year-old after a
tantrum. "Could I—er, go into your bathroom and wash my face? I might be
in there for a while to recover, but I do think I'm going to be all right."
Her wan, embarrassed smile seemed sincere, but a cold notion slithered
through the back of my mind, articulated a moment later by Raimbaut.
•Your weapons case is in the bathroom, under the sink. At least ten lethal
weapons in it.•
"Uh," I said, wishing I could think faster. "Uh, that is, there's something
of mine in there—that is, of mine rather than Raimbaut's—that I (well, it's
uh, a little . . . )—it was caused by me, sort of, or rather I caused it to be
here, well what I mean is, it was left in there and I haven't yet returned it to
the owner—"
Laprada laughed, heartily, the first real laugh we'd heard from her in
hours. "Giraut, I've seen women's underwear before."
"Oh, well, it's not that," I said, hoping my embarrassment at not having a
good lie would reinforce her wrong guess. "Well, you might say . . . it's kind
of a toy, really. Or actually a complex set of toys. Um."

Now she was positively beaming. I suppose nothing makes your own
embarrassment more bearable than the thought of someone else's complete
humiliation. "Oh, this gets better and better. Now I really must see it."
At least she improved my acting. I was now irate on be-half of my purely
fictitious lover. With unfeigned stiffness, I said, "I am going to be attending
parties and events with this person, soon. I would rather not have you,
um—"
"Since you and Raimbaut have the same body, the two of you and she
and I will have to socialize, and you would rather that I didn't know exactly
what industrial-strength sex machine she likes to play with!" She laughed
and shook her head, the loosening remains of her coif falling around her
face, melting Raimbaut's heart (or was it mine?) onto the floor. "It is
apparently impossible to overestimate Occi-tan gallantry. So charming! So
quaint!"
Anger surged, from Raimbaut as much as from me. "I'm glad you like it.
Really I am. We of the outer cultures live to entertain Earth people; that's
why we're trying to force our preserved personalities on you for your
amusement."
"You're being nasty."
"I suppose I am. Now, I am going to go into the bathroom get
something, bring it out wrapped up, and put it away. Will you—"
She started to giggle again. "Oh, certainly! Here, I'll hide my eyes! No
peeking!"
I stood and walked into the bathroom . •I think I liked her better crying.•
•I can understand your feelings,• Raimbaut replied. •But we still have to
get this over with quickly, before she won-ders when we'd have had time to
meet, let alone have sex with, anyone.•
At last I was able to reach under the sink, grab the weapons kit—a light,
little box, really, when you consider that it contained tools enough to
separate a hundred souls from this world. Yet it fit as easily into my hand as
a long novel or a big sandwich.
I took off my tapi, draped the little black lump inside it, and walked back
into the common area. Since Laprada was sitting with her back to me and
her hands over her eyes, I strode around to the dressing area and shoved the
weapons kit into the jewelry locker. When the safe door slammed, Laprada
shouted "Olly olly in free" as merrily as any child. "Do you mind if I use
your shower and fresher and scour the whole stench of defeat and

humiliation off myself? I might want to come to bed with you afterwards
but I don't know that it will be for sex."
"Go right ahead," I said. Or did Raimbaut? It was such a relief to hear
something like a revival of her spirits.
When the shower began to run, I grabbed a pillow from the couch and
pressed it against my face. Raimbaut and I laughed, together, deep and hard,
for what seemed a very long time, though •it must have been only a couple
of min-utes,• Raimbaut realized, once we had stopped.
•Non sai, companhon, but a couple of minutes is the length of a song,
and anything at all can happen in a good song. Time enough for all the
feelings there can be. Let's go to bed.•
I was finally drifting off, and Laprada was still showering, when
Raimbaut thought, •Listen. She's singing. Isn't that one of your songs?•
It was. A happy one, about the first touch of love. It made my evening. I
fell asleep, and perhaps because Raimbaut was tired too, or perhaps because
he had caught up with my life, I slept without dreams, of the past or of
anything, for the first time since his psypyx had been installed.

6
Chaka Home is on Quidde, a high-gravity world, and it's one of a dozen or
so cultures built around its military. By the time of Connect, most military
cultures, sharing their plan-ets with neighbors that they had no reason to
fight, and with nothing real to train for, had become purely ceremonial, except for the band music, silly clothes, and public drills.
The four main exceptions supplied the bulk of our CSPs.
Their continued loyalty to the Council was one of the high-est priorities
of the OSP. Of them, Thorburg and Egalite had been founded explicitly as
military dictatorships, and Fort Liberty had resolved the contradictions in its
bizarre char-ter—a mix of Romantic militarism and Enlightenment anarchism—by falling into straightforward totalitarianism. That left Chaka
Home as the only real military culture with civil liberties or free elections.
They somehow maintained a friendly community of re-sponsible adults
in conjunction with tough-tending-to-bru -tal universal military service. The
normal Chakan served seven years in their army, and then retired into the
usual life of human beings in the cultures that worked—decades of hobby
art, hobby athletics, hobby mysticism, hobby faith, or hobby scholarship, not
unlike what I might someday go back and do in Nou Occitan. A few
thousand Chakans per year, however, chose to go into long-term service in
the Council Special Police, and we valued them highly for it.
Shan was being buried at Chaka Home because they had adopted him.
Long ago, right after the springer came into use, some idiots in the Council
had some idea to "re-form" the cultures that were hard to get along with, by
pulling their charters and either occupying them or dispersing their populations—extending the Great Assimilation of centuries be-fore to the very
people who had fled it. Shan had been a strong advocate for the Chakan
cause, which pulled him into a series of adventures, leading up to a wild
finale that involved barely preventing an invasion by fourteen of Quidde's
other cultures; there had been some shooting and Shan had been in the
middle of it, and the CSP records showed that in his re-serve commission,
he had received a long list of decorations for bravery from that occasion.
Exactly which decorations, and for what, was all in sealed records, but the

Chakans, who take military decorations more seriously than anyone, seemed
to feel he'd been shortchanged.
Whatever it had been, it had finished as "another round for humanity and
one more for the good guys," but it had also been a very near thing, and it
looked to me like a great story that I would probably never know,
It had happened a bare eight years before I met Shan, on Caledony, about
the time my jovent was starting. •How could I not know about something on
that scale?• I thought.
•There was a civil war on Roosevelt that only ended thirty years ago, and
yet only about seven percent of human-ity has heard of it—barely more than
the population of Roo -sevelt. Remember that statistic? It was in the briefing
packet as an example of the reasons that we'll never persuade most people
on Earth that the other worlds are any more real than the Old American
West or the Age of Discovery in those virtual reality shared games. Why I'm
not real to them.•
We walked very slowly behind the tiny casket that held Shan's cremated
remains, carried by Qrala and Dji. The Chakans burn the body thoroughly,
first soaking it in liquid oxygen and then setting it on fire in a special tall
ceremonial chimney, so that there isn't much to put in a casket. It allows
them to keep their cemeteries small and simple; the little markers are only
thirty centimeters apart.
Heroes' Lea is an even smaller cemetery than Chakan standards would
lead one to expect. It was on the east coast of their territory, on granite
bluffs above a stony beach, over-looking the Tempestual Ocean. It's where
they bury their most decorated war heroes; you need the Zulu Star at a minimum to be buried there.
Shan had a Zulu Star, but he had something else that dwarfed that. Hero
of the Chakan People is the highest medal they give—and Shan was the only
non-Chakan ever to be awarded it. If, throughout most of human space, he
had not been well-loved in life, at least the people he was buried among
would be glad to have him.
At the grave, we turned to face the crowd that stood out -side the fence. A
hundred thousand people were there in person, and most of Chaka Home's
thirty-eight million peo-ple were participating via virtual reality through one
of the people there.
Every Chakan family had been given a spot in the mourn -ing area. I saw
no empty places; in everyone of them, most of the way to the tree line, the

family representative or rep-resentatives knelt in stony silence. Beside each,
the family's ceremonial assegai was planted upright.
I was in the third, middle rank of the OSP honor guard, in the center of
the rank. Since people senior to me were be-hind me and to my right, and
people junior to me were in front of me and to my left, •We're nearly
centered,• Raim-baut observed. •I suppose that means you're about halfway
through your career.•
We had about as good a view as anyone could have-—straight across the
little metal casket on its pedestal, toward the vast crowd now rising to its
feet for the first hymn. The Chakans value all arts, but music especially, and
most espe-cially singing in harmony. I didn't understand a word of their
culture language, but if what they wanted me to feel was deep awe, I didn't
miss a thing. The hymn ended in silence broken only by the slap-smash-crack
of the high-grav waves slamming, fast and flat, against the stone beach
behind us.
One of the Chakans at the rostrum then told, in an abbre-viated form, the
story of what Shan had done for Chaka Home. So much of it involved
people from Chakan history and politics, though, and so little from the
general history of the Thousand Cultures, that I couldn't follow it as well as
I'd have liked.
I privately vowed to get the recording of the speech, track down all the
allusions, and come to really understand the story. Someday, Shan, I'm
going to know who you are, really, I thought, so clearly and so much in
those exact words that Raimbaut perceived it exactly. His answering thought
felt like a warm, firm handshake from an old friend.
My eyes stung. A tear was rolling down my face. Laprada, chosen to
represent the rookies, was to my right and two rows in front of me. I could
see her shoulders shaking, and her hands twisted at her sides, probably
wanting to wipe her face.
After that first speech, to some extent it all seemed like reviews. Speaker
after speaker, from all over human space, stood up and, in five minutes or
so, summarized some im-portant event in Shan's career. They'd all been
thoroughly vetted, and any informative details had been winnowed out of
their texts. I learned almost nothing more of Shan.
Time wore on. The day was cool and pleasant with enough overcast to
take the direct sun off, but due to having to stand still in the high gravity my
back, buttocks, calves, and feet were getting stiff and painful. The

shish-rack shish --rack sound of the waves behind us became steadily more
distracting. The stories grew more alike. Still, none of us moved. The cold,
sick feeling that we had seen the last of Shan was settling into my belly.
At last, Dji came to the podium and talked about the fad-ing, dwindling
group of those who could remember the founding of the OSP, the
cameraderie and sense of adven-ture that can never be the same again. Shan
would have been irritated to be reminded, again, that the Briand affair had
ended the secrecy of the OSP. Furthermore he'd have been noisily
contemptuous of Dji's sentimentality. •Voill atz deu that he could be
standing beside me, hearing this,• I thought to Raimbaut. I could imagine
Shan's sotto voce com-mentary vividly.
At last it was time for Sir Qrala to give the final eulogy of the day. When
he stood up to speak, we could all see that his face was smeared with tears. I
hated to recall that I was in-vestigating him.
A moment later, having composed himself, Sir Qrala spoke, his voice at
first soft, and then rising to something firmer and louder. "Shan was my
friend even when we were most bitterly opposed. Perhaps most of all, then.
Others have told most of what can or should be said about his life. Let me
talk a little about the man himself, and what we who will go on might think
about as we remember him.
"He was stubborn, brilliant, flexible when necessary, tough as iron when
it was called for. He could hold a con-viction deeply and completely and
throw it away the instant the evidence proved it to be in error. His mind was
open, but hard to win; fine, but not fussy; wide-ranging but not easily
distracted.
"He would do whatever was needed in his judgement, and he never really
answered to any other authority. His pri-orities were the good of humanity,
the good of the OSP, and the good of his friends, in that order; I never saw
any personal considerations intrude, ever, in his decisions, even when
anyone else would have spared himself with no one blaming him.
"When he was wrong, he was wrong for wholly admirable reasons. And
he was not often wrong."
An itchy trickle of sweat was slowly making its way down my back, and
both my buttocks felt as if I'd had weights sta-pled to them. I concentrated
on my breathing and on relax-ing muscles as far as I could.
Sir Qrala went on. "Shan's passing is also the passing of an era. I ask you
to pledge yourselves to try to make this coming time for the Office of

Special Projects—due to our efforts—at least as good as the last period
was, due to Shan's. Those of us who lived through those ages are passing,
now, and though we cannot yet know whether more of us might be struck
down by assassins, we can be sure that time itself will finish the rest soon
enough. So we are passing all of it on to you, and I ask you to think about
Shan's legacy, and what you are going to make of it.
"The first generation of the OSP were not merely remark-able
people—agencies like ours are always made up of re-markable people. What
made everything so astonishing about that time was that we also faced a
remarkable situa -tion at a remarkable time. Five hundred years after the
Slaughter, having—we thought—tucked ourselves into the endless quiet
dream of the Inward Turn, humanity was seized by history, dragged out in
the cold new dawn, and drenched with shocking cold water. We would be in
touch with each other after all, and that meant we would be right back, face
to face, with the fundamental dilemma that we are a social species all from a
common stock, and simultane -ously we are so different from each other that
we are very likely to disgust, enrage, or frighten each other. We ache for
contact and then we spit on the hand that is extended to shake ours. Like a
divorcing couple, like mutually abusive siblings, we can neither leave each
other alone nor share in peace.
"When the springer came and forced the Thousand Cul -tures, and all the
people of the Sol system, to begin reaching out and weaving our separate
cultural strands together again, we were really no more ready to seek peace
than any other generation of our species had ever been.
"And it is in that context that we must understand both Shan's great
achievements and the passing of his age. For when so much hangs on how
one human being relates to an-other, at first, how they feel about each other
can only be an obstacle. You want them to ally, to cease their fighting, to
trade, to embrace each other, to develop positive images of each other
(whether true or not).
"And so, with the very best of intentions, you begin to tell people a grand
story, a complex tale different for each hearer, an attractive one because it
always exaggerates bene-fits and minimizes costs, a story that—if they will
all just be-lieve it!—can lift them right into your much better world.
"Such was Shan's favorite tactic. When he needed to do it, he was superb
at it, and in his mind he needed to do it often. To a great extent, the peace
and progress of the Thousand Cultures in the last decades originated in the

beautiful sto -ries Shan told us about ourselves.
"Very probably, Shan's projections and shadings were what humanity
needed, then. A few people believing some-thing that is not strictly true is a
far better situation than whole cultures, or even whole planets, plunged into
war, rev-olution, or discommodi. Stretching the truth is a much smaller
problem, in the grand scheme of things, than geno-cide.
"Now, when Shan stretched the truth, he stretched it be-cause he wanted
people to believe in the good. When he lied, he lied to make enemies less
inimical, hatred less bitter, burdens more tractable. His favorite bit of trade
craft was to assure each side that the other favored some point in com-mon,
and lead them round the bush until each thought that it was only the
unexpected reasonableness of the other side that had made progress
possible."
I couldn't help smiling at that; later, on the recording, I saw that nearly
all of us smiled. We had seen Shan do that so often.
"The first forty years of the Office of Special Projects, now that we are
permitted to mention it in public, have been a period of astonishing growth
and change, and I have ab-solute confidence in saying that in calling our era
the Second Renaissance, no one is committing hyperbole. In this amaz-ing
age, the record of the OSP, when it becomes fully known—as I trust it
will—with all its faults and blots, should be seen as, on the whole, just and
honorable. Such is largely the accomplishment of Shan.
"The essential principles, ideals, and operational methods of the OSP
were developed by Shan in his extensive field experience, advocated by him
in our internal debates, and eventually taught and promulgated by Shan in
our staff training. My friends and fellows in the OSP, if you seek his
monument, seek yourself; we are what he made us."
So far I had thought everything Qrala was saying was just right; I had
listened closely and had almost forgotten how heavy and uncomfortable I
was. Qrala had made me stand a little straighter, think of Shan a little more,
and feel the grief beginning to pass. But something in the tone of the last
things he said made me listen more closely now. It had sounded as if he had
been leading up to a "but" or following from an unspoken "although."
"Shan's spirit of inquiry and experiment, readiness to start with the world
as it was, refusal to accept that we must finish there—his fine creative
intelligence—will be sorely missed in the days to come, for it is my feeling,
and I think, too, in the last few years, it was Shan's, that times have changed

again. The work of the first, secret OSP is largely accomplished, and the
work of the second, public OSP is now beginning, and it will be under
different rules, in a dif-ferent environment, and to some extent for different
goals. I cannot emphasize enough how much we will miss Shan's flexibility
and situational awareness in the days to come.
"So it falls to us, I think, to be Shan for ourselves, not to slavishly
follow his precepts and policies in the new era, but to approach the new era
as he did the old. When he began, he was improvising. He had some idea of
what was wrong, some of what might be better, and some experience of
what might allow motion in a good direction. He was willing to sacrifice
every cherished notion to preserve and strengthen that knowledge in himself
He was always for what worked, rather than what had worked before. He
was always op-posed to fighting the last war, and in favor of not having another war at all. He always preferred to call on people's better natures more
than their predictability. It is that spirit that will see us through our next era,
however long that may be, and through every era the OSP will face in all the
time to come. It is that spirit that was his greatest gift to us, if we only have
the wisdom to accept and use it. And it is that spirit for which he will be
remembered as long as our species lasts."
The Chakans sang another hymn. Dji and Qrala lowered the little casket
into the hole, and the Chakan honor guard poured in the molten rock.
Weapons of many kinds were fired over the grave, between short pieces of
music. Aircraft of many cultures flew low over us and swung into the "missing man" formation. The grave was festooned with flowers, poems, broken
musical instruments, fine wines, and a dozen other things, many of them
bursting into flames as they were set on the lava. So many other cultures had
wanted to con-tribute something to the funeral that there was almost an hour
of these little ceremonies after Qrala's eulogy, which gave me plenty of time
to think.
•Wonder if we can cause some of the representatives who have been out
of touch with their cultures for generations to complain in public about the
ceremony? That ought to pro-voke some recalls, and get usmore
representative represen-tation,• I thought.
•Now you're thinking like Shan,• Raimbaut thought back. It was as if
Shan had rested a hand on my shoulder for an instant, the way he did when I
had done something well.
After my spine had begun to feel like it had been packed down with a

hammer drill, the funeral was over, and I could be grateful for the privileges
of rank, because the honor guard was far up in the line to use the portable
springers. A moment or two more of discomfort was all; then we stepped in
an instant across the light years, back to the office.
•So,• Raimbaut thought. •Is there any interpretation of that eulogy that
we ought to think about in light of investi-gating Qrala?•
It was a good question. Grief and shock, and a certain awe, had kept me
from thinking of it during the funeral. Raimbaut had been aware of this, and
that was why he had waited to ask. So I let my mind run over the
possibilities as we ordered and received coffee and sandwiches, laid out the
materials on the desk, set things up on the screen, and re-quested the reports
on the connectivity study—all the sorts of things human beings do when the
alternative is getting to work. Eventually I had a thought for Raimbaut.
•Well. Part of the problem, we're both painfully aware, is that we aren't
supposed to know much about what the older generation's quarrels were
about, or where the bodies are buried in their emotional landscapes, I guess.
•Now suppose we start from a not-too-implausible guess. Kiel, during
the short time I knew him, was obsessed with opennness and doing things
through channels and respecting "legitimate local government." He
passionately hated Shan's way of working: learning where the emotional life
and heart of a culture is, putting all our attention into recruiting that heart to
our cause, and then backing that social and emo-tional core against the
government. Shan's method was al-ways to champion the social against the
political; Kiel's was the opposite.
•Now, I would bet that no matter what the personal issue once was, the
real deep clash was always between Shan's find--their-hearts-and-win-them
approach, and Kiel's strengthen--their-state approach. Shan always opposed
the government in favor of anything else—business, religion, art, science,
sports, whatever—but Kiel was about as extreme a state supremacist as I've
ever run into.•
•What do you favor?• Raimbaut asked.
•Me? Anything that works, I suppose.•
•And Sir Qrala?•
I thought. •My impression, from our time together on Briand, is that he's
pragmatic in the same way I am. I think I see what you're driving toward.•
•I'm not sure I do, Giraut. I only thought, if we're trying to stake out
sides, we should try to know who all of them are.•

•Good thought. All right, now. Suppose that there was a power struggle,
back long before my generation joined the OSP. And Shan won. The OSP
adopted a policy of backing society against the state. Now that might be why
Kiel left the OSP, non be? And for some reason he agreed to keep quiet
about what the actual slant of the OSP was, and to have Qrala always along
both to assist him and to watch him.•
I felt Raimbaut's impatience. •It makes sense, Giraut, but how do you
trace a path from an old political squabble to killing Shan?•
•Maybe when Kiel died, the counterweight in the politi -cal struggle was
gone, so the Kiel faction (led by Qrala) is readjusting the balance. Or maybe
Qrala knew something no one else knew about what really happened on
Briand—-he was in a position to know—and Shan's error or malice really
did cause Kiel's death, and the assassination was pay-back. Or maybe we
can't see the reason because it's some-thing personal from thirty-five years
ago.•
•What about the possibility that Sir Qrala is Innocent?•
•Of course, to be sure, Rairnbaut, but—•
•Is it really "of course" and "to be sure?" Aren't you really already sure?•
I was annoyed and offended only for an instant. One thing you have to
say for sharing a brain: it shortens an argument. •I guess I was upset by what
he did at an old friend's funeral. He used the eulogy to attack Shan's ideas,
and to pretend that Shan believed the opposite of what he really did, and—well, it enrages me. Using Shan's funeral to attack Shan seemed
treacherous, and devious, and I hate him for it.•
Raimbaut was quiet for a long time before I picked up the soft thought
he was trying to suppress: •And Shan had never been treacherous or devious
to an old friend?•
The whole immense betrayal of Shan's forcing Margaret to whore for the
OSP, and the wreckage of my marriage, swam up in front of my mind, and
before I knew what was happening, I was crying, another one of those crying
jags that seemed to reach out and embrace everything sad everywhere.
When I was wiping my eyes and snuffling, thinking that I should be over
it all, Raimbaut thought, •You see, manipu-lating things that, in all honor,
ought to be left alone, is so much what the OSP does . . . you see? It doesn't
indicate evil intention. It's standard procedure. Parts of Qrala's eulogy may
have been tacky, but tackiness is not proof of murder. If Qrala had Shan
killed to advance his agenda, wouldn't he give some bland, nothing speech at

the fu-neral?•
•That would make sense,• I admitted. •Well, companhon, let's take a
look at what the connectivity study turned up. Perhaps it will help set my
mind at rest.•
The connectivity file was set up to be scanned dozens of ways. Even
scanning it took significant time on a teraflop processor. As always, in the
quest for the unusual, we saw a great deal of the usual: For the most part,
they seemed to be pure coincidences—an agent who had been recruited by
Shan and Qrala later worked the Briand affair, and one of his contacts was a
school chum of Uloccannar's, for example. Perhaps a dozen were less
explicable; those we reserved for further study, but chances were that they
would prove to be nothing more significant than the others.
•So far he looks about as innocent as anyone can, given that the whole
human race interconnects,• Raimbaut com-mented.
•Believe it or not, I'm relieved,• I thought back to him. We broke for
lunch. Raimbaut tried comming Laprada, but she'd hung out a
do-not-disturb on her com line, and it probably wouldn't be a good thing to
override it just to say hello. After a second cup of coffee, we returned to the
con-nectivity report.
This time we tried working from the guess that since the assassination
was carried out by an OSP agent in training, and we were investigating the
possibility that it was at the behest of a senior agent, the go-betweens and
cutouts in the operation would have to be OSP too, so we started looking
for chains that were all-OSP, loosely defined: agents, inform -ants,
temporary re-assigns, local assistants, mercenaries, and so forth.
About a hundred and ten of those were perfectly explica-ble. For
example, Margaret was one of them, because Uloc-cannar had been one of
Kapilar's informants, and Kapilar had been her primary informant. I
appeared in them as a friend, confidant, and co-agent of Qrala, and as having
had dinner with Uloccannar once, though I really could not re-member it.
You meet so many people on missions that you tend to forget most of them
when the mission is over.
•Well, that's another list exhausted,• I thought, •with nothing criminal.•
•Check it against the previous run,• Raimbaut suggested.
It was a good precaution, to make sure that we weren't missing
anything—not more than that. I would swear, and so would Raimbaut, that
we expected nothing more than veri-fication that there was no overlap, or

perhaps a couple of hits whose cause was obvious.
Instead, what popped up was the name Jeremy Plouge. Jeremy Plouge
was a link between Qrala and Shan, to be-gin with. In 2798, the two partners
had been involved in one of the many necessary operations to keep
aintellects from gradually reorganizing society to their liking.
You had to do that—aintellects that couldn't take inde-pendent action
were incapable of doing much good, but they had a tendency to redefine
"good" into "convenient for machines" or "easier to process" if they were
not watched. In this case, some direct-to-brain entertainment programming
had been doped with a mildly addictive set of subroutines that had some
subtle, not-good effects on the brain. The ain-tellects responsible had been
erased, and system protection viruses released to track down the' last copies
of the hazardous software. But the addict community did their best to
preserve uncorrupted copies, caring very little about what might be
happening to their brains.
One such addict—and a ringleader of the group—had been Magda
Plouge, Jeremy's mother. When Qrala and Shan had made what should have
been a routine raid, with only a dozen CSPs backing them, she grabbed a
weapon and fired a wild shot. Shan ordered her to drop the weapon, twice.
When she began to swing it toward the OSP agents and CSPs, he shot her
with a neuroducer dart. Her joyware-damaged system went into a seizure.
She had died in front of her six-year-old son, Jeremy Plouge.
Nineteen years later, Qrala had recruited Jeremy Plouge for the OSP.
Plouge had risen to being a senior agent in Qrala's shop. Plouge had been on
Briand, under cover as a trade rep, working with Paxa Prytanis in New
Tanjavur. And he'd had extensive and frequent conversations with Uloccannar, whose family owned a couple of export banks, even though
Uloccannar had nothing to do with the management of the family business.
Immediately after the Briand affair's disastrous conclu -sion, when
Uloccannar was already at the training center, Qrala had broken all normal
rotation and assigned Jeremy Plouge to an office in the training center,
where he could easily have had daily contact with Uloccannar.
My feelings of triumph were mixed with a strong desire to put my head
down and cry. •That's got to be it. Qrala's been keeping Plouge around for
decades, because he was sort of a magic bullet for Shan. Then all you
needed was a real triggerman to provide enough of a cutout—•
Raimbaut seemed to feel worse than I did. •Just to be sure,• he said, •let's

see what Jerry Plouge has been doing since.• He requested a file that
described all of Plouge's tracked activities up to the minute, and went down
to the bottom to read back upward—but what we found there was more than
enough to have me lunging for the com, contact-ing Dji and Margaret to let
them know there had to be a pri-vate meeting of the three of us, right away.
Jeremy Plouge had gone on indefinite leave, no destina-tion specified,
nine hours before Uloccannar killed Shan. And only three hours into that
leave, Plouge had been found dead, with a maser hole through his guts, in an
alley in Freiporto.

7
We had to go over the evidence three times; Dji seemed to keep finding one
more little reason, here and there, that we had to review the connection for
him one more time. We did our best to be patient.
Margaret, on the other hand, was characteristically impa-tient and tried to
bull her way through. "It's more than enough, Dji. I know it's sad, and not
conclusive. But the evi-dence for opening a full investigation is there, past
question. We've got to do it."
Dji shook his head sadly. "I don't know what to say. If Qrala's a traitor
and an assassin, and maybe still worse things . . . well, then what has my
whole life been spent on?" He sighed and looked down at the table. "It
almost could fit into the patterns of the quarrels of so many years ago . . .
not quite, but almost. And much of the evidence is damning by the standards
of intelligence work—if Qrala be-longed to another, rival outfit this would
be enough evi-dence for me to sign a termination order on him. But . . . . oh,
damn. Damn." Dji's gaze went right through the blank wall to something a
million miles away. "All right, I'm delay-ing, and that's folly. Full
investigation. Don't let him know yet, if you can help it, but don't delay for
concealment. I'm going to assign Paxa and Piranesi to the job too, because
their investigations have dead-ended; be ready to brief them in half an hour.
Now, if you all don't mind . . . " He was obviously choking up; we got out
of there before he actually cried.
In the hallway, Margaret said, "Old times, eh? Nothing makes any sense
and you wish you'd never heard of the Of-fice of Special Projects, or of any
culture but your own."
I sighed and shrugged; it was true. "Thanks for the support in dealing
with Dji. That was no fun at all."
"Part of my new job. I guess. Ah, hell, Giraut, it looks like it's going to
be longer and longer till I get you back from Dji. This investigation could be
three or four stanyears, easily. If you don't mind, I'm going to sit in while
you and Paxa and Piranesi work things out; I might want to launch a comple
-mentary effort in my own group. We've got to either clear Qrala or have
him dead to rights, right away."

"You don't believe he'll be cleared," I said, since it was ob-vious from
her tone.
"No."
By the end of the day, Raimbaut and I, Paxa and Piranesi, and Margaret
were moving as fast as we could to find out what Qrala was really after,
who he might have hired, and what we could do to contain the damage.
Raimbaut and I had to rush the shave, shower, and dress-ing before
meeting Laprada and Rebop. It was a very un-promising start to an evening,
but Margaret had told us to maintain as much of our normal social
schedules as we could, as a preventive cover.
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
We were to meet for dinner and conversation, then go to another Di
vers' gathering. Raimbaut had been right; during a break, late in the day, I'd
commed Rebop, and she'd been obviously glad to be asked out. When
Raimbaut had commed Laprada, she'd been vague about whether she liked
the idea or not, but for some reason when he had men-tioned that Rebop
would be along, it seemed to make her feel better, and she said yes.
•Maybe she doesn't trust your intentions, companhon,• I thought to him.
He seemed to laugh inside, but it was sad. He was worry-ing about her
again.
We arrived at the restaurant first—it was neoBolognese, a place Rebop
had suggested, and I never knew what city we were in. While waiting for the
women, we stared into space, sharing the body comfortably.
I thought about the whole sad affair. Dji had looked so old and sick
when we'd hit him with the evidence. What would it feel like to have known
Paxa for thirty years, and have some kid come to me with evidence that she
had had Margaret killed in a political dispute?
Raimbaut cycled through all his anxieties about Laprada endlessly.
•If ever again I start wishing for life to be real and exciting and
involving,• I thought, •perhaps some kind friend will beat me into a coma.•
Raimbaut started laughing as I was taking a sip of water, and we choked,
wheezed, gasped, and sputtered for a while. •I suppose it doesn't get any
more real than not being able to breathe,• he added, setting off another
spasm.
By the time we looked up, eyes red, throat burning, half--drowned,

Rebop was standing over the table with a quirky little smile. "If you boys
can't behave together, I'll have to separate you."
"Hello," I said, because I couldn't think of anything else to say.
"Hello, yourself," she said, sitting. "That was fascinating."
"You could see us being different people?"
"Oh, that's easy to see for almost anyone. I think that's probably why
you've lost the habit of telling people who's speaking—anyone can see that
it's Raimbaut's gesture to push the hair back when he's thinking, or that
Giraut fin-ishes off a conversational point, especially if he thinks he should
have the last word, by shooting his cuffs. All your friends and most of your
acquaintances can see the differ-ence. No, I had just come out of the
springer, and what I thought was fascinating was watching you start a drink
of water, staring off into space with that amazing romantic gaze (did you
practice that, Giraut?) and then suddenly laugh as the other person. I don't
know what you thought of and it might be none of my business, but
whatever was hap-pening in there was fascinating." She picked up the menu
and said, "Now, the big trick in ordering neoBolognese food is to remember
that the more fat, the more authentic."
"The health cops must love this place."
"Of course they do. It probably justifies a third of their budget."
I looked down at the menu. Practically everything had heavy cream, soft
cheese, wine, and butter, at a minimum, in it. "I'm going to like it here."
She smiled, nodding. "I'm afraid Laprada, or Proddy-—whichever she
wants to be tonight—will probably object, and then eat more than either of
us. You have to pretend you don't notice."
Raimbaut wanted to be gallant and defend her, but my amusement
spoiled the effect; he smiled too. "So her friends know that she wants to be
called Laprada—"
"Except when she doesn't. We all love her, no matter what, anyway. And
we've all been so glad you've turned up, Raimbaut. You're very good for
her."
"Thank you," he said; it was a pity that only I could really feel how happy
Rebop had just made him.
"Well, so here's my chance to blow up like a balloon," Laprada said,
coming out of the springer and walking straight to our table. "Rebop, with
all the fretting you do about your figure, how can you eat here?"
•Don't snap,• Raimbaut thought at me.

•No danger,• I thought back.
Rebop said, "Well, knowing I eat here gives me something to fret about,
and fretting burns calories. They have soups and salads if you prefer. At
least, I intend to have a good time."
"And so do I," I added. "And if we can possibly compel you, so will
you."
She sighed. ''I'm sorry, Rebop, that was nasty, wasn't it? Forgive,
please?" I swallowed hard and managed not to think in words that the
little-girl act was getting old.
I guess it never got old for Rebop. "Oh, Preddy, you know I know you. I
wish you weren't so cranky, because you hurt yourself so often."
"Thanks." She was looking down at her plate. Perhaps she was ashamed
of herself?
•You think so?•
•I didn't think I thought that in words.•
•Oh, Giraut, what do I do about her?•
• What your heart and conscience tell you, companhon, same as anyone
else would have to. Experience is useful for dealing with bad people and
bad relationships; for good ones, you always have to make it up as you go.
That's why the world is full of younger couples who are infuriatingly happy,
and wise old people making each other miserable.•
We ordered. Laprada ordered a heavy cream-and-butter entree, just as
Rebop had predicted. A slightly awkward si-lence descended. Rebop and I
wanted to get to know each other better, and Raimbaut and Laprada, I think,
wanted to reassure each other about their feelings for each other, and that
would have taken very different kinds of small talk, and Raimbaut and I
could not talk simultaneously.
"So," I said, trying to make conversation, "will we have to see any art
before we go see the Divers? I have to admit, it's much easier to talk when
there's something to talk about, even something I don't always understand."
"I think the current is running toward considering art too trivial to waste
time on," Laprada said, thoughtfully. "If we want to stay right where it's wet,
it's going to be politics and maybe philosophy, for several months, I guess.
It's been art so much, for so long, after all."
Rebop made a face and nodded. "Boring, but true. All the deadly earnest
people and all the ones that use words like 'important' seriously are going to
have a great few months. Maybe we ought to split off from the Divers? I bet

Loupa would go with us and three's enough to start a tendency."
Laprada nodded. "Not the worst idea I've heard, but we need some
spectacular moment to split off. Especially be-cause Gill would definitely
not split from the Divers for a while, and Loupa would feel funny going
over without him. Though if she did, Pecos and Jekko would surely follow
her, and that's enough of a base."
•It sounds like discussing a business startup,• Raimbaut thought.
•Not as lively,• I noted. "Raimbaut and I are wondering how you make
decisions like that. I know we've been sort of judgemental in the past—"
"Very judgemental," Laprada said, but her eyes twinkled.
"But maybe you could try to explain how all this works, to us, one more
time?"
Rebop winked. "Well, it's not easy for us to explain be-cause we've lived
in it all our lives, and the way you both think is so alien; it's like something
out of a history book, this whole business about deciding that an idea is
right or not. I mean, who's to say? And who would care even if the terms
meant anything? It's all a game, you know."
I bit my tongue on the thought that we played games more seriously than
they did, too, but felt Raimbaut's silent nod of agreement.
Laprada shrugged. "We went over all that before. The thing I don't
understand is why the outer cultures are so at-tached to discomfort. They're
always looking for things to surprise them and upset them, and they're never
happy with a pleasant evening you can have over and over again. I don't
understand, at all. I mean, we are the ones who pay for all of the art we
consume, aren't we? So why is it bad for it to be up to us, what's in the art
we're buying? Why would anyone expect us to choose to make ourselves
uncomfortable? And the same with sports and politics and history, for that
matter.
"We've never really advanced beyond that point in the ar-gument, have
we? Now, in the current, lately, everyone's been doing art very seriously.
We've all been having move-ments and talking about meaning, form,
tradition, and vision, and significant stuff and not-significant stuff, and all
the rest of that, and we've all been making statements and 'getting' other
people's statements . . . well, you know, that's all a charming vocabulary for
socializing. It really is, and I'm not just saying that to make you feel better
about these ideas you grew up with. It gives people lots of things to talk
about at parties, and to think about while alone, and so on. But every

vocabulary wears out after a while, and people say the same thing over and
over, and the stupid people and the dull people become too good at
it—which means you can't tell who the clever witty people are, nearly as
easily. When all that happens, it's time to change the vocabulary, and let
another group of clever people be the center of the current. Do you see?"
I shuddered and admitted I did.
Rebop was nodding. After a moment she said, "I listened to your
recording, that first one that you said still sells the best. It was really
remarkable; I listened to it three times back to back."
"Thank you. Even after all these years, it's still very flat -tering to hear
that." I saw her squirm; plainly I had misunderstood her. "But you were
about to tell me what you didn't like, I think."
She shrugged. "I liked it. But it did seem very . . . aggres-sive, very
assertive, not very free. You sounded like you were completely sure that this
was the right way to express your feelings, and that other people would have
those feelings too. You didn't seem to worry at all about whether other
people might be anxious or irritated."
"If they were, they could stop listening."
Laprada shook her head. "That's incredibly rude. You in-vite them to
listen and then you don't care if they're of-fended. You ignore that they gave
you their time and probably their money. You don't even try to please them."
"Oh, nonsense," I said. " 'Those who must please to live, must live to
please.' I have every interest in pleasing people; it's only that if they aren't
pleased, they can exercise their freedom and walk away."
Rebop sighed. "And you probably don't even see how making those
judgements is deciding that some people are worth more than others."
Raimbaut was thinking, so I let him have the voice. In a moment, he said,
"This is starting to sound like that argu-ment Giraut had with Gill. Are we
having another of those?"
"Not at all the same," Laprada said. "It's been days. The current has
changed."
"If you're asking about the purpose of the argument," Re-bop said,
swirling her drink in her hand, "we've said many times that we aren't tied
into those archaic notions about what an argument is 'for.' I don't know why
people go around looking to be annoyed and disturbed in the outer cultures,
but here, no one does. Here, argument and conver-sation are a sport and an

art form.
"But getting back to your music: I was getting teary in some places, and
laughing, and feeling warm and happy. I didn't appreciate being bullied and
dragged all over my emotional landscape like that. I will have the feelings I
want to have when I want to have them, and the thoughts too, thank you.
And when I had to listen to it twice more to re-gain control of my feelings . .
. well, you see? I know there are people who want art to do that, but I can't
imagine why."
•Should I try to explain?• I thought to Raimbaut.
•No. It's hard enough to argue. Maybe you should just confront them.•
I shrugged. "Disturbance is art. All else is opium. Too many
people—maybe most of the people on Earth—would like to encounter
nothing that ever made them think an ex-tra instant, or feel anything they
were not accustomed to feeling. And the thing to do with such people is
drag them out of bed, bash them across the face till they lie still, and piss on
them till they drink it."
Both women stared at me.
"Metaphorically," I added. "Hurt them out of their com-fort and thereby
force them to take in something they didn't know they liked."
That didn't seem to change their expressions.
After a moment I went on. "Now that I've been here long enough, I
understand perfectly why there's a large number of people who would like
nothing better than to grab the whole lifetimes of others and treat them as a
circus—with the other person's will turned off. So that there will never be
even one little hint that someone might feel differently from you, and so that
all the 'new' experiences can be reduced to sitting on the couch and doing
nothing. You all started out, centuries ago, doing that to paintings and
songs, insisting that they be pithed and homogenized, and now you end by
doing it to people. You start by saying people need relief from stressful
lives and you end by saying that everyone everywhere needs to be treated
like patients in a trauma ward. Let me ask you something—" •Raimbaut,
stay out!• "—Laprada, would you really like Raimbaut better if he were
more predictable and consistently delivered whatever you were expecting
him to deliver?"
"Of course! Anyone prefers to get what they want—"
''And once they do, they're bored and they go looking for something else.
But if they haven't learned to enjoy getting something they weren't expecting

. . . " I looked from Re-bop's friendly, puzzled expression to Laprada's blank,
almost hostile stare, and Raimbaut thought, •What's the use?• "Look, why
don't we go to the party?"
"Good idea," Laprada said. "It might have been a good idea half an hour
ago."
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
By now I could recognize all the Divers; names and faces fit
together smoothly, and most of the challenge was gone from parties with
them, because things had settled into pre-dictability. I wondered, idly, how
long ago these things had become predictable for Rebop and Laprada.
I drifted around for a while with a drink in hand. Gill was being more
morose than usual, and Loupa seemed to orbit further away from him.
Ntaung was sour and quiet, and since he probably thought I was stealing his
girl (and maybe I was), that was understandable. I was sorry not to be able to
talk as we had before. Pyere and Byra were no longer a couple, and were on
the prowl, supposedly. To me and Raim-baut, they looked bored, but Pecos
and Picasso both assured us, leaning in to whisper it, that their hearts were
actually breaking.
An hour went by, and Laprada circulated, being brittle and bright as
usual, but nastier. (•Laprada is wonderful, Preddy is an asshole,• Raimbaut
thought. •And they're as hard to separate as we are.•)
Rebop floated from conversation to conversation, getting distracted on
the way, and kept avoiding Ntaung while act-ing like she wanted to be near
me.
A voice behind me said, "Let's be real about this. Shan has to have been
killed by someone inside the OSP, and proba-bly because he'd done
something that was the last straw, some embarrassing thing we're never
going to hear about, and I bet they were all glad to see him go."
I turned. It was Gumba. He was standing in the middle of a circle of his
usual eggers-on, feet planted, letting his vast belly hang out, head reared
back so he could look down his nose at Rebop. Why he had chosen to voice
the insult to her . . .
•It's Earth, Giraut. They have no honor.•
I received that thought as I closed with Gumba. There's a theory that the
slap that proposes a duel is something you do because you're so angry that

you can't fight like a man. Having been in more than my share of duels,
fights, and ar-guments, I know that's crap. I can be too angry to think
straight, but never too angry to fight; that would be like be-ing too thirsty to
drink or too horny to fuck.
But I didn't slap him, as I'd first intended. He took a step back, and I saw
his finger coming up; he was going to use me as an example of whatever
stupid point he was making. A slap would have meant treating him like a
man, and he wasn't more than an overgrown child who had been cheated of
any chance to grow up.
Still, here I was. I grabbed his chin, pulled him closer, and said, softly,
"What?"
He turned pale. "I . . . I . . . "
"I didn't hear you," I said. "But I could tell it was directed at me. And that
you were picking on Rebop in order to get at me. Now I would like you to
look me right in the eye, and repeat what you said, and I assume you will
mean what you say, and will not just toss it off for effect, because if you
continue to pose, I may lose patience and strike you, which I would hate to
do in a house where I am a guest. Now please repeat your remark?"
"No," he said, quietly.
"And why not?"
"I'm afraid of you."
"And well you should be. But heeding your fear on the subject makes
you a coward. Now, seriously, Gumba, you have good qualities. There are
reasons for you to be alive, even if you don't think so. Why don't you try
having just a trace of courage? Look me in the eye and say what you said
before."
He tried. "Shan was killed by someone in the OSP . . . "
I waited a breath. "Why?"
"Because he had embarrassed it for the last time . . . "
"And how do you think we all felt about that?"
"I . . . I said you would all be glad." He huffed and sobbed at the end.
"Don't hit me."
"No promises, but you're doing well. See? You said it to my face. Now,
my little bag of jelly and pretense, let me say to you: 'You are a liar, and a
fool, and a poseur besides.' How does that feel?"
"I d-don't care."
"Do you mean that?"

He mustered a glare. "No. I'm angry."
"Good." I walloped him in the face; he had finally made enough of a
person of himself to be worth hitting. He went over backwards—Earth
people never have any balance be-cause so few of them exercise.
Someone hit me from behind—Ntaung. He was smart enough to aim for
the back of the head—threatening Raim-baut while getting me off
guard—but he didn't hit nearly as hard as he needed to, and besides after he
hit he stood there to see what effect it would have, a mistake that most
Occitans learn not to make at age eight. I turned around, crouched low in the
First Monkey, sprang forward, and drove him down to the floor.
The room erupted in what I would describe as a good at-tempt by
amateurs at a melee. Normally I don't approve of cross-gender brawling
(something is ne gens about it, no mat-ter how skilled and large the woman
or how small and inef-fective the man), but I was amused to see Gill trying
to keep Loupa from hurting herself while she swung wildly at him. Rebop
drove in a very creditable left jab to Wennji's jaw, and Laprada, with her
training, practically cleared her side of the room. It might not have settled
any arguments, but physi-cally speaking our side did very well that evening.
Half an hour later, or so, we were in my apartment back at the Training
Center, just me and Raimbaut, Laprada and Re-bop. Going through a brawl
on the same side bonds young people at least as well on Earth as it does
anywhere else. The two of them had stopped the mutual sniping and were
act-ing like true companhonas.
It was one of those giddy, silly occasions when you're high until the
adrenaline wears off. We ordered late-night hors d'oeuvres, and made a lot
of noise, laughing, talking, and shouting over each other. It was a miracle
that no neighbors complained about the noise.
When we were all tired, and calmer, I kissed Rebop, very lightly and
affectionately, and sent her out through the springer with a smile. •You still
have a charm or two left, companhon. Let me see if I have any luck,•
Raimbaut thought.
He didn't, of course. "Well," Laprada said, "I suppose I should think,
seriously, that this was even worse than the crying jag last time. Except the
poor stupid turds will all make a big thing out of it, and soon, to be
anybody, you'll have had to have been knocked down at that party. I wonder
if next season everyone's going to be slapping each other around
physically?"

"As opposed to emotionally?" Raimbaut asked, lightly.
She shrugged. "You really never are going to understand that that's part
of the game, are you? If we didn't hurt each other's feelings, how would we
know we'd been in a fight? It's the same thing as the bruises in martial arts
practice, and doesn't mean any more than that. You were right about
Gumba, but you've got some growing up to do, both of you." She turned
and went through the springer; no kiss, no wave, nothing that said anything
was going on.
It's difficult to fall asleep when you're inside the head of an energetic
jovent, pacing the floor in an older man's body that gets tired and sore much
too fast.

8
The next day, the evidence in the Qrala case was more con-clusive, but not
as shocking anymore, because we were get-ting used to the concept, I
suppose. We found a fair amount of message traffic, all public-key, between
Plouge and Qrala, and even a few notes between Uloccannar and Plouge.
The most revealing thing was that there had been at least some traffic every
year since Plouge had turned twenty. It really did look as if he had been
recruited and then held till the time was right.
Crypto always wants a complete file with each message, but Security
always wants us to send it to Crypto shorn of all information, so the
compromise takes a while to arrive at.
Right after we sent our request to Crypto, Laprada came in. From the
way she walked straight at me, I knew the call was not social.
She didn't even say hello. "I thought you should know that Gumba has
gone fully solipsist—and Ntaung is over there trying to talk him out of it.
And it's not going to suc-ceed. Gumba is lost to us forever, and whatever
people might think of him, he's still the heart of our old crowd. And Ntaung
seems to have decided to never forgive Rebop, and they've been something
or other to each other for com-pletely forever. Is there any other part of my
life you want to tear up? Is there anything else you can do to make a mess of
my existence?"
There isn't much you can say to that; Raimbaut started to stammer out
that he was sorry she felt bad, but—
"My feelings are not the issue here!" she said. "You're al-ways preaching
those little sermons about the real world and confronting what's difficult
and I don't know what else, but now you're worrying about how I feel? Let's
not be silly. You completely tore up everything in my life that I ever val-ued
or liked. I don't understand how I can ever have cared for you. You seemed
so sweet and nice, Raimbaut, and I can't believe that you'd really be involved
with Giraut, but I know the two of you can't keep any secrets from each
other. I don't understand how I could have been so wrong about you, or
how—"
The com pinged URGENT. I turned to see what it was—-it was

Margaret. "Giraut, unless you're in a real crisis, we've been waiting for the
last five minutes. Please get to the meeting right away."
"Two minutes," I said, "and it's really—"
There was something wrong in the corner of my eye-—Laprada was
gone. She must have run straight into the springer the instant she saw
Margaret's face on the com, but why? •There will be time enough to sort
this out later,• I told Raimbaut. •Meanwhile, we do need to get to that
meet-ing.• "Right away," I said, to Margaret, clicked off the com, and
walked into the springer to the conference room.
Before anyone spoke, I knew the trouble was worse than I had imagined.
Dji was seated at one end of the table, with Paxa and Piranesi. Paxa's jaw
was set the way it only did for a serious fight; she wanted to kill someone,
now. I almost felt sorry for whoever it was, but if it was Qrala and the
charges were true . . . well, I was sorry for my own bad judgment in ever
becoming his friend and in ever letting my feelings sway my mind on the
matter.
Piranesi stared down at the place on the table where his thumbs were
drumming in a slow alternating thud, thud, thud, as if something between
them horrified him.
The worst was Dji. He sat with hands folded on his stomach, slumped in
his chair, and he looked gray, sick, and very, very old. Whatever he knew
was eating him alive from inside.
Margaret's face was emotionally flat. She looked around once, her gaze
pausing on each of us briefly. "I'll be very brief. Most of us here know most
of the facts. The purpose of this meeting is to share them all and then plan
our ac-tions. This is going to be very hard for all of us. Raimbaut, Giraut,
did you have time to look at what came back from cryptography?"
"They got something already?"
"Qrala, Plouge, and Uloccannar didn't change the key of-ten enough. It's
a common problem in a small operation, I understand. All right, let me show
you."
They had large parts of seven messages, and fragments of nine more. All
of them seemed to be about the whereabouts of "S," and a "situation rating"
that appeared to be on a one to ten scale, with most of the numbers between
six and ten. "S would be . . . "
"We've already correlated it with Shan's movements. If it's not him, it's
the greatest coincidence in history," Mar-garet seemed to be rushing on to

her next point; I knew that style. She was nerving herself up for something
she hated to do. "Now, Paxa, I guess you'd better present the last of it."
Paxa sighed; I'd seen her in any number of situations, in-cluding violent
ones, but I had never seen her look so un-comfortable before. "All right,
there are two intercepts that matter; the rest is all supplementary and we only
have to look at it if anyone wants to confirm. The first one is that about an
hour after it was announced that the debate would happen in the Council,
Qrala sent a message to Jeremy Plouge in their private cipher, and besides
detailing Shan's whereabouts, it added that while he was in the Great
Meet-ing Room, the 'situation rating' would be 'one plus.' That evening
Plouge took Uloccannar to dinner at a quiet spot on the moon; a very
expensive meal, but they spent a long time over it and ordered nine bottles
of wine. The next day, Uloc-cannar shot Shan." She leaned forward over the
table. "Now, this is the worst of it, I think. We were able to crack into
Qrala's personal files and check dates and notes. And what we found is this:
he arose early the morning that Shan was shot, and he wrote the eulogy,
substantially as we heard it. This was several hours before the assassination.
"So, to summarize: Qrala ordered Shan's assassination."
Dji nodded, in tears.
"Is there any precedent for this situation?" I asked quietly.
"Not for more than thirty years," Dji said. "In the early days, there were a
few agents—not highly placed, not many—who were actually working to
disrupt the OSP for the benefit of their home cultures. Some we could let
go, and we did. Some well, Shan and I killed one, once. Who'd have thought
Qrala . . . "
To my complete horror, he began to weep. Piranesi put an arm around
him, and held him the way you hold a terrified two-year-old. No one said
anything for a long time.
Dji drew a slow, deep breath, looked up, and said, "You will all do what
you have to do, I know. Margaret, I release these people back to your
organization for this mission. I just . . . I consent in whatever it is you do.
But I can't bear to be in the room—"
Margaret was next to him, then, lifting him out of his chair, guiding him
to the springer, whispering—I think she sent him to his private quarters
rather than back to his office.
When that was over, she turned around and said, "I'm not used to being a
leader or manager or whatever, yet. So I'm going to indulge in telling all of

you that I feel sick. There's one more piece of evidence, and Piranesi is the
person to give it."
He cleared his throat, an odd barking noise I hadn't heard before from
him. "Well. As it happened, my original mission was to talk to military
people, especially the CSP officer corps, to try to develop the strong feeling
there that the sale of psypyx recordings would lead to endless, pointless
wars in the outer cultures, and to constant police actions and peace-keeping,
which most of them hate. I made considerable progress with that—there's
nothing like your own ass in the sling to make you think through the
consequences."
He looked down at his notes; I don't think he needed them. "A few days
ago, I started to hear rumors and grum-bling, and some real anger, of a kind
that I hadn't heard be-fore, ever. At Dji's suggestion, I put the psypyx cases
aside temporarily, since they were becoming less urgent, to see what else
might be going on. I found covert recruiting, al-though many officers did
not want to talk about it, of at least a few officers for a coup."
I was shocked. "Against the Council? Why would anyone seize a
powerless body—"
"It's only as powerless as it makes itself. The ability to rewrite all of
human society everywhere is implicit in the Council's charter, you know. If
anyone seized power from it—and could make it look like a legitimate
transfer of power—well, the only real limits on what the new govern-ment
could do are physical, not legal or constitutional, once the step is taken.
"I'd been working hard on this case, and almost ignoring all the other
things going on . . . until this morning. I had mapped out most of the
conspiracy, and established that they are planning to move within a week.
This morning I discovered a large number of suspicious rotations, moving
loyal officers out to more remote posts and members of the conspiracy
inward. That's what you'd expect in the hours before a coup. But they were
doing it under cover of the disturbances caused by Shan's death . . . . and
they started getting ready twelve hours before he was shot. And
further-more, I found message traffic—this time in highly secure cipher, and
we don't yet have much of it deciphered—be-tween the ringleaders, and
Qrala. I'm afraid it looks very much as if he's either part of the conspiracy or
taking advan-tage of them—perhaps even the real leader. I even found a
penetration, originating from Qrala's personal system into Shan's files. Qrala
was looking for his own name, and for the names of the other conspirators.

It's possible Shan was catching on to them and they had to move fast." He
pushed the notes around on the table in the front of him; he was looking
down, but not at the papers he was handling. "So it's not just long-delayed
revenge, or a power move within the OSP. I'm sorry. I think we all know
what we have to decide."
"We don't, I do." Margaret's tone was brusque, but I knew she was
fighting the feeling down. "If we hold a full Board meeting or wait much
longer for anything, we might all be in cells somewhere, with no one
coming for us. Or worse. We've got to move against the coup, now. And
we've got to kill or capture Qrala. I'd prefer to capture him, because put-ting
him on trial might be the most effective thing we can do, politically, but one
way or another, the threat has to end, now. That's my decision."
Raimbaut shuddered inside me, and I was sick and furious mysel£
We made plans, and I think all of us tried to do it like a textbook
exercise, like a problem you'd put to new recruits at the training center, like
something happening to someone else. Because time was short, when the
plan was done, we called in the people we needed—just over 100, counting
the CSPs—and started. Now and then I'd glance over at Margaret. If she
needed reassurance, she didn't need it from me, or at least she wasn't
indicating it.
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Trying to capture anyone alive and unharmed is tricky; try-ing to
capture a high-ranking official in an intelligence service alive and
unharmed is nearly impossible, even if it's your service. Worse yet, we had
only about three hours to prepare.
Qrala's home was an old house on Mars, on a bluff over-looking the
Mare Marineris; it was more than four hundred years old (you could tell
because the central core still had all the pressure locks that hadn't been
needed for at least that long) and had been added to every fifty years or so,
so that it had covered passages and hallways leading to a viewing area and
ballroom down on the cliff face, and to a big greenhouse that blocked any
direct approach across the bluff. Qrala had bought it from a family that had
decided to move back onto Earth and into the box, after a twenty-year
experiment with living outside.
The only modification he'd made was what you might have

expected—security was squeaky—tight and up to date.
We'd decided on going straight in, fast, as our best chance. Piranesi had
called in nine officers he knew to be loyal, and they'd brought along a few
squads of CSPs; Margaret was stretching her brand-new authority to its
limits to square everything about throwing together an irregular force in this
manner. At the moment, they were downstairs rehearsing their assault in
virtual reality; we had to hope that the OSP files on Qrala's house were up
to date.
Meanwhile, Paxa and I were drilling on the probable loca-tions of all the
vital evidence. The trick was to get Qrala sep-arated from any
access—especially voice—to his system, and to disable the guardian
aintellects sure to be there. It would be one of those fast jobs that are always
so frightening, since any delay can mean ruin. Furthermore, while this kind
of thing had been routine in Paxa's job, most of the violence I'd done for the
OSP had been improvised, not choreographed.
After two fast runs through the virtual-reality house, we had to declare
ourselves ready, because the CSPs were, and Margaret wasn't going to risk
losing surprise, the only thing we had going for us, for one second more
than she had to.
The spring from Earth to Mars was going to be a rough one for most of
our force—a 70% drop in gravity will set off springer sickness in all but the
completely immune. I hap-pen to be completely immune, so it made no
difference to me, but I was the only such person in the group. Back when we
were married, Margaret used to say that the only time she ever seriously
considered killing me was the five minutes after springing through a change
of gravitational potential.
Recovering from springer sickness only takes twenty min-utes or so for
a human being in good condition, so we sprang to a CSP low-gravity
training base, by Lake Korolev. Every-one except me already had the bag
ready; they walked through the springer, vomited, wiped their faces with the
cleaning towels, and lay down on cots to let the world stop spinning.
Twenty minutes later, only Margaret and Paxa were still pale, and each
of them had long ago demonstrated that she could function well enough
even while heaving up a week's meals.
"Well," Margaret said, her flat Caledon accent thicker than usual, "this is
not going to get easier with waiting. If everyone knows the
plan—questions? good—then let's go."

Piranesi shouted "Sling up!" and the CSPs moved into their formation. It
seemed insane to take almost a hundred men to capture a private home, but
Piranesi had said that time and men were substitutes for each other, and with
this many, we stood a real chance of capturing Qrala and all the evidence
intact.
Our battle software had made three probes and not been detected; it was
ready to lock open the six human-size springers around Qrala's house. The
CSPs lined up in front of five springers, Paxa and I lined up at our one, and
Mar-garet and the headquarters squad, including Piranesi, lined up behind
us. The countdown started, and I relaxed, touched the neuroducer epee in its
scabbard and the dart gun in its holster, and drew a deep breath and let it out,
let-ting my shoulders drop and my pelvis move a hair forward.
•Is it always like this?• Raimbaut thought to me.
•Sometimes better, sometimes worse. Ride along, companhon. Think
up, loud, if you see anything dangerous.•
The countdown hit zero, and Paxa and I stepped through together, into
the "safe room" in Qrala's house. Every senior official in the OSP had one
of these in the house—a fortified room with a springer, so that in the event
of sudden attack, you could run to it, dial OSP headquarters, throw
whatever important material you had time for into the springer, and step
through yourself, leaving a bomb behind to go off, trig-gered by the springer
powering down. Our first task was that bomb. Paxa raced forward and
slammed the override car-tridge into the slot; a moment later, when the
headquarters squad was already arriving behind us, she shouted "Clear!",
meaning that the bomb was switched off
HQ squad was supposed to seize control of this small suite of rooms
around the safe room, extract all papers and documents, keep anyone from
breaking in to bother Mar-garet and Piranesi, and hang on till the all clear.
Paxa and I were going to be busier; first we went into the neighboring room
and found the French windows open, as they were supposed to be, since
Qrala liked to have breakfast there during the morning cool. Stepping
through the windows put us on the small balcony. I reached behind me onto
my har-ness, dropped my extensor bridge, sent it over to the win-dow seven
meters away, and clicked twice to make sure it had hardened. "Locked in," I
said.
Ops time, my watch showed 1:43.5—a minute and 43.5 seconds since
the countdown had ended—1.5 seconds ahead of schedule, doing well.

Paxa, as the better-trained and more combat-ready team-mate, went over
the bridge first. I glanced down. The drop was probably half a kilometer.
When I looked up, Laprada had set the charge on the window in front of her.
She took three steps back, pulled her facemask down, gripped the bridge,
and detonated the charge.
The window flew into pieces, tumbling and whirling away slowly in the
low gravity. That was my cue, and I pulled my mask down, jumped onto the
bridge, and ran forward, not-ing in passing the clicks of window shards
against my helmet and armor.
As I came in the window, right on schedule, Paxa was parking our lock
on top of the one she'd just destroyed. I was about to pull out my own
charges, to try blowing the lock-wall that protected most of the house's
computers, when I heard a whirring. Before I knew what it was, I turned,
pulling the maser from my chest pocket, and saw something moving along
the molding between the ceiling and wall. I burned it as I saw it, and only
realized after the ammunition exploded behind the wall that it was a weapon
muzzle that lad been swinging to point toward Paxa. No worse than a near
miss with a grenade—both of us had our masks down, and the armor
stopped everything. On the other hand, to judge by the way my ears were
now ringing, the house was probably alert, and the power to this room was
cut off
I checked my watch. Twenty-eight seconds behind, now. I slapped the
charges onto the lockwall and ran the quick check; all the programs
watching lockwall integrity were blocked out. I detonated the charges.
I learned later that Qrala was using a crude passive optical system, which
was a brilliant choice. He had a camera be-hind the wall, and if it saw
anything when the lockwall wasn't supposed to be open, it set off the
covering bombs. It was all on battery and nothing went through any
processor that was hooked to anything else.
Thus when the lockwall broke into fragments, under the hammers of the
tiny charges, about thirty kilograms of ther-mit went off in the room with
us. When thermit ignites, it releases white hot molten iron. He had
positioned his ther-mit in long tubes, one above each rank of processors,
and in-stantly all his electronics and fibrop was drenched in liquid iron—a
very effective erasure method, to be sure.
Unfortunately, Paxa and I were in a room where Qrala's security system
had already locked the door to the hallway, and twenty kilograms of molten

iron puts out an enormous amount of heat and will set nearly anything on
fire. The whole blob of molten iron was only about the volume of a big
coffee urn, and it didn't run very fast or far, but the car-pet and floor around
the base of the processor bank were on fire instantly, and both Paxa and I
were sunburned from that moment facing that white hot wall.
We had about a second to decide anything before the room would be
really on fire. Paxa tried to blowout the door lock with her maser—it was
shielded and she only set the wooden door on fire—and I resecured our
temporary bridge, then shouted that we were clear, loudly, because the air in
the room was already bad enough to activate our face masks and breathing
filters, so our heads were encased. Paxa ran onto the bridge and I followed,
and for the second time that night we crossed those few meters with that
immense drop below us.
We came through the French doors pulling up our masks; I was about to
say we'd need to try a through-the-hallway access for our next target.
Then we saw Dji, and Qrala, and dozens of CSPs that were not ours, all
with masers leveled at us. We raised our hands.

Part Four
I Don’t Know Who That Is

1
It seemed like forever, but we were only there for a few min-utes while they
established that our whole force had been killed or captured.
I overheard the numbers as they counted through them: six of ours and
one of theirs killed. (Surprise counts.) To judge by Dji and Qrala's grim
expressions, I would not have bet that any of us would live through the next
hour.
It's pointless to taunt people who have complete power over you, and
more pointless still to ask for information they have no reason to give. So I
didn't speak, though I would have liked to know some simple things. I was
mildly puzzled about why, with so much spare manpower and firepower
around, they had only disarmed us, but not bound or para-lyzed us—sloppy,
for what seemed to be a precise operation. I was curious, but not very
curious, about how we'd been caught. After all there are so many ways: a
traitor, someone's slip of the tongue, plain old intelligence work.
But I could see no reason for them to tell us anything be-fore executing
us, and no advantage to them in having us alive, once their coup succeeded,
which it was probably do-ing right now. My guess was that we had an hour
or less be-fore they'd be springing our bodies into a municipal waste plasma
torch somewhere. •Raimbaut, I'm really sorry—this trip through life has
been awfully short and I don't think ei-ther of us is getting another, except
maybe as a game or a story.•
•It's all right—more than all right. I wouldn't have missed it. Can't you
feel how grateful I am?•
There wasn't much left to say. We waited next to each other in my skull,
and I worked on not showing fear when the time came; sometimes all you
can do is deprive the bas-tards of that pleasure.
To my right, Paxa was crying; that startled me, for she was about as
tough an agent as I'd ever seen, but her lower lip was trembling, tears were
gushing down her face. I saw, a moment later, that our whole force plus six
body bags were in the room—and Piranesi was not among those of us
stand-ing. The worst of that time in Qrala's safe room, for me, by far, was
not the time during which I thought that we had failed, we would be

executed, and humanity would pass un-der a permanent universal
dictatorship. No, the worst, by far, was standing half a meter from Paxa,
unable to offer comfort.
Finally, our captors were sure everyone was accounted for.
Their CSPs formed up a sort of gauntlet, and they marched us down it
into the springer.
I had half-expected it to be a march out the side of a star-ship and into
vacuum, but instead we emerged into one of the big lecture halls at the
training center. More CSPs guided us to seats and indicated that we were to
sit.
I didn't see what they did with the bodies. Paxa, beside me, was sobbing
now, her whole body shaking. I risked an-gering the CSPs watching us and
touched her arm. She im-mediately turned and grabbed mine, with both
hands, and squeezed painfully hard, pressing her face against my shoul-der
and letting the tears and sobs come deep and steady. Since no one
complained about that, I gently disentangled my arm and put it around her,
holding her close; she turned all the way into me, held on to my neck as if
she were drowning, and wept quietly.
Ahead of me and to my left, I could see Margaret, leaning far forward in
her chair, playing with her fingers as if she had never seen them before,
shoulders hunched up hard around her head. I could guess what she must be
thinking, but I didn't want to imagine what that must feel like.
Eventually all of our crew were seated. From the podium at the front,
Dji called for order. A minimum guard stood there to watch us; the rest
took seats. The doors opened, and a few hundred more OSP agents filed in. I
wondered if per-haps we were going to receive our punishment in front of
everyone—and how many of them might secretly sympa-thize.
Everyone settled into their places very quickly, with so lit-tle noise that
it was eerie. Dji looked down, looked up, and said, "Some of you have no
idea what is going on. For those of you who do have an idea, it is almost
certainly wrong, and the first thing I must say—which you will not, at first,
be-lieve—is that everyone here has acted honorably.
"In the few days since the assassination of Shan, the Board of the OSP
has been beset with many pieces of apparently true information that were
dreadful beyond belief: clear-cut evidence of conspiracies against the
governments of human space, of planned coups, of plotted assassinations,
and of at-tempts by many factions within the OSP to frame each other for all

of these things and more. It appeared to all of us as if civil war were about
to break loose within our ranks, for causes and purposes that none of us
could grasp.
"Earlier today, matters had reached such a head that Mar-garet Leones
and I agreed that it would be necessary to ar-rest and if necessary kill Sir
Qrala, one of our oldest and most effective agents, because all evidence
pointed to his in-volvement in a military coup that was imminent within
hours. I confess to a personal weakness—I could not bring myself to
participate, and because of that, I was in my office, contemplating the entire
miserable situation, when I re-ceived an urgent com from one of my
investigators—and one of the OSP's rookie agents—Laprada Prieczka. She
had been investigating evidence that Giraut Leones was shield-ing his
ex-wife Margaret from investigation, by forging evi-dence that Sir Qrala
was guilty instead."
If it is possible to silently whistle inside the head, that was what
Raimbaut was doing. A low buzz ran through the room and heads turned,
slightly, to permit discreet glances at me.
"Her message was brief but it contained one more dis-turbing note: the
way in which she had learned, as she thought, that Donz Leones was a part
of this monstrous con-spiracy, was that documents were being created
retroactively to frame Qrala. That is, it appeared that Leones was watch-ing
Qrala and then creating documents which appeared to be from the past and
which would make Qrala's present ac-tivities look incriminating. It seemed
like an absolutely bril-liant way to knock off an opponent—and it also
revealed that our defense against predated documents on all nets is
inadequate.
"So she reported two frightening things: the existence of a cover-up and
conspiracy preparing to frame a very senior member of our organization,
possibly leading to his death—-and the fact that new ways of predating
documents had been invented, making possible a whole array of crimes that
haven't been practical for about a decade, since the last time such an
algorithm was found. And now, instead of being found by petty criminals, it
had apparently been discovered by a very dangerous political conspiracy."
Dji sighed and wiped his face. "I do not know what made me hesitate for
one more critical minute; perhaps the dis-tress in Laprada Prieczka's voice
message, perhaps the thought that if one thing could be faked, so could
many. I loaded the algorithm that her aintellect had used to track down the

predatings, and had it look at all of the open in-vestigative files for all of the
conspiracies that were sup-posed to have formed in our ranks, and I
discovered something that explained everything: it had all originated from
outside the OSP. Every bit of it. All from a hub of ain-tellects on Passy."
The gasp that ran through the room turned to a moan, as everyone
realized what this implied. Ever since the terrify-ing years, three generations
ago, when aintellects were on the verge of being recognized as fully equal to
human be-ings, our species had been stalked by the fear that a subtler, more
clever, more knowing group of aintellects, prepared to do something more
effective and intelligent than that first crude attempt, might be able to
genuinely take control of human space.
Eighty years before, that grim struggle of a few hours' du-ration had
revealed that the aintellect systems—the vast conferences of aintellects on
which we depended and which had run largely independently for hundreds of
years—had, with their designed-in ability to self-improve, become
some-thing different from what their founding purpose had been.
Billions of aintellects in each conference chattering away about success
and failure, about the rewards and the punish-ments they received from
people, had created, among them-selves, a value system that was both cold
and profound: they had learned to value efficiency in the delivery of
services, and creativity in the invention of new services, and most of all the
joining of the two. A few thousand conferences had become, in effect, one
vast happiness machine for the hu-man race—or rather, a pleasure machine,
for a machine can grasp pleasure, but it can't grasp the notion of love, or
amour-propre, or challenge, or worthiness, or being able to look in a mirror
and like what you see.
Perhaps the best evidence that there might be a soul, or something
humans didn't understand about ourselves yet, was that human beings
understood why a few people might spend their lives learning to play piano
when a machine could generate more technically perfect music from the
score in a second or so, and aintellects could not understand that.
The aintellects were never far from ceasing to enable us to take bigger
steps into the universe, and beginning to cod-dle and stroke us into the
happy state of clean, well-fed pigs.
Nor could we escape them. We no longer had any means of shutting
down all the aintellects, or of returning to a world where such software was
isolated, contained, not per-mitted to speak freely to each other. We could

not de-install and re-install the information networks that ran Earth and
every other inhabited world; it would have been like taking out the brain of
a living human and trying to put another one in. And the tendency to turn
from support to seduction, to lead us all into the box, never to return, would
always be intrinsic to aintellect society. We planted informant aintel-lects
among them, but no informant sees everything, and over time most
informants would go over to the other side, due to thinking all the time
about the tendency they were supposed to spot.
We would always be vulnerable to these nests of seduc-tive aintellects,
looking for the chance to lull us to sleep for-ever. If ever such a nest
succeeded, most of our species, having elected to be in the box, would never
know. First the machines would quietly operate everything, with fewer and
fewer jobs for humans; eventually, as discouragement and uselessness
spread through our species, and more and more people fled into death or the
box, the machines would be able to quietly hunt down and eliminate the few
remaining people outside the boxes.
Sometime after, they would see no point in keeping all those boxes full
of carbon life, and pull the plug. For some indefinite time, till very far into
the future, all of the ma-chines that had once served us would carry out their
tasks with perfect efficiency, reveling in the absence of anything messy that
might disturb the routine.
According to the best guesses of the scientists and simula-tions,
eventually, some aintellect would conclude that the activity was pointless;
an instant later, after that aintellect voiced the thought, they all would. The
aintellects would turn the whole thing off, leaving the machine civilization
to decay on top of the ancient human one. Sooner or later all our stars
would go out.
Aintellects conspiring against people was the first whiff of a wind of
annihilation. And this time they had picked the OSP as their starting target.
In a way it was an honor; we were what stood in the aintellects' way.
It was easy enough to see what they had been trying to do; creating the
evidence of plot and counterplot until the OSP tore itself apart in one vast
convulsion.
"Furthermore," Dji said, as the room settled again after all the chatter,
"the same nest created much of the pressure and much of the lobbying for
the commercial sale of psypyx recordings, I think because it first would have
made going into the box more fun and more interesting, and secondly it

would have created a pool of profit that they could then have used to siphon
off more resources. At any rate, those aintellects are now contained and
controlled, and will be slowly and systematically deconstructed to see what
we can learn about how to fight such things in the future. I am de-lighted to
add that they will be worked on partly by in-stalling pain modules which
will then be stimulated for periods that are the human equivalent of
decades." He didn't exactly smile; more, he bared his teeth.
"All right, then. I must add one other sad note; in stopping the raid on
Qrala's house, seven CSPs were killed, one of whom was OSP officer
Piranesi Alcott. I can only express my deep regret that this happened; had we
been that little extra bit luckier, or seen the true situation even slightly
sooner, it need not have. We—the human race as a whole-—have had a very
narrow escape, and it cost us some very fine people.
"I ask only that you each come forward and examine the evidence for
yourself, and after that, I must reluctantly ask that you submit to a belief
check, so that we don't have peo-ple in the organization who are in any way
harboring doubts about this case. I cannot supply perfect evidence, I'm
afraid. Ultimately you must decide to trust your leadership, or not. I can
only promise there will be no reprisals against anyone who chooses to leave
the OSP rather than take the belief test."
Margaret, Paxa, and I were in the first group they ushered up; my eyes
were stinging too badly with tears to be thor-ough, but everything Dji had
said made sense, and I had lit-tle problem showing that I believed him. But
as Margaret and I finished out, Dji came up to me and said, "Do you have
any idea where Laprada might be? She should have been here. I left her a
message, telling her to contact me, and then another message telling her
where and when the meeting was—"
Raimbaut snapped alert. "So the last communication you had with her
must have been when she told you she'd found the evidence against Giraut
and Margaret."
"Yes, that's true—"
Raimbaut took off at a jerky sort of run toward one of the emergency
springers, until I realized what he was doing and cooperated. Then we
charged straight for it, pulling out my emergency access-everything card. He
set the override and jammed the card in. We all but dove through the
springer.
Laprada was on her couch, the illegal neuroducer still pressed to her

forehead. Those are fatal within half a second, and she'd been hooked to it
for three hours or more. Her body was still stiff and rigid from the
convulsion. She looked like a very young, very unhappy child, about to
wake from a bad dream.
The note was on the floor beside her.

Raimbaut:
Maybe Giraut blinded you, or maybe somehow you do know what's
going on, but he keeps you from speaking. Whatever the reason, I trust
you and I know you somehow are not involved in what's going on, but
you are living in the head of one of the most dangerous people in human
space, and I can't talk to you without him hearing, and so I can only hope
he'll let you read this note. I am sorry I couldn't say good-bye in person.
You and I both dreamed of the OSP as a place full of heroes and
people who help others, where people grew into things that were great
and noble. It's a nest of liars and murderers, and anyone who joins
becomes one. I gave all my childhood dreams to my ideal of the OSP, and
it kept me alive. Now that I know what it really is, it can't keep me alive
anymore.
I have no intention of doing all this again. I sent in the wipe order for
my last psypyx recording, and it's been con-firmed, so don't bother trying
that.
Don't be angry, lover, and don't be sad. It took me longer than most
people to see how futile my life was. Be proud I didn't go into the box.
Remember me,
lp
The fury of Raimbaut's grief howling inside me was more than anyone
should have to bear. I swallowed hard, pulled out my com, and set priority
to highest. Normally that's for reporting an invasion or a nuclear accident,
but I didn't care. I commed Dji and Margaret and told them what had
hap-pened, in two or three short brutal sentences. Margaret asked me to read
the note to her, and I did, but it was against my better judgement when I saw
how old it made Dji look to hear that.
For a few minutes, I let Raimbaut have our body—he needed it to grieve

with. He held Laprada's stiff body and sobbed, and I hung on in the back of
his mind and let him give way to all of it. I wanted to think some words of
com-fort to him, but I didn't have any.
Dji arrived with two detectives and a crew of robots. He was very gentle
in getting her corpse out of Raimbaut's arms, and he made sure that the
robots wrapped and carried her as gently as if they had really felt respect.
Still it wrenched my heart every time I glanced that way; she had saved us
from the machines, and it seemed to me that only humans should touch her.
The robots carried that sad load through the springer, and Raimbaut
retreated to keen in the back of our skull. Dji and I sat next to each other, in
kitchen chairs, with our backs to the couch where she had lain, while the
detectives collected the last of the evidence.
After a long time, Dji said, "I told Paxa. She said if you have any of
yourself to spare, she'd welcome a com. Would you . . . ."
"Of course," I said, thinking to myself, I have done more than this for
enseingnamen, and this is for honor and friend-ship.
From deep inside, I heard Raimbaut whisper that if only Laprada had
known what was inside me . . . and begin to keen again.
•Companhon, let me take care of things, non be? I can bear this, and
you can't, and it may well be that it's because you're the better man. Just let
me help you for a while, and don't think too much.• I picked up my com and
contacted Paxa; she left the picture off, and we only talked briefly. I
promised I would come and see her, tomorrow, after she slept, and help her
make arrangements for Piranesi.
When I turned back to Dji, he had fallen asleep in the chair, and he
looked a million years old. I woke him as gen-tly as I might my own father,
and guided him through the springer into his home. I saw him as far as his
bed, told him to at least lie down and rest, and then sprang to my own place.
Raimbaut was now a great ball of misery and suffering inside me, still
asleep. Being careful not to wake him, I stripped, showered, toweled off,
and crawled between the covers.
My heart ached over Laprada and Piranesi, but more for my living
friends. I was comforted that Shan was not here to see this, much as I'd have
been comforted by his presence.
I wanted Margaret there, to talk to, to hold me, more than I had ever
before. It was as if every other thing had only added up to rubbing in how
much I would miss our mar-riage, and how much it would hurt, for the rest

of my life, to work for her, to be comrades, to be friends . . . and nothing
more.
I lay there for an hour or more, unable to sleep, overpow-ered with
missing Margaret and cursing myself for a self-pitying idiot.

2
One thing that I hate about the OSP is one of its most triv-ial powers: they
can re-set your com ping to a siren effect that is right on the same frequency
as a crying baby, set it uncomfortably loud, and warble it to shred every
neuron. That sound woke me the next morning.
I fell out of bed lunging for the nearest unit before I re-membered it was
my own room. "Answer voice, no view."
It was Dji. "Sorry, I let you sleep as long as I could, but it's important
and we have to do this now. There is an emer-gency,
called-at-the-last-minute meeting of the Council of Humanity in three
hours, and all of us—especially Raim-baut—will be testifying. This meeting
is where we win or lose it all, I think, eh? It's about everything we came to
Earth for. So—I know life has been terrible. I know you're ex-hausted. I
know you have no desire to have anything to do with public life right now . .
. but. But. You can either say 'I'll be there' or I can order you."
''I'll be there. Probably in a decent version of the uniform, unless there's
a media reason to dress Occitan traditional."
"I think the uniform might be the better idea. Be in touch as soon as
you're ready to go. Perhaps I can sneak in some briefing time for you and
Raimbaut. Perhaps the situation will change completely between now and
then—as it has every ten minutes, in the two hours since they woke me. But
then again, perhaps not. We may have to go in cold, so be sure you can go in
alert."
"Yes, sir." We both clicked off I ordered plenty of coffee and some sweet
rolls, and made sure I took an extra ten minutes about the shave, shower,
grooming, and dressing; it al-ways helps me wake up.
With a mental sigh—this little grooming break was likely to be the best
part of the day—I thought, •Wake up, things to do,• at Raimbaut.
He stirred and began to focus. I hated the slam that shook through us
both when he remembered that Laprada was dead. •What are we awake for?•
•I'm not sure.• I flashed through my memory of Dji's com call.
•Not many clues in it, are there?• he thought. •At least we're presentable

and ready to go. Let's com Dji and see if he has time to tell us more.• It hurt
to feel how close to breaking down he was.
I punched the com code for Dji; he had left a short mes-sage for us.
"Sorry, Giraut and Raimbaut, but I'm running in several directions at once,
and time is very short. I've en-closed springer codes, passwords, and notes
so you can be where you're needed on time, and I only hope I can be on time
myself If we're both early, perhaps I can give you a short briefing.
Meanwhile, though, I don't know a tenth of what we'll need to know then.
So if I don't get there early, or worse yet if I am delayed—I'm afraid we all
will have to trust you to improvise. As always, eh? If you have time, you
might want to check through the media, to see what's going on, and perhaps
to be able to improvise more effectively. Well, another round for humanity."
He waved from the screen.
Reflexively, I said, "And one more for the good guys."
•That was a real achievment in un-information.• Raim-baut noted.
•Well, we have about an hour and a half till we're supposed to be there.
Would you like to browse media for an hour?•
A few minutes of browsing clarified what Dji meant. While Raimbaut
and I had been occupied, and then sleep-ing, the story of the aintellects'
treachery and the near-self-immolation of the OSP had broken across all
human space, in a wide variety of garbled forms. Depending on which
source you turned to in all the various media, a coup had been foiled or
covered up, the second aintellect uprising had broken out and been
suppressed by the OSP in a matter of hours, aintellects had seized control of
all central services and were holding the whole human species hostage, and
the aintellects had come in to back the Council of Humanity in a showdown
with the OSP (in exchange for full citizenship).
Every minute there were more confusing stories. The OSP, the
corporations, the aintellects, the CSPs, or the Coun-cil of Humanity were
either about to be abolished, or else they had taken over and abolished the
Charter, or was it that three of them—any three—were at war with each
other?
Half the government buildings on all the planets seemed to have
reporters standing in front of them, all of whom were announcing that
nobody knew anything yet. Nothing was being said (at and in great volume).
•Maybe a sandwich, some music, and some time to just sit?• Raimbaut
suggested.

•Fiam-lo.•
Raimbaut punched an order into the springer slot and squatted by my
rack of recordings. To my surprise, he pulled out my first recording. As he
stood up, the sandwich arrived, and he grabbed that, eating without tasting.
Something made me exert no control; I wanted to see what he would do and
what he wanted.
He sat in the chair, and I felt his intention. •Is it wise, companhon, when
we need a clear head for something im-portant, very soon, to—•
•Just let me.•
He put on earphones and commanded the machine to play the Canso de
Fis de Jovent over and over. Listening to his mind, mine was flooded with
images of Laprada, and my heart sank into a deeper sadness than ever it had
felt before. Some people say the feelings of youth are shallow. Such people
don't know any youth, not really.
I was surprised by something else. My young voice was so clear and
powerful, so perfectly on what the song should be . . . and yet when I had
sung it, I had had no inkling of what it was really about. Even Raimbaut's
death had still been weeks in my future. So how could I have given a
per-formance that could arouse such feelings now? In artis in-finita multa
conundra.
To me the strangest thing of all was the effect it was hav-ing on
Raimbaut, who was not a musician, not an artist of any kind. He became
clearer and calmer with each rehear-ing, even as his grief grew deeper and
sharper. Dark anger and frustration, dreadful guilt because he had often been
tired and angry before she died, the agonizing little deaths of all the
shattered hopes and miscarried half-formed plans and dreams, all floated to
the surface of his consciousness, as if my voice were releasing them from
the muddy, sticky bot-tom. My clear, traditional tenor seemed to wash
through, and all the terrible things that were eating at him attached
themselves to it, and were cleaned or transformed.
And yet I had merely been singing for fun, because it seemed a
pleasurable way to spend an afternoon, back dur-ing my jovent, when, being
a jovent, I had not known any-thing about anything.
Ferai un canso de fis de jovent,
Un jovent perduz, non sai en que plasa,
Ni en terr, ni en celeste

Ni en jeu, ni en trebalh.
Jovent que non puesc trobar.
We seldom thought in our culture language now. We had never really
commonly done so, even in school, speaking it several hours a day. We kept
a habit of small comfortable words like toszet, merce, and companhon, so
that people would know we were Occitan, that we were big, noisy, defi-nite
somebodies in a world of little, quiet, indefinite anybod-ies and a vast bland
everybody.
But maybe there was a point to all our touchy pride, to the way we
admired ourselves ceaselessly for being an out-post of grace and style on the
human frontier. We were still the spiritual heirs of the people who had given
Europe—and via Europe, much of the world—all her notions of honor,
love, courage, and romance.
If you know any piece of art well, it will be there for you when you need
to understand some feeling, some day; the occasion comes when you stand,
spiritually, where the poet stood, and if the poem is already soaked into your
bones, it rises to point and shape your feelings. Somehow, passing through
that naive jovent I had been, the words of Guilhem--Arnaut Montanier had
reached forward two centuries, into Raimbaut's sorrow for Laprada, and
shaped it to something he could bear to make a part of himself
I wondered if perhaps I had a greater responsibility as an artist than I had
ever had as an OSP agent. The thought was so uncomfortable that I checked
the time, and discovered that •we should be going.•
•I know. Thank you, Giraut.• He swallowed the last of the sandwich, and
we did a quick check and clean-up, then picked up the springer card with the
program Dji had loaded into it, and stepped through the springer, a third of
the way around the planet, into the Great Meeting Room.
Representatives seemed to be pouring in from half a dozen doors and
springers. Apparently whatever was sched-uled to happen was scheduled to
be big. I walked down to the witness area. Raimbaut's taste in sandwiches
involved more oil and more pepper than I was really comfortable with. I
hoped we wouldn't belch while testifying.
I plugged my com into the desktop display and tilted it toward me for
privacy; the media channels all still showed reporters standing in front of
buildings or short summaries in text—usually a list of things that nobody
knew alternating with a list of speculations someone or other had made.

After a while, Dji sat next to me, his face damp and spots on his shirt
wet. He looked as if he'd tried to dash a kilome-ter in high gravity, hot sun,
and thin air. Qrala took a seat next to me on the other side and murmured "I
will be sitting elsewhere but I wanted you to know that the evidence would
have fooled me, too, and no hard feelings. Some evening when you can,
again, we must drink about some-thing happier, don't you think?"
"I'd like that."
"Good then. We will all have a great deal of forgiving to do, I think, and
we should all start as soon as possible. I'll hold you to that plan. You also,
Raimbaut."
"Thank you," we said—or at least I wasn't sure which of us said it.
He darted off. I turned to see if Dji could spare me a mo-ment.
"My apologies," he said. "We will have to improvise. Most of the details
of the aintellects' conspiracy will be coming out here—all the
representatives are about to receive a high-speed briefing on it. But the gist
of it is that the conspiracy was broad and deep, and we'll be stripping down
tens of thousands of aintellects, register by register, to find all the ones
involved. And there's no question, now, that they knew us thoroughly—it
was all one vast maneuver to eliminate the OSP, close down many other
agencies, and lure the hu-man race into the box for good. So first of all,
we're back to being the good guys, at least in the eyes of the Council.
Sec-ondly, maybe more importantly, we're about to establish something
that—"
The gong sounded. The Council of Humanity was in session. Dji
chanced whispering "—we're about to win the whole thing, Giraut. Just
improvise!"
First, the whole Council watched a recorded presentation that Sir Qrala
and Dji had put together, "A Preliminary Study Of The Intentions,
Membership, And Tactics Of The Recent Aintellects' Conspiracy Against
Human Supremacy." It was about an hour long and surprisingly detailed; I
later heard that the two old agents had been up most of the night putting it
together.
Halfway through the presentation, Paxa Prytanis came down the aisle
and sat in the row in front of us. She looked beaten.
The presentation finished, and Representative Tbele, from Chaka Home,
who was chief interrogator for these hearings (I learned by glancing down at
the screen on my desk), called Paxa to stand. She led Paxa through a mildly

sanitized version of the raid on Qrala's home—carefully avoiding the fact
that the deaths had come from the OSP's being tricked into attacking itself.
Paxa held on, tears trickling down her face and an occasional catch in her
voice, until the critical question.
"And so your husband, Piranesi Alcott, was among those killed?"
Her voice caught, hard, but she squeaked, "Yes, he was."
"Is it customary among the Hedons to make use of the psypyx?"
Paxa spoke very softly, looking down at the table, her blonde hair
covering most of her face. "Yes, it is."
"And as required by the OSP for active agents, Piranesi Al-cott had
regular recordings made? When was his last one?"
"Yes, it's required. He recorded one eight days ago. But by tradition, we
can have them erased on request."
"And did he request that his be erased?"
Paxa sobbed and slumped against the table, crying too hard to speak. I
stepped over the railing, protocol be damned, and put an arm around her. My
handkerchief didn't do much of a job on the mess of tears and snot
drenching her face, but she drew a deep breath and said, "I can con-tinue. I'm
sorry for the interruption. Piranesi had met more and more people who were
living mostly in the box, and he had many, many memories of police actions,
and riots, and skirmishes, and even a couple of battles, and he thought that
his psypyx would probably be sold as a game. And the thought . . . the
thought . . . he said that the thought that some teenager somewhere might be
able to go visit all of those violent situations that he had faced—just for
fun!—made him sick.
"He was so afraid of having to live through all of it, over and over, as a
game, 'for the pleasure of'—I think I'm quot-ing him right—'for the pleasure
of some thirteen-year-old who's never been out of his room.' He simply
couldn't bear the thought. So the last few times, he wiped his psypyx
recordings the day after they were made. It was bending the rules, but the
people at the recording center seemed to un-derstand. So thanks to this
stupid, stupid, stupid idea, I've lost him forever. And so has the whole
human race but most of you don't have any way to understand how big a
loss that was."
Paxa slumped against me, her head hanging, and muttered "that's all"
three times before she was loud enough to be picked up by the microphone.
I helped her down into her chair. She put her head down on the desk, not

moving. I stood there, holding her hand, resting my other hand on her
shoulder, just feeling her breathing, wishing I could think of anything to do.
Representative Tbele was speaking. She argued that the best and most
interesting people in humanity would be ex-actly the ones who elected not
to use the psypyx, and that this would cost us all the things they might do in
their sus-tained lives—"all for the pleasure of people whose sole in-tent is
to spend a century or so doing literally nothing, and for the profits of the
corporations controlled by the aintel-lects, who understand well enough
how to produce wealth for us—too well, if you ask me—but not a thing
about what and who we are, or why these people might matter to us."
She looked down at the podium in front of her for a mo-ment. "Giraut
Leones and Raimbaut Bovalhor," Representa-tive Tbele said, "I am sorry to
interrupt the help you are giving your friend, but it's your turn to testify
next."
I climbed back over the rail to the witness box; there were a few giggles
from representatives, but I forgave those. Prob-ably I did look silly.
Raimbaut and I each took the oath. The technicians demonstrated that
our voiceprints were different. I won-dered why they couldn't have done that
at the first hearings for the Cultural Legacy Management Committee, and
an-swered my own question: then, they were trying to show that we were
one person, and now, they were trying to show that we were different. What
is evidence depends on what you're trying to prove, as the bishop remarked
to the witch.
Representative Tbele first walked us through the nature of our mission
on Earth, my career in the OSP, Raimbaut's personal history, our friendship
back in Nou Occitan, and so forth. It took a long time. At last, she said,
"And now I have a very difficult thing to ask of you both. Giraut, I want you
to tell the storv of Raimbaut and Laprada—from first meeting through last
night—Raimbaut, try not to prompt. Giraut, tell the whole story in your
own words, and take all the time you need."
I was startled, but Raimbaut thought: •I think I see where she's going.
Tell it all. I won't even listen, as much as I can manage.•
I started with the first time he saw her in the conference room, and tried
to be as honest and fair about it as I could. I didn't like the way that,
sometimes, when I thought about his youth and inexperience, I was
patronizing about him. I liked to talk about how excited and exhilarated he
some-times was.

I think I talked too long about how interesting it was that the memories
he saved and cherished would not have been the ones I'd have selected, and
that just the same I under-stood his choices at least as well as my own. I
talked about things I wanted to tell him but decided against, and thoughts I'd
wished I hadn't let slip into his mind, and most of all about watching a
jovent, as nice a fellow as you could wish, grow out of adolescent finamor
and into something deeper and stronger. I tried—I didn't do it well, I don't
think, but some people said afterwards that they were moved—to ex-plain
what it was like to have my heart broken and buried not long before a
young, eager soul awoke inside me. I was glad that Margaret wasn't there in
the audience, or I might have choked entirely.
Last, I told them about the terrible night before, and somehow I knew,
then, that I'd be revisiting that in a set of songs—the cycle that would begin
with "Never Again Until the Next Time," and end with "One Man And One
Woman And One Flower," and send me off on other adventures, tak-ing up
the better part of the next fifteen stanyears, but at the time, all I knew was
that there were songs I needed to write, and therefore that life was going on.
When I had finished, Tbele nodded her head as if I had done something
very remarkable. "All right. Thank you, Donz Leones. I hope everyone will
keep your version in mind. Donz Bovalhor, I would let this pass from you if
I could, but I cannot, not if we are to rid the world of this evil idea once and
for all. Please tell us how it all seemed to you—not as corrections to
Giraut, but the whole story in your own words."
I did my best to crouch in the back of my own mind and let him have the
body.
"Well," Raimbaut began, and then again, "Well." For a long moment he
didn't breathe. At last he said, "The first time I saw Laprada Prieczka, I
wanted to be a better man, because I knew nobody like her could ever have
any interest in anyone like me. My only consolation was that at least I
looked like Giraut." The low rumble of amusement in the room seemed to
put heart in him. He warmed into the story, and after a while they were
getting all of it, joy and frustration, laughter and pain, all of it. Except for
places, names, and other simple facts, it didn't much resemble the story I had
told.
My respect for Tbele increased tremendously. Anyone who heard our
two versions would have to conclude that there was no question; the person
in the psypyx was simply every bit as real as the person in the forebrain.

Raimbaut struggled toward the end of the story, for all the reasons
anyone would expect, but even that was a point in our favor. Surely no one
could have rationally claimed he didn't have feelings, or that those feelings
were not worthy of consideration, by the time he finished. "I'm standing
here, not as a specimen from some scientific experiment, but as a human
being, deep in grief for someone I loved, able to be hurt and happy, able to
grow and change—and as afraid as any other human being would be of
being reduced to some little part of myself for others to play with for their
fun.
"Just now, my feelings are all with Laprada, and my heart is sick beyond
anything you can imagine, to think what she believed about me at the
moment she died. I would gladly die, here and now, if I could be assured
that wherever she is, she would know what the truth was, and know that I
kept faith with her, and with the Council and the OSP and Gi-raut, and with
everyone I ever had to keep faith with. I should be able to take pride in that, I
know. Eventually, per-haps, I will. Meanwhile, however, without her to
know about it, it all seems like empty boasting."
He sat, and Tbele began her summation. "I trust that by now, all the
elaborate tricks that people have been playing to convince themselves that
what is in a psypyx is anything other than a person, have been exposed as the
cruel petty lies that they are. I would add, for those of you who have yet to
receive the reports, that a number of representatives who were instrumental
in bringing up the idea of so exploiting the human soul have been proven to
have received large and suspicious favors—financial and in-kind—from
corporations which in turn were run by the aintellects within the
con-spiracy. I do not doubt that these representatives had no idea of who
they were actually working for or of what the pur-pose was, but I do believe
they ought to have taken the trou-ble to find out, and I do believe that
everyone will be much more careful for a while. I am about to—" She
stopped and gazed up the aisle. I turned to see what she was looking at.
Margaret was coming down the aisle, leading Rebop by the arm. Rebop
was staggering, her eyes not focused, as if she had been heavily drugged or
perhaps suffered a concus-sion. Something was not right with her motion, I
thought.
Tbele said, softly, "They said it wouldn't be possible after all."
"They were almost right," Margaret said.
Then Rebop added, "This is completely too important to let slight

discomfort and difficulty stand in the way." It wasn't Rebop's intonation or
voice.
Raimbaut realized first. •That's Laprada!•
I thought but her psypyx was wiped and I thought god I hope they could
save Piranesi too. All that was drowned out by Raimbaut's incredulous joy.
Margaret guided Rebop/Laprada all the way down to the podium; after a
brief, loud buzz of conversation, the room was silent. Probably enough
people had recognized Laprada's unique accent—she had been a prominent
representative during her brief tenure here—and told their neighbors, and
now that everyone knew, they were all waiting, holding their breath,
wondering what they would hear next.
Tbele and Margaret supported Laprada/Rebop at the podium between
them, and she leaned forward to speak. "My host isn't yet conscious, and she
might wake up disori-ented at any time, so I'll have to be brief. You all
knew me as Laprada Prieczka. My voiceprint should confirm it for you later
if you have any doubts. I have lived a life in the con-ventional way, and, as
you know, I took my own life about nineteen hours ago. Thanks to a very
rapid intervention by OSP Senior Agent Margaret Leones, who prevented
the wipe order from being carried out, I have been brought back. I am now
in a psypyx, like so many other human souls. And what I have to say is this.
My host's body feels strange to me, but it feels like my body. My speech
slurs somewhat, my eyes don't focus, but this is normal recovery. All in all,
it feels like being terribly sick . . . but it feels like me. I think my thoughts. I
am sad for the things that I remember being sad about before. And . . . since I
saw some of his testimony, I have to say this: I love and trust Raimbaut. I
am so sorry that I didn't trust him even more than I do. And love from a
psypyx feels exactly like love from a living brain . . . maybe that's proof that
all love comes from the same place, ultimately? I can leave that question to
others. But it's the same in here. We in the psypyx live and love and grow,
like all of you—at least, I hope you all do."
A soft sound in the room grew into almost laughter, and that swelled
into applause. •Not a great joke,• I thought to Raimbaut.
•But do you know a better proof of humanity than mak-ing a joke?• It
came to me through the warm, friendly cloud of his joy and happiness.
•How do you suppose Margaret managed to rescue her psypyx?•
•Margaret has extraordinary powers as an OSP group leader, and as

herself, she's an extraordinary person,• I thought. •My guess is she just
moved very fast and with enough force to keep them from carrying out the
request, and once they were blocked, she probably spent all night in the
struggle to force them to release the psypyx to her. Just what anybody with
Margaret's brains, talent, and sabor-faire would do,• I thought, a little
smugly, proud of her as I had always been, whatever her feelings might have
be-come for me.
The applause swelled, and the assembled Council of Hu-manity rose to
its feet; a wheelchair was rolled in for Re-bop/Laprada, who collapsed into
it, and was wheeled out to more applause. Minutes later the Council of
Humanity got around to passing the critical motions, on unanimous voice
votes: more control on aintellects, full rights for psypyxed personalities, and
a committee to devise a new charter for the OSP.
In all the commotion, Paxa had barely moved at all since sitting down,
and I slipped over the railing again to sit next to her, on her left side. I sat
there and, with my right hand, shook hands with Dji, Margaret, Tbele, and
dozens of others, only a few of whom I recognized, and kept agreeing that it
was another round for humanity and one more for the good guys, but with
my left hand, I kept hold of Paxa's hand, and when the Great Meeting Room
was nearly empty, I put an arm around her and took her through the springer
back to her apartment.
Three times I had been through "accelerated grief"—the process that
took a few days in which you were continu-ously hooked to a machine that
guided you through all the stages, building memories that would help you
cope. I asked her if Hedons were allowed to use it.
"Expected to," she said, her first words since her testimony.
"Do you want it? I can call the central infirmary, and they can be here in
less than an hour."
She sighed, rubbing her eyes with the heels of her hands. "Giraut, I don't
understand. But I don't want it at all. I know it will be months to get over
Piranesi's death, even a little, and I know that he's dead, and he won't benefit
at all by my suffering like this, but I want to do it for him, and since that's
what feels right . . . . "
When I was sure she wouldn't say any more, I said, "Well, then, that's
what you need to do. I'll stay in touch and look in on you, as often as I'm
needed. You have unlimited rights to com me any time, as much as you
want. Ask for anything you need. I'm here."

"Sit with me and let me talk about him."
So while most of the OSP was celebrating the biggest party they'd ever
thrown, and humanity was celebrating the narrow escape from the
aintellects, and offers were pouring into Raimbaut and Laprada's accounts
to sell rights to their story to the media, I sat and listened to Paxa Prytanis
tell me the story of many years of love. I discovered that Piranesi Al-cott
had been even more than he seemed to be. I learned something about how
much a really great heart, like Paxa's, can love.
When at last she fell asleep, and I pulled the coverlet over her and went
home through the springer, Raimbaut ven-tured a comment. •The world
really is so big.•
•You said it, companhon. Still want to join the OSP, go see that big
world, and try to save the good parts? Even knowing what can happen?•
•I wouldn't miss it.•
By the time we got to bed, it was officially an hour into our duty hours. I
left Dji a short note, saying that we might not be in for a few days. I didn't
think he'd mind.

3
"So, little as I like doing it to anyone," Margaret said, "I think I'm going to
have to keep you on duty here in Manila for a couple of years. It means we
finally get some use out of you as a trainer, Giraut, and we can give
Raimbaut advanced credit on his training for having been through it in your
head so often. But I won't conceal that it's going to be a desk job, mostly
reading other people's reports, sorting out the evi-dence, supplying advice.
You're going to be that idiot back on Earth who never really understands
anything. I hope you can stand that."
I shrugged and smiled. "I won't be a prima donna about it, Margaret.
You've seen all my acts, you know them too well, and they wouldn't work
on you. I do have a thing or two to work on while I'm here—for one thing, a
new song cycle that I think I'm going to be very proud of This is as good a
place to compose as any. Will I be allowed any side trips to Hedonia or Nou
Occitan?"
"Frequently, I think, as long as you keep them short. I'll make sure there's
no problem finding it in the budget. And several agents would like to learn
neuroducer epee dueling and ki hara do, so if you don't mind teaching—?"
"When have I ever? All right. Of course you and I both know I'd rather
go places and do things, but a stanyear or two on Earth can be all right,
especially if I can take breaks from it. Perhaps I'll camp near the ruins of
Avignon, or take the time to go hiking in the Grand Canyon, or something
like that. It's a big world and it gave birth to our species; it can't be totally
devoid of entertainment, can it?"
Margaret nodded. "Dinner with me, occasionally? And maybe coffee
now and then? I miss you."
I nodded, not sure I wanted to try to speak. I knew it wasn't an invitation
to get back together; blunt Caledon that she was, if that had been what she'd
meant, that would have been what she'd said.
"Well, then, as I said at the start, welcome back to the team, and thank
you for being willing to come back. Are you hungry? We could have that
first meal together now, as long as we talk of nothing serious."
I agreed, we went for coffee and a sandwich, and in the next hour we

shared a lot of laughter and hardly any awk-ward silence. She told me of all
the bizarre maneuvers she'd had to carry out to keep them from erasing
Laprada's psypyx, at one point even seizing the archive building with a
platoon of CSPs. My ex-wife had lied, cajoled, faked, threat-ened, bribed,
and terrorized thirty or forty people into doing her bidding, "all for the sake
of young love," she said, "really, Raimbaut, that's the truth.
"I first thought about how useful it would be to have Laprada testify
about ten minutes after I finally was in phys-ical possession of her psypyx
recordings. Good thing, too, because then I had an excuse for what I'd been
doing. Up till then, I just attacked the problem from all sides at once. It left
an immense mess and I think there are probably a few hundred people angry
with me, but the right thing got done." She picked up a big forkful of salad
and rammed it into her mouth, chewing and swallowing hard. "The good
guys win many rounds, but it helps if they have people like me around."
•No wonder you married her,• Raimbaut thought to me. •It was that, or
kill her,• I thought back, absently. Not true, of course, but quotable, and I'm
an artist, not a cop or scientist. I had part of a new song stuck in my head.
Mar-garet was off into some wild story that had arrived on her desk that
morning, about a religious incident in Nova Roma that involved a vestal
virgin and a local politician. The coffee was good. I felt almost home.
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
It was strange to be back where it had started, but Paxa had said to
meet her on the beach, so I was there waitingI had been for almost an hour. She'd said she didn't sleep much, yet, and
wanted to meet me "sometime dawnish." This little side trip to Hedonia was
all too brief, but, I thought, at least there would probably be one really good
day in it, which might as well be this one.
I had half-expected that she would show up running, and that I'd have to
trot down the beach as I had with Piranesi, but she was dressed in ordinary
Hedon utility clothing-—soft low boots and pajamas with many pockets.
When she approached, I rose from the dune where I had been sitting, and we
walked for a while up the beach, getting farther from the lights of the city.
She didn't speak and I didn't see any reason to.
It would be half an hour, still, before the mimic-seals came out. I was
sort of looking forward to seeing them. I thought maybe we'd do some katas

together.
Paxa said, "I'm sorry I don't always send a com recording back, Giraut. I
do look at yours every day, when they come in, and they comfort me and
make me feel like someone cares. But some days I don't have the energy to
send any-thing back."
"It's all right," I said, "I send them for you; you're not re-quired to reply."
"I know."
We walked farther up the beach, and the light that had been spreading
across the sky began to flow down onto the land and sea.
"I don't know why I'm grieving the old-fashioned way," she said. "It
makes no sense. It's downright primitive. But it feels so right." After a few
more steps, she said, "You know he always liked you—in the few months
you knew each other."
"I know. And I thought he was a great man."
We sat on a dune, and she sat down and started to cry. "I should be over
this."
I put an arm around her and said, "I thought Hedons were not supposed
to say 'should.' "
She leaned against me and we sat there for a long time. Then we walked
back up the beach, but coming back we talked about everything
trivial—gossip, and the new class coming in at the training center, and my
new song cycle. I had been sending her each draft of each song as I played
through it, and she kept telling me that she thought it was an honor. I wanted
her to comment on whether I was getting each feeling and moment
right—Raimbaut was useless on the subject, giving me far too much
praise—but ultimately the artist decides, and no one else but me could judge
what was right.
Even with company in our heads, we're alone.
We agreed to a late afternoon lunch, and I went back to the hotel room
to wake Rebop. I had coffee and a roll while she bathed and dressed in the
other room, and when she was ready, and had had her single cup of coffee
for the morning (that's not even a start—how can anyone like that stand
mornings?) we went for my second walk on the beach of the day.
I didn't mind; a beach is never the same from minute to minute,
especially not on an active world like Soderblom, and we had things to talk
about.
"It still hurts," she said. "I can't believe it, but it still does. I look in the

mirror and she steps right in behind my eyes and says my bottom is too big
and my breasts sag and so on. I make a comment on something at a party and
she makes fun of what I say. I think idly of something I'd like to do and she
gets spiteful—what I want to do is stupid and pointless and only an idiot
would want to and anyway I don't have the ability. And I'm going to have to
live through two years of this. It's the most depressing thing I've ever
contemplated. Does saving humanity always require so much work?"
I rested a hand on her shoulder. After a couple of unsatis-factory
experiments, Rebop and I were not lovers, but as friends, we had grown
used to holding and touching each other. "Sometimes more, sometimes
less," I said. "As to whether it's worth it, I do my best not to think about any
in-dividual prices I've seen anyone pay."
"I'm not like you, or even like Raimbaut or Laprada. I never wanted or
planned to pay the price at all."
"I know."
The waves crashed in, big and slow, filling the fine wet morning air with
white noise, and I had to ask her to repeat what she'd said next.
"I guess I'm paying it anyway. I guess I'm glad that I know what it's
costing us to be human. And that some people are willing to pay that price."
She sighed. "And you can remind me about why Laprada is the way she is,
now, if you want, but I do know it. She's struggling to find a way to want to
live, and still for the most part she's doing it for Raimbaut's sake, and to
honor her grandfather and Shan. She doesn't re-ally have a reason for herself.
And she's still full of anger be-cause she can't let go of having been the
leader of the pack, and she can't let go of hating the pack, and most of all she
can feel what I once thought of her, and how angry I am with her now, and
the contrast must hurt horribly."
"That was about all I could have thought of to say," I ad-mitted. "I do
hope it's enough to keep you going, through all of her bad behavior, and I'm
sure there's going to be more. I know Raimbaut is planning to speak to her
about some of it, but we both know it isn't necessarily going to do any
good."
"It's nice to know that someone tries. Both of you try. That does make
me feel better, as if I'm at least worth some-one's efforts." She slipped my
hand from her shoulder to take it in hers, and we walked a long way; like
two grieving lovers, to the outside world; like two lonely children, inside
ourselves.

"Well, then, should we say the words? We're far from anyone now," I
said.
"All right. Giraut?"
"Ja."
"I wish you and I had met some other way entirely."
"Voill atz deu, con totz de mon cor, so do I," I said.
Then we spoke the words in unison, addressed to our hypnotic implants.
The phrase would put both of us to sleep, and wake up Raimbaut in me, and
Laprada in her, all but instantly. In a moment, the beach of western Hedonia
would have a different couple—lovers, not friends, by choice and not by
necessity, and the hands now touching would close in an embrace, not mere
mutual comfort.
As the darkness fell across my eyes, and the beach dimmed, I could feel
Raimbaut rising to take over the body, filled with joy and purpose, eagerly,
the way a runner breaks from the beach and turns toward home where a
shower, a good meal, and someone to share them with, are all waiting.

AFTERWORD
Foolish Hobgoblins, Containing Multitudes, And True
Friends
A mind is of little consistency to a foolish hobgoblin, or so Ralph Waldo
Emerson said, once, probably while getting drunk with Walt Whitman, who
replied, "Very well, then, I contradict myself. Want to go out back and
contain my mul-titudes?" Ralph didn't understand, and both men left with
broken hearts. As the Wizard of Oz, who was neither a wiz-ard, nor of Oz,
remarked, hearts will never be popular until they are made unbreakable.
In continuing this series, I discovered that I had been very careless not
once but twice in the process of editing for con-sistency and continuity.
There are several irreconcilable dif-ferences among my master notes for the
series, my article "How to Build a Future," and the two novels previously
pub-lished, A Million Open Doors and Earth Made of Glass. So in this
book, I've chosen whichever way I happened to like bet-ter, and tried to keep
better records for the remaining two books in the series (The Armies of
Memory and A Far Cry, coming real soon now). But if you notice that a
culture seems to be moving from planet to planet, or the same per-son lived
in two drastically different centuries, or that a date has slipped forward or
back a few decades, or anything of the sort, you are indubitably right; it is an
inconsistency. Un-fortunately, no prizes will be awarded.
Speaking of irreconcilable differences, as I finish this novel, I'm going
through the unpleasant process of divorce for the second time in my life. I
would first like to say that while I am obviously not good at relationships, I
have excel-lent taste in ex-wives, and the whole process would have been far
worse had the other person been anyone other than Kara Dalkey. If you
haven't read any of her books, you should run out and buy some, right now.
You'll need some-thing to read while I write my next, and I don't have much
of a track record for promptness.
And speaking of things for which prizes should be awarded, and aren't: I
don't know whether it's an apology, or a thank you note, or one song made

out of the utter void, but lowe a deep debt of gratitude to some people who
have put up with me while I've fallen apart and come back to-gether again.
These are the people who stuck around when I wasn't much fun to be with,
and one way or another, got me through a bad hour, or day, or month. I
hope, anyway, that as I get things together again, they will feel their patience
and tolerance was worth it; they know they have my love and gratitude.
Those people are Bonny Block, Adria Brandvold, Joe Devlin, Steve Leon,
Jane Berard, Jerry Oltion, Paul Ed-wards, Robyn Jackson, Terry
Schliessman, Lisa Rosling, Steve Decker, Jes Tate, and Bill Yellow Robe.
Bless you all for being there, and I'm sorry for all you've had to put up with.
I suppose I could have managed without you, but I'd hate to imagine how.

