Aggression
By
Jon J. Strine
&
Rob Levanowitz

2

© 2007 Jon J. Strine and Robert Levanowitz, Jr.
All rights reserved 2007 by Jon J. Strine and
Robert Levanowitz, Jr., including the right
to reproduce this book or portions thereof
in any form whatsoever.

3

This book is dedicated to Charles “Chuck” Smith, whose
Role-Playing game these stories are based upon. From both of
us, thank you for allowing us a little creative license with your
creation.
Jon & Rob
To my father, Jon Jesse, and my sister, Jessica Burgess.
Thank you for believing that I could actually create something
out of nothing.
Jon
To my father, Robert Levanowitz, Sr., for your support,
opinion and love.
Rob

4

5

Introduction
The old man looked upon his child and asked, "Are you sure you
want to hear about my life, child?"
The child, no older than ten, replied, “Yes, father, I do. I want to
know where I came from."
"The stories will take many years to tell, my son, and there is
much information that you will find distasteful."
"Do you not want to tell me?" the boy asked, disappointed by his
father's gloomy tone.
"Actually, I want to tell you more than anything in the universe. I
have been waiting patiently for this day since you were born. I just want
you to know that not everything you hear will be to your liking."
"I want to hear all you have to tell."
"Then it shall be." The old man sighed. The man and his son
were next to each other, relishing the heat from the roaring fire before
them. They had been traveling through the woods for several days,
having left their hometown behind. The old man wanted his son to know
the world and to be a part of it. Staying in town would've limited the
boy's education and experience. The old man had much life experience in
the real world, as was evidenced in his tired, hazel eyes. The man’s long,
black hair was streaked with gray and his face was weathered with age.
His voice remained soothing throughout the years and belied his age to all
listeners. "You must understand something, my son. What I have to tell
you goes all the way back to the Ancients themselves. I know quite a lot
about the Ancients and even more about the Aseraphim. Yet I believe it
is the Immortal Siblings and their comrade in arms that you'll be most
interested in. That will be the easiest part since I have stood with all of
them at one time or another, offering them my assistance, my knowledge
and sometimes my life. But that is for later.
"In the beginning, evil won. A being known as the Darkness,
along with his allies in evil, conquered the forces of good led by the Light.
All that was good and pure in existence was vanquished. The only
remaining vestiges of good to survive the purge were ten beings that
would become known as the Ancients.
“The Ancients were present when time began in the universe.
There are ten Ancients and they are generally paired up according to their
respective tasks. First are the Will Cosmic and the Power Cosmic. They
are the creators, the very reason the universe we reside in exists.
"Then there are Propheteus and Styx, the judges. Zaron and
Genepool, givers of life. Gilmore and The Hunger, the destroyers.

6

Finally there are the watchers, Each and The Beholder. The Ancients
were here when time began in the universe, along with the Darkness and
the other evil beings. These dark essences viewed the Ancients as a threat
and many battles were fought between them. Eventually, the Ancients
were able to kill five of the Titans. All that remained were the Darkness,
Pak, Zomb, Nin-Gauble and Bedlam. The Ancients were at a loss as how
to vanquish their remaining foes. As options were being discussed,
Propheteus whispered the following prophecy to the Will and Power
Cosmic: 'You will create a magnificent universe. This has been
prophesied. Every rock, every stream, every planet known to all who shall
come to pass will owe its existence to you. All Ancients will play a roll in
keeping the universe stable. One planet among the infinite will be as a
home to the Ancients and this planet will be under your feet upon
creation.' There's more to it, Propheteus can get very long-winded at
times, but you get the general idea. More to the point, the Will and Power
Cosmic did in fact create the universe, and the planet where they stood
was Earth. Unfortunately, sensing their demise was imminent, the Titans
followed the Ancients to this planet and the planet of Haven, wrecking
havoc whenever possible.
"The first beings created by the Will and Power Cosmic were Tag
and Nacht. Tag is the bringer of Light and good tidings. Nacht is her
polar opposite as he is the father of Darkness and the bringer of evil.
These two were drawn to each other with disastrous results. They were
banished to the planet Haven and there set up the realms we now know as
Haven and Haedes. This planet exists on the other side of the sun,
invisible to all on Earth. Where our planet rotates on an axis that is
almost vertical, the axis of Haven is perfectly horizontal. This has the
effect of casting one half of the planet in perpetual light while the other
half remains forever in total darkness. It is here that the realms of the
afterlife were created. All those deemed by Styx to hold evil in their souls
are damned to Haedes, just as all deemed to be good are blessed with
eternity in Haven. The torment and pain in Haedes is beyond description
and all who are sent there are doomed to suffer. In Haven, the everpresent light heals the wounds of your soul, and joy and happiness
abound within its gates.
"With Haven and Haedes firmly established, Limbo was created
by Styx to separate the two for eternity. Limbo does not actually exist on
planet Haven, but as a separate dimension created from Styx's mind. You
cannot see Limbo unless you are in it. It exists simply as a line of shade
running around the planet along its equator. From Limbo, the Aseraphim
were born. The Aseraphim are the children of Tag and Nacht, born to do

7

their deeds on the Earth. The coupling that brought forth the Aseraphim
would be the last time Tag and Nacht would ever be near each other.
“The four Immortal Siblings were born of the union of the first
child of Tag and Nacht, the Aseraphim Starz and The Beholder. This
endowed their children with not only the blood of an Aseraphim but the
blood of an Ancient as well. The four would represent order, chaos, love
and hate in this world and all others. For ages they did not exist on Earth
but only in the ethereal.
“You see, son, this is where it gets complicated. I can tell you
about the adventures I’ve been on with these immortals but that would
not be an accurate picture of what they truly are. I believe it would be
best for you if you learn of the siblings from their own words.”
“How is that possible, father?”
“The clerics. You’ve seen their works before back in the village.
At one time or another, every one of the siblings has told his or her story
to the clerics to be recorded for posterity.” The old man withdrew a book
from his satchel and opened it to the beginning. “This is the first, the
book of Aggression, told in his own words to the clerics of Earth. Listen
well, my son, for much will be made clear.” The old man looked down at
the book and began to read aloud.

8

Chapter 1
To say my life began at age seven was both accurate and
inaccurate at the same time. I was born centuries ago as nothing more
than an essence, an ethereal being with no shape or form. Then I was
known simply as Order and was joined by three other beings. These three
were my siblings, Chaos, Love and Hate. We remained in stasis, in the
ethereal, until the Earth was prepared for our coming. We were to be
born onto the earth as humans yet so much more. Much to my chagrin,
the other that was to be brought to the Earth was Chaos, my polar
opposite.
When we assumed human form, I was created as a male and
Chaos as a female. She and I shared many similar physical characteristics.
We both had blonde hair. Mine was a darker shade that lay in neatly
aligned rows of curls, hers a bright blonde, straight and always moderately
messy. We also both had green eyes. Valencia's eyes were a bright,
radiant green while mine were a shade or two deeper in color. The main
difference between us physically was our respective heights. My sister was
a good deal shorter than I. Since we took on the human traits, this
included emotions as well. A by-product of this was, since we looked like
small children, we behaved like children. As ancient as we were, our very
nature and spirit were overridden by human instinct and habit. Our
father, The Beholder, named us Vincent and Valencia. He was a tower of
a man, over six feet tall and powerfully built. A shiny silver mask covered
his face, hiding all but his eyes and mouth.
To the unknowing, we were mere children. Our father explained
to us that since we needed to learn how to live on the planet's surface, we
had to grow naturally, hence the decision to bring us to bear as children.
The three of us appeared in ancient Egypt outside settlements built along
a riverside. Other than the water of the river, all there was to see was
sand.
"Why here, father?" I asked.
"It is here that you will have room to grow, my son," he replied.
"With your gifts, you will need it."
"What gifts are those?"
He patted me on the head and reassuringly said, "You will find out
soon enough."
We set up residence along the Nile at the edge of a small village.
Homes were nothing more than crude huts of mud and straw. I found
the scattershot way everything was laid out absolutely appalling. Being a
child of seven, there wasn't much I could do to change it. The Beholder

9

noticed my unease.
"What is the problem, Vincent?" he asked me.
"Nothing is organized," I said, pouting.
"That will all change soon enough," he said with a smile. "This is
where you will learn to use your natural abilities. You will end up helping
these people simply by being here and nudging them in the right direction.
You won't need to talk like an adult. You won't need to act like an adult.
All you'll have to do is be present, and others will come to you. Do you
understand?"
I peered up at my father, trying to grasp what he was telling me. I
shrugged and shook my head, denoting a total lack of comprehension.
He laughed and told me it was all right. He knew what would happen,
and that was the important part.
We settled into a nearby empty hut. Our father told us that the
Will and Power Cosmic created this particular domicile for us. It
resembled just about every other home in the village. Constructed from
large, solid slabs of hardened mud with straw for the roof, it appeared
quite sturdy. It only had three rooms, yet was fairly large. The ceilings
were ten feet high, maybe more. From the outside, it looked as if a grown
man would have trouble standing upright once inside. As I was thinking
it, The Beholder told us this hut was actually much larger inside than it
looked from the outside. To keep from arousing suspicion, it was made
to appear normal sized. Sensing we’d need the room, and time apart from
each other, our father had asked the Will and Power Cosmic to make the
hut more spacious. This pleased me to no end. While drifting through
the ethereal with my siblings, we had no physical form but we did have
consciousness. My sister's proclivities for chaos were in full bloom from
inception and I'd never been able to tolerate her antics. Hate found her
amusing most of the time and Love simply put up with it. Sharing a room
with her was not how I wanted to start my life on Earth.
My entire first day in human form was spent with my sister,
listening to my father talk about the Ancients and the Aseraphim. When
we existed merely as essences, we knew a little about our history and the
history of our family. Our father was going over some of the finer points.
I was captivated by his every word. My sister could barely sit still long
enough to concentrate on anything he was saying. For hours, The
Beholder enlightened us as to the nature of the Ancients and their specific
purposes for being. He spoke at great length about the Aseraphim and
how our relationships with them would drastically change in the centuries
to come.
"You will be guided by these children of Tag and Nacht all

10

through your lives," father explained. "Most of the time, Ancients such as
I will not interfere directly with the course of events on the planet. We
have the Aseraphim for that task. Since they control Haven and Haedes,
you and your siblings can deal more easily with them than you can with
us."
"Where are Love and Hate?" I asked.
"They are still in the ethereal. It is not their time yet."
"Why not?"
"Because the world is not yet ready for them. In time, that will
change.”
"Will they know us?" Valencia asked, paying attention for the first
time in hours.
"It's doubtful. By the time they arrive, they will have spent
millennia as ethereal beings. Just as the two of you have forgotten details
about the Aseraphim you once knew so well, their time in the ethereal will
undoubtedly cloud their memories. When they do come into being, the
two of you will have much more experience than them, so you will need
to lend them aid at times."
"Aren't they going to be immortal like us?" I asked.
"Yes, my son, they will be and just like you they will be born to
this realm as children. You need to keep a close watch on young children
for they have a tendency to either get into trouble or get hurt."
"Will we get to meet the Aseraphim while on this realm?" I asked.
"Most certainly. I do not believe, however, it will always be under
the best of circumstances. This is important for the both of you to
remember. You are both neutrals. You do not fight for the side of light,
nor do you fight for the darkness. You can choose to, if you like, but it
will only hamper your efforts. Because you can choose a side if you so
desire, the Aseraphim from both sides will attempt to get you to do their
bidding. You must decide if it helps your goals before you accept. Do
not judge things as good or evil. You, Vincent, must base your decisions
on whether or not helping in their requested tasks will bring order. If it
doesn't, you must decline. Even if you think what they want you to do is
a good thing, if it does not help establish order, you mustn't help. The
opposite is true for you of course, Valencia. If you are asked to do
something that you think will bring order, you should refuse."
"I can do that," she gleefully replied.
"It's well past nightfall," our father said as he glanced outside.
"The two of you should get some sleep."
"We don't need to sleep. You told us that," I reminded him.
"I know, but the people of this village would think it strange if

11

they saw the two of you awake at all hours. You must learn to sleep."
"How?" I asked.
"You must gain control of your mind and relax. Clear your mind
and sleep will find you. Now go."
Valencia took off for her room and I went to mine. I lay down
and concentrated on shutting off my mind and sleeping. I had succeeded
more easily than I'd imagined and felt myself drift off. Just as I was about
to achieve sleep for the first time, Valencia entered my room.
"Vincent, you still awake?" she asked, and not quietly.
"I almost wasn't," I angrily replied.
"I can't sleep," she continued, ignoring my surliness. "Why should
I?"
"Because father said so."
"I know, but it doesn't seem right. We don't always have to do
what he asks us to, do we?"
"Why shouldn't we?"
"Maybe he's not always right," she replied. She had done this sort
of thing in the ethereal quite often. There wasn’t a subject she wouldn’t
debate.
I leaned up, locked my gaze with hers and said, "He is our father,
Valencia, and he deserves our respect. If he says we need to learn to
sleep, then it's for the best that we do it. Now go away." I resumed my
previous position and tried to sleep again as my sister exited my room.
My first day on this realm ended with no fanfare for a son of the
Aseraphim. There was no one honoring my father. There was only my
sister, proving to me that she was going to be just as aggravating on this
realm as she was in the ethereal.
I awoke as morning arrived and the new day brought with it
unbearable heat. The Beholder was standing in the doorway to my room.
I had some difficulty in getting certain parts of my mind to wake back up
and said so to my father. He informed me this was normal and that it
took mortals even longer to become fully awake.
I heard Valencia stirring around in the other room. "Did she
sleep?" I asked my father.
"No, she did not. I don't believe she even really tried. That is her
nature, Vincent. Many times, she will do exactly the opposite of what is
asked of her. It is something you will have to come to terms with
eventually."
"Why is she like that?"
"She is as she was meant to be, just as you are."

12

"Can't she be normal?"
The Beholder laughed at my innocent question. "To your sister's
way of thinking she is normal. You are the abnormal one."
"I am not!" I stated defiantly, leaping to my feet.
"But to her, you are. Remember, you are two parts of the same
equation.”
"But she's a pain," I pouted. "I don't want to have to spend my
life with her."
"You won't. Be patient, my child. Once I get your sister under
control, the three of us will venture into the village. I will try to keep
Valencia away from you so you can see things for yourself. Don't try to
talk to the villagers however. You do not speak their language yet and any
confusion brought on by our arrival may lead to dire consequences."
"Shouldn't we leave Valencia here then?" I was smiling at the
prospect.
"No, we shall take her with us. I do not want to leave her here
alone. She could wander off and wreak havoc. It's for the best if we keep
an eye on her at all times. I'll take her with me while you observe the
goings-on of the village."
He left to tend to Valencia and I began to wander around the hut.
I ventured over to the opening of our domicile and was assaulted by the
sunlight. Once my eyes adjusted, I saw villagers mulling around, doing
various chores. Everyone was doing one task and only one task until it
was completed. It seemed awfully inefficient. I could hear Valencia and
my father approaching and turned to face them.
Valencia's hair was a tousled mess. It hurt my head just to look at
her. I could tell by the expression on our father's face that he noticed my
displeasure. He led us out of the hut and into the village proper.
We were just starting to mingle amongst the local inhabitants
when The Beholder directed me to the riverbank. He told me to wait
there for him while he took Valencia to picks up some supplies. Seeing as
how this would get my sister away from me for a bit, I happily complied.
There were several locals washing their clothes in the river when I
arrived. They were pounding their clothes with rocks, which made little
to no sense to me. My clothes were still clean, since I hadn’t really done
anything yet. My outfit was red and yellow, making me stand out among
the villagers and their drab garments. My sister was even worse as her
outfit was bright white. I couldn't figure out how our clothes would get
any cleaner by hitting them with rocks. I theorized rocks would only
make the clothes dirtier, seeing as how you had to pull them out of the
mud.

13

I leaned down and did just that, freeing a large rock from the
muddy bank. I washed it off in the water and noticed no significant
difference. I returned to the riverbank and pulled more stones out. Each
time I washed one off, I became more disappointed with the outcome. I
wanted to discuss this with The Beholder. There had to be a better way
to clean our clothes.
I had loosened up a good deal of mud by pulling out all those
stones. The mud was scattered all over the place and the sight of it
bothered me. I swept all the loose mud into one big pile and started
making blocks. The blocks weren't perfect cubes, but elongated to twice
their width with only half the height. After finishing up a block, I'd set in
on some reeds I'd gathered. I worked in this fashion for quite some time
until my father appeared with my sister at his side. By that time I had
made almost fifty blocks, all of them the exact same size and shape.
"What have you got there?" The Beholder asked, studying the pile.
“Blocks. There was mud everywhere, so I scooped it all together
and made some blocks. Was that wrong?”
My father’s eyes lit up with my response. “No, Vincent. In fact,
this is what I'd hoped you'd do. This will help the villagers immensely."
"How?"
"Tomorrow, you will see. Now come, you've been out here long
enough. It's time to go home. You two have a lot to learn this evening."
"Like what?" Valencia asked.
"I'm going to teach you the local language."
The three of us walked back to our residence as my father told me
of the day’s events. Apparently, while he was looking over some things in
the market, Valencia got away from him. He told us he could've easily
just disappeared and then reappeared wherever she'd run off to, but he
again stressed the point of remaining incognito. Valencia seemed to like
the winding pathways and odd corners in the village.
Back home, our father made us a small dinner since there wasn't
much need for us to eat. This was another habit we’d have to get used to
if we were going to remain anonymous. The Beholder said we wouldn't
always need to remain anonymous. It was just a good idea to be able to
blend in if needed. After we’d eaten, he taught us the language of the
locals. Since there was no written language it was not easy to learn. Our
father was very patient with us, but what really caught me off guard was
Valencia seriously concentrated on learning. It was the first time she'd
seemed interested in anything. We both picked it up fairly easily. As we
departed for our sleeping quarters, we said goodbye and good night in our
new tongue.

14

Overflowing with anticipation of the coming day, I could not
force myself to sleep. I crept over to Valencia's room and she was out
cold. Maybe father told her she had to. That's what I would’ve done. I
wasn’t one hundred percent sure that approach would work with her. I
left her alone, lest she suddenly decide to wake up. I found I could
tolerate her presence a lot easier when she was sleeping.
I moved into the main room of the hut and spied my father
kneeling on the floor and chanting. I dove for the shadows in the corner
to avoid being detected. After watching my father chanting for another
minute or two, I was tempted to sneak back to my room and try once
again to sleep. As I thought this however, The Beholder removed his
mask and set in on a table in the corner. Once the mask was out of his
hands he began a transformation that made me shiver. My father, the
Ancient, was becoming a beast. I watched as he finished his
transformation into what looked like a human mixed with a feral, wild
member of the feline family and darted out of the hut.
I was utterly transfixed on the mask. The fact that The Beholder
could change into different creatures didn't shock me as much as the fact
that he’d removed the mask. I remembered my father saying his powers
were drawn from the mask itself. The legend of the mask was that
anyone who wore it instantly became The Beholder. I stared blankly at it
from across the room and didn't notice I was slowly making my way over
to the table it sat on until I was halfway there.
The Mask of The Beholder, one of the legendary artifacts of the
Ancients, lay before me unattended. I had a flash of panic as I thought I
heard sounds coming from Valencia's room. With a clear line of sight to
where she was sleeping, I quickly put that belief to rest. She was still
sound asleep. I reached up for the mask and, as I touched it, I could
physically feel its power.
An overwhelming urge to put the mask on entered my mind and I
had difficulty fighting it off. I grabbed the mask with both hands and felt
a surge of power course through my body. I raised the mask to my face
and attempted to put it on. The mask seemingly grew heavier as I lifted it
to my face. I had the mask up and in front of me, but I couldn't move it
any closer to my face than six inches or so. I struggled and fought with it,
trying desperately to put the mask on but to no avail. It was as if the
mask was repelled by the idea of my wearing it.
Realizing the very essence of The Beholder was contained in the
mask, I wondered if he’d know I had tried to put it on. Fearing the worst,
I carefully placed the mask back on the table and ran to my room. There
was no way I was going to be able to sleep tonight. This being the case, I

15

was wide awake when I heard the thing that masqueraded as my father
return. I found myself shaking, wondering if he would know I was awake
and had touched the mask. I worked through my fear and silently crept
out of the room again.
Hiding in the shadows, I saw the lycan clearly. It resembled a
large tiger in human form. As I watched it methodically clean itself, I saw
droplets of some unknown liquid hit the floor. I couldn't make out what
these drops were because it was too dark and I hoped it was only water.
The lycan completed its cleaning and went over to the mask. As soon as
it picked up the artifact, the mask practically leapt onto the lycan's face.
The moment the mask made contact, the beast transformed back into its
predominately human form.
Immediately after the lycan once again become The Beholder, he
stormed over to my room. He spotted me standing in the shadows as he
neared the doorway.
"Why did you try to put on the mask?" my father asked tersely.
"I just wanted to see what would happen," I sheepishly replied.
The Beholder looked down at me, not as an Ancient looks at an
Immortal but as a father to a son. "Vincent, if it weren't for the fact that
nothing happened, I'd be much more livid. Luckily, you cannot wear this
mask."
"Why not?"
"Because of who you are," he replied. "The children of the
Aseraphim are immune to the mask's abilities, as are the Aseraphim
themselves. It all has to do with our bloodlines."
"But you aren't human," I commented.
"Not completely, no. Lycans are extremely weak-minded
creatures. My mask draws them rather easily. Thankfully, my essence
renders me immune to such things as lycanthropy. Only when the mask
is removed can the lycan's true nature be revealed."
I studied him for a moment as I considered how to ask the next
question. I was slightly afraid of the answer but felt it had to be asked.
"Am I a lycan as well?"
My father laughed and replied, "No, my son, you are not a lycan.
I cannot guarantee that you won't have lycanthropic tendencies later in
life however. While your true bloodline is with the Aseraphim, your
human bloodline is partially lycan."
"What does that mean?"
"It could mean lots of things. You could end up with the
bloodlust inherent to lycans or you could just end up being hairier than
most other people. Most likely, you might grow claws or jagged, feral

16

teeth. Then again, maybe your Aseraphim ancestry will trump the lycan in
you and nothing unusual will come of it. That all remains to be seen."
I nodded to acknowledge his words. I was still unsure about the
meaning of my father being a lycan, but there was nothing I could do
about it. Besides, when the mask was on he was The Beholder, not some
creature that only felt a need to kill. My father tousled my hair and
ordered me off to bed. I watched as he went back outside and sat in the
doorway.
Before I went back to my room, I wandered over to where the
lycan had been cleaning itself. I saw the drops on the floor and my
suspicions were confirmed. It was blood, and it was fresh and warm.
Sleep eluded me all evening and I found myself grateful.
Yesterday when I had awoken, it took me a while before I was totally
coherent. Today I was energized. I glanced into the front room and saw
my father had already left. I then peeked into Valencia's room and she
was still sleeping. Knowing I had a few more moments of peace and
quiet before she woke up, I wandered into the main room and sat down
on the floor near where my father had taken off the mask the night
before. In the light, I could see some scrolls under the table in the corner.
I reached for the scrolls and was amazed at how new they looked.
I had a feeling that these writings were the works of The Beholder and the
other Ancients, the apparent newness of the scrolls belying their actual
age. I unfurled the one on top and studied it. The scroll was written in
the language of the Ancients, my native tongue, so I had no problems
reading it. I had many problems understanding what was written though.
I rolled the scroll back up and grabbed the next one. I read that one as
well, even if I didn't completely comprehend what it said. One after the
other, I read all the scrolls from under the table. There were only eleven
scrolls so it didn't take all that long. It only seemed like I was studying the
writings for hours.
I had just put the last scroll back when Valencia entered the room.
Her hair was worse today than it was yesterday. There wasn’t a strand of
hair on her head cooperating this morning. She was about to say
something when our father arrived, sparing me from having to deal with
Valencia alone.
"Are the two of you ready to go out again today?" he asked us.
"Not yet," Valencia answered, eyes still only half-opened.
"Then you should get ready," he replied.
"Will we both be going with you today?" I asked.
"No, Vincent, I want you to go back to where you were yesterday

17

and continue what you were doing."
"How am I going to be able to talk to anyone if I do that?" I
asked.
"Fear not, my son, for people will come up to you and initiate
conversation."
"Why would they do that?"
"Because of who you are, silly!" Valencia answered while making a
feeble attempt at fixing her hair.
"That's not quite correct, Valencia," our father corrected. "They
will talk to him because of what he is, not who he is." He looked at me
and continued, "It is because of what you are, the bringer of Order, that
will have people talking to you. Most of the time people won't even
realize why they wanted to talk to you. Some will just watch you from a
distance without ever approaching. Yet all will learn something valuable
from you."
"What about me?" Valencia asked.
The Beholder peered down at her and replied, "Right now, many
people will avoid talking to you and I don't want you to take it personally.
You just radiate the opposite feeling that your brother does. Where
people will feel relaxed while talking to Vincent, you will have a tendency
to make people ill at ease. It's no fault of your own. It’s just the way the
two of you were created. Besides, I need you to come with me again
today Valencia. Just mind whom you talk to. I'll let you know when it is
appropriate."
"So my brother gets to walk around by himself and I have to stay
with you? And I can only talk to who you say I can? That's not fair!" she
complained.
"Fair or not, that is the way it will be. Let's talk about this no
longer. We have things we have to get done," The Beholder said with
finality. He turned and headed back out the door with Valencia and me
giving chase.
As soon as we exited the hut I ran straight over to the riverbank
to continue my tasks from the day before. The first thing I noticed was
that the blocks I'd made yesterday were now extremely hard. They
seemed harder than the surrounding rocks. I picked one up and took it
over to the riverside. I placed it squarely on the ground perfectly parallel
to the river. I retrieved a few more blocks, twenty total, and lined them
up end to end in a long line. I then scooped up some mud and spread it
evenly over the blocks. Once a thin layer of mud was evenly applied I
went to get more blocks. I noticed a child, no older than my assumed age,
standing near my pile of bricks. He was looking over at me with a look of

18

confusion on his young face. I strolled over and greeted him in his native
tongue.
"Hello. I'm Vincent. What's your name?" I asked.
He jumped when I spoke to him, shocked to hear me speaking in
his language. He regained his composure quickly and answered, "My
name's Alipha. What are you doing?"
"Stacking blocks," was all I could think to say. I wasn't sure why I
was arranging the blocks as I was. It just seemed like the right thing to
do.
"What are you making?"
I thought about it for a second and honestly replied, "I don't
know."
He giggled and said with a smile, "How can you not know?
You're the one doing it."
"I haven't decided what I'm making yet. I may make a little
building."
"A building? With these?" he asked in disbelief.
"Sure! I bet it'll be really strong too. Want to help?"
"What do I have to do?"
I knelt down and scooped up some mud. Then I started shaping
it just as I had done the day before. After I'd done two blocks, my new
friend tried. It wasn't as evenly formed as mine but he did a really good
job for his first time. I showed him how to make them the same size and
shape every time by using reeds for measurements. His third block was
perfect and I asked him to make a few more while I built up the wall I was
working on.
When I returned to Alipha after assembling more of the wall, I
was pleasantly surprised to see he had made almost twenty more blocks.
He had them arranged on the reeds much like I had done the day before,
all in nice, neat little rows. The blocks were all uniform in length, width
and height. I was quite impressed. I knelt down beside him and began
making blocks as well. By the time my father returned, Alipha and I had
made almost a hundred blocks.
"I have to go now, Alipha, but I'll be back here tomorrow."
"I'll meet you here. Can I help you stack the blocks tomorrow?"
"Sure you can. You were a great help today, my new friend. Be
well."
"You as well, Vincent. Take care!" Having said his farewell,
Alipha cheerfully skipped back to his family's hut.
We reached our domicile and all three of us sat on the floor of the
main room per our father's instructions. We were going to learn another

19

language tonight and The Beholder informed us that we were only to
speak this language between ourselves. We were to practice by talking to
each other often in this new language since we would need it later in life.
Valencia picked up this language quicker than I did, probably because it
was an intrinsically confusing language. At least she was gracious enough
to help me along when I fell behind.
When our lesson was finished, The Beholder sent us off to our
rooms. I had made up my mind that I was not going to go wandering
around this evening, not after what I'd witnessed last night. This was not
a problem as Valencia came into my room no more than ten minutes after
I'd settled in.
"Why does father let you go off on your own while I have to
follow him around all day?" she asked immediately upon entering my
room.
"Why do you get to spend all your time with our father while he
leaves me by myself along the river?" I asked in return.
"I don't want to be with father all day! I want to be able to go out
on my own."
"Maybe he doesn't think you're ready for that yet."
"And you are? We're the same age!" she yelled at me.
"Keep your voice down. Father will hear you."
"No he won't. He went off into town as soon as he sent us to our
rooms."
"I don't see why you have to yell at me about it. I'm not the one
dragging you around everywhere."
"I can't very well yell at our father now, can I?" she sarcastically
responded.
"I don't see why not. He might actually take it as a positive sign
of progress for you."
"You just want me to get into trouble."
"Valencia, what trouble could you possibly get into by doing that?
Is he going to keep you inside and never let you out? It wouldn’t be a
smart thing to do if he expects you to learn anything."
"So you think I should tell him I don't want to go with him in the
morning?"
"I'm not saying you should and I'm not saying you shouldn't. I
just think it's what he's waiting for from you."
My sister was confused. "What do you mean?"
"Well, what did the two of you do today?"
"Nothing!" she replied in frustration as she paced around my
room. "He talked to some of the leaders of the village, stopped in some

20

shops, that sort of thing. He didn't let me talk to anyone or go anywhere
without him."
"You did run away from him yesterday, so I can understand why
he kept a close eye on you. Did you try to talk to anyone?"
"I tried, but he wouldn't let me. After a while I gave up."
"So you didn't?"
"No, I didn't."
"Well, just keep trying. You’ll succeed eventually. Then there
won’t be any way for him to stop you from talking to whomever you
want. I think father wants me to be alone to see how others interact with
me. I think he wants you to be with him so he can see how you interact
with others. Maybe the people you saw today were not people he wanted
you to accidentally influence towards chaos. Do you understand?"
"Not really," she replied honestly.
"Just do it," I said, "And you'll see."
Valencia stared at me to try and sense if I was leading her down a
dangerous path. I think she realized, finally, that I was being honest with
her. She stopped pacing and went to leave. In the doorway, she paused
and turned around. "How did you figure all that out, by the way?"
"It's what's known as reasoning." I paused and smiled at my sister
and concluded, "It's probably why you couldn't figure it out."
She returned my smile with a smirk and left my room. I couldn't
help but feel like today had been very productive. I learned another
language, I got some of my building started and I met someone new. I
knew sleep would not find me tonight and I made no attempt to search
for it.
Daylight couldn't come soon enough, and upon its arrival I was
ready to greet it head-on. I heard Valencia stirring all night so I knew I
wasn’t the only one ready to go this morning. Father stepped into my
room and, without a word, waved his hand to call me out. I leapt off the
floor and was out of my room in a heartbeat. When I got to Valencia's
room, I noticed I was actually in front of The Beholder. I shook my head,
confused by my current position. My father looked down at me and his
face bore a smile brighter than the sun. Before I could ask him anything,
he raised his head and called my sister out of her room. I was right in
believing she'd be eager to start the day. She was bouncing up and down
on the balls of her feet, bursting with excess energy. I noticed her eyes
were a little brighter green today than they had been yesterday. I got the
feeling our talk last night had some effect. I was oddly proud to see it.
We left the hut and I departed for the riverbank. I was

21

enthusiastic about getting back to building blocks and walls. I also wanted
to see if Alipha would return. A helping hand was always welcome and
besides, he was a nice kid. When I broke free of my family, I glanced
over at Valencia and she did the strangest thing. She wore an honest,
purely joyful smile on her face and winked at me. I wasn’t sure what was
going to happen between those two during their rounds today, but I
almost felt sorry for my father.
I jogged over to my familiar spot along the river and saw Alipha
already hard at work making blocks. And he wasn't alone. There were
two other children assisting him. One was very nearly identical to Alipha
but obviously slightly older, so I naturally assumed it was his brother. The
other one was about the same age as Alipha and must’ve been a playmate.
They all had naturally dark skin and as I joined them I couldn't help but
notice how much I stood out.
"Alipha," I called out as I approached.
I must have startled him because he jumped when I spoke.
"Vincent! Sorry, I didn't see you."
"Its fine, my friend. When did you get here?"
"About an hour ago. I brought my brother Ihmo and my friend
Kalim with me. Is that all right?"
"The more the better. How are they at making blocks?"
Alipha shrugged and said, "Kalim is about as good as I am, but
Ihmo isn't as patient as we are. He did mention that he'd like to help you
with the wall and designing a structure. Ihmo isn't much of a hands-on
person but he's very smart."
"Then I'll have him help me over there." Alipha introduced me to
his companions and I thanked them for offering to help. Then I spoke
with Ihmo and invited him to assist me with the assembly of the wall.
Ihmo examined what I'd done so far and finished with a troubled
expression on his face. When I asked him what was bothering him, he
mentioned that the wall would never hold up if the river decided to crest.
He said that if we were to dig a trench around the wall, put some of the
blocks below the level of the river and then pack mud around these
blocks the wall would be more stable. Before I could ask him to
elaborate, he was on his hands and knees digging alongside the wall.
Once he had extended this trench the entire length of the wall, he asked
me to help him slide the wall into the trench. Once the wall was settled in
and aligned, Ihmo started packing handful after handful of mud into the
trench. He packed it tightly against the wall on both sides, always
checking to make sure the wall was still perfectly vertical. He stepped
back from his finished task and admired his work.

22

"Now if the river decides to crest, the wall will have a better
chance to survive," he said with pride.
"It looks great, Ihmo. It really does. We'll need to dig out more
mud for the other walls before we can continue building the first wall
though."
"The first wall? What are you going to build?"
"Just a little place to play in. It will also serve me well as a place to
hide from my sister."
"You're afraid of a woman?" Ihmo asked, shocked.
"No, I'm not afraid of her. She just gets on my nerves
sometimes."
"Would it be possible to have a place of my own as well?"
"I don’t see why not." I knelt down on the ground again and
started extending the trench that we'd built. Ihmo quickly realized what I
was doing and joined in. When we finished, we had dug out a trench
extending several yards down the riverside, long enough to fit at least ten
small playhouses.
Ihmo ran over to the pile of blocks when we finished the trench
and started building a foundation for his own sanctuary. Alipha and
Kalim were making blocks at a rapid pace as Ihmo and I worked on the
walls and foundations. The four of us continued our respective
undertakings throughout the day. I was making good progress on my
project, and Ihmo's building was off to a very good start as well, when my
father showed up. I ran over when he called to me and I couldn't help
notice the look of exasperation on his face.
"Vincent, I need you to find your sister. She ran off," he ordered.
"Where did she run off to?"
The Beholder peered down at me, disfavor radiating from his
eyes, "She took off towards the far end of town. That's all I can tell you."
"Can my friends help me?"
"No. I want you to go alone. When you find her, bring her back
to the hut."
"But I want to work on my buildings!" I pleaded.
"You can continue on that tomorrow." The Beholder then
cocked his head to the side and asked, "You know what you're going to
build now?"
"I sure do!" I cheerfully replied. "I'm going to build a small
playhouse. It will be my sanctuary from Valencia.”
"Speaking of, be on your way. And find your sister," he ordered as
he made off for home.

23

Chapter 2
I had yet to actually venture into the village itself so Valencia was
starting off with a decided advantage. I strode quickly down the main
path of the village, peeking down every off-branch of the path for any
sign of her. I saw a few villagers but that was all. The sky was clear as the
sun was beginning to set over the dunes in the distance. It suddenly
dawned on me how long I'd been at the riverside working with Alipha,
Kalim and Ihmo. We had worked most of the day, time evaporating like a
puddle in this barren desert. With the sun now setting, I figured I'd better
find my sister before it got dark or I might never be able to spot her.
I quickened my pace, going from a fast walk to a steady jog. Still,
there was no sign of Valencia. Eventually I asked some of the villagers if
they'd seen her. Describing her was easy. Considering she was the only
young girl in the area with pale skin and long, blonde hair, most of the
villagers recognized her immediately. Unfortunately, none of them had
seen her in a while. I gave up on this approach and figured I'd just have
to track her down myself. Increasing my speed every passing minute, I
ran through the village, stopping only to check around corners for my
elusive sister.
I felt the warm breeze flowing around my face, blowing my hair
back as I ran. I was barefoot so my traction wasn't great. I easily
compensated for this by slowing ever so slightly as I neared a turn. The
breeze around me had become a true wind as I accelerated even more.
For reasons I couldn't explain, I knew I could run faster. This feeling of
confidence grew as I ran ever faster, the exhilaration filling my spirit and
my soul. I also knew now I would find Valencia. There was no way she
could outrun me. I grinned at this thought and redoubled my efforts.
I blew past villagers, running around them and more than once
between their legs. I ran between huts, pausing to peek into some of
them to see if Valencia was hiding out inside. I was nearing the far end,
having doubled back and searched every inch of the lower half of the
village. I inspected every corner of town with no sign of my sister. The
path I was on lead out of the village and towards the river. I assumed she
had to have gone this direction since she was nowhere else to be found.
Turned out, I was right.
Valencia was sitting on a log facing away from me, staring at the
river as it flowed by. She gave off no sign she noticed my arrival. I slowly
made my way over to her when she threw something into the water. I
glanced over her shoulder in time to see a stone splash into the river,

24

sending up a small column of water and sending ripples outward from the
point of impact. A few clouds had rolled in as the fading sunlight
reflected off of the river, making the ripples glisten different shades as
they faded into nothingness. Valencia threw another stone and watched
as this stone had the same affect as the last. I slid up beside her and
looked her over. She was depressed, the emotion clearly evident on her
face. Before I had gotten close enough to see her face, I knew she wasn’t
happy. I could almost feel the depression radiating from her as I
approached. Even though we didn't see eye to eye all the time she was
still my sister, like it or not. Seeing her in this mood made me feel a bout
of depression dawning in me as well. Valencia was silent, normally a good
thing as far as I was concerned. This time I found it disturbing. Either
she was ignoring me or just didn't want to acknowledge my presence,
because she had to know I was here. Sensing that, I made the first move.
"It's pretty, isn't it?" I asked. Valencia slowly and purposefully
turned her gaze to meet mine. Our eyes locked for a minute and in that
stare I felt the full weight of the sadness she was carrying. She then
lowered her head back down and continued throwing stones into the
river. "You know, father is looking for you."
"No he isn't. You are," she replied without looking up.
"He asked me to look for you."
"Why? Couldn't he be bothered?" she asked accusingly.
"I'm sure that's not the reason," I replied, wondering if I really
believed that or not.
Valencia sat quietly, throwing another stone into the river. Just as
I was about to suggest we head home, she said simply, "You were wrong."
"About what?"
"Why our father takes me with him," she began and glanced at a
spot next to her on the log. I sat down as she continued, "I decided to
take your advice, Vincent. I tried to talk to some of the villagers. Every
time I tried, he shut me down. I couldn't even get a simple greeting out
before he was telling me to be quiet."
"That doesn't make very much sense. Why wouldn't he want you
to talk to people? How else are you supposed to learn anything?"
"That's what I thought!" she exclaimed and heaved a rock a good
distance into the river. I picked up a rock and tossed it casually into the
water. The stone I threw outdistanced hers by a large margin. That
earned me a nasty look. Another stone met its watery demise at her hands
before she spoke again. "You said you thought our father wanted to see
how I reacted with others. I'm beginning to think he doesn't want me
interacting with anyone at all."

25

"How'd you come up with that?" I asked.
She turned to face me and starting ranting. "In the market I saw a
really nice doll. It had silky black hair and amber eyes. I just wanted to
get a closer look at it so I wandered off. He could still see me so I figured
I could get away with it. When I picked up the doll a lady came over and
asked me if I liked it. Before I could say anything, our father was
hovering over us and pulled me away. That was when I decided to get
away from him. I can learn what I need to on my own better than I can
with him."
"I highly doubt that, Valencia. We both need our father's
guidance."
"What guidance?" she shouted. "He hasn't helped me with
anything but languages. I probably wouldn't even know them if it weren't
for the fact that he's teaching them to you too."
"He hasn't taught me anything but languages either. Everything
else has come about on its own."
"Vincent, how can I learn anything if he won’t teach me and I
can't get away from him?"
"You have to be more patient," I suggested.
Anger rose in her eyes, which were now a brilliant, bright green.
The glow of her eyes cast an eerie glow around her and for just a moment
I was nervous. Maybe this was why our father didn't want her talking to
anyone. If people saw her like this they might think she was evil. She
wasn’t, as far as I knew. "I'm done being patient," she said past clenched
teeth, the timber of her voice now drastically different. Gone was the
sweet, lilting voice of a seven-year-old girl. This was the voice of one very
upset Immortal; dark, brooding and menacing.
"Valencia, we've only been on this plane for four days. Give it
some time," I said, trying to calm her down.
"And how much time should I waste waiting for The Beholder to
get around to me? A few more days? A few seasons? Years? How long,
brother?"
As much as my sister annoyed me, I had to admit she made a valid
argument. I decided to try a different approach. "Valencia, do you know
what I've been doing the last three days?"
"No. What?" she replied impatiently.
"All I've been doing is making blocks out of mud and building a
wall. I have three local children helping me. Hopefully, the wall will
become a building. Ihmo, one of the children helping out, is starting his
own building as well. We may have a whole row of tiny playhouses for
the children all lined up along the river. If I had to do it all myself, it

26

would take a very long time. A child saw what I was doing and asked to
help. He brought others with him the next day. Now, construction of
the buildings is underway and will probably be more organized than
anything in the village itself."
"What are you getting at?" she asked, annoyance clear in her voice.
"I didn't ask any of them to help. They all volunteered. Why
don't you try to meet up with some children in the village? If you're really
that determined to break away from our father, do it early enough so that
you can find someone your own age to talk to. Don't wait for people to
find you."
"What about our father? He'll just send you after me again."
"Maybe he will and maybe he won't."
My sister was lost in thought, mulling over my new theory. She
turned back to face the water and threw another stone in. "Don't you just
love the randomness of it?"
"Of what?" I asked.
"When the stone hits the water and it makes a splash. Total
randomness."
"I prefer to watch the ripples afterwards. They're much more
orderly."
She peered at me out of the corner of her eye and said, "The
column of water that shoots up always disrupts the ripples. Chaos wins."
A tiny, weak smile formed at the corner of her mouth.
"Yes, but the ripples and the circles they create go on long after
the column of water has disappeared. Order wins."
She turned her head to look at me and I saw that the light in her
eyes had faded back to their normal brilliance. Even better, there was a
genuine smile on her face. "Not always. If I use a larger rock, the column
of water is so large that it totally corrupts the ripples. So, the greater the
chaos, the weaker the order."
"True, but a smaller stone causes a smaller splash and more
defined circles, therefore the weaker the chaos, the stronger the order." I
found myself smiling as I debated order versus chaos with Valencia.
Neither of us could win the argument and we both knew it. That wasn't
going to stop her.
"If I take a small, flat stone, I can skip it across the water, causing
irregular circles and ripples that meld into one another."
"If I take a large stone and drop it gently into the water, I can
control the spray of water slightly and keep the ripples intact."
Valencia was grinning from ear to ear, enjoying our little debate.
She sighed overdramatically and said, "I guess it all depends on what you

27

have to work with."
"And how you use it," I added. Her mood had definitely
improved, so I figured now was a good time to wrap this up and get
home. "So, you ready to go now?" I sighed in exasperation.
Suspicious eyes now stared back at me as she said, "You know,
the last time you gave me advice I wasn't too thrilled with the results."
"Then don't listen to me. It's your choice." She nodded, finally
believing I truly wanted to help her. "Can we head back now? Father
probably has a new language for us to learn. I don't know much about
our father’s attitude, but I'm guessing patience isn't one of his best
virtues."
"I guess," she replied with artificial resignation. She stood up and
suddenly stopped. "Vincent, how is it we can learn an entire language in
just one night? Isn't that impossible?"
"Well Valencia, we are Immortals," I answered as I rose. "Maybe
we just pick things up faster."
"But an entire language?"
"I don't see why not. We'll ask father when we get back, okay?"
"Okay." We walked down the path back to the village, aware that
people were staring at us as we passed by. It could be due to the fact that
we didn't look like anyone else in the village. It was also possible that two
children walking through town alone as night was approaching piqued
their curiosity. Personally, I think what got us noticed was Valencia and I
joking and laughing as we half-heartedly continued our earlier debate. Just
as it was with her depression, her happiness was slightly infectious and I
couldn't stop myself from actually enjoying our time alone, away from
father's judging eyes.
We were still going back and forth on the topic of order versus
chaos as we approached the hut. Our father was standing outside, waiting
impatiently for us. I was too involved in my talk with Valencia to notice
him right away. Valencia just ignored him.
"Look, if you take two stones…" she said, re-examining a point
she had tried to make earlier in our walk.
"No, we are not taking two stones. I've already proven…"
"You did no such thing!" she yelled at me, all the while jabbing me
in the chest with her finger to emphasize her point. There wasn’t one
speck of anger evident in her voice. She threw her head back in mock
disgust at the idea of being wrong.
"Where were the two of you?" The Beholder bellowed as we
approached.

28

"I found her down by the river," I replied innocently.
"And it took you this long to get back?" He was not pleased at
being made to wait. Apparently I was right about my father's lack of
patience.
"We were talking. You know, that thing I'm not allowed to do
with anyone else," Valencia interjected.
The Beholder wheeled around to face my sister. At that moment,
I feared he would hurt her. My fear almost became a reality as our father
raised his hand to strike Valencia. Much to my surprise, she didn't move.
The Beholder held his hand in the air and I waited anxiously to see if it
would eventually come crashing down. Thankfully it did not.
"Go inside and wait in the main room for your language lesson.
I'll be right in," he calmly ordered as he stayed his hand.
Valencia and I walked in, side by side. Her grin lit the room as if
fueled by a thousand candles. It didn't take long to realize the light wasn't
coming from her grin. Her eyes were glowing again, casting the room in
that eerie green glow I'd witnessed earlier. I leaned over and whispered,
"That was almost bad."
"Almost," she responded as her smile grew wider. "But it felt
good."
We sat by ourselves for a few minutes until our father returned.
He did not bring up the previous incident, preferring to let it pass.
Instead, he told us he was going to teach us another language.
"Father, how is it we can learn these different tongues in just one
night?" I inquired.
"Yeah, is it because we're immortal and smarter than everyone
else?" Valencia added.
"Partially, Valencia, it is because you're smarter in most areas than
mere mortals. It is not the main reason."
"Then what is?" she prodded.
"Time," was his simple reply. My sister and I shared a look of
confusion and he picked up on it immediately. "When night falls, and all
three of us are in this hut, time changes."
"How is that possible?" I asked.
"When the Will and Power Cosmic created this hut, they cast a
spell over it that makes time slow down drastically when night comes and
we are all present inside. The two of you haven't noticed the change in
time because you've been preoccupied with your studies. It is also why I
leave every night." The Beholder glanced at me, awaiting a comment
about the night before when I saw him succumb to his lycanthropy. I
wisely remained silent.

29

"So it only works if all three of us are here?" Valencia asked.
"Correct, child. I don't want you getting any ideas though,
Valencia. This time is for learning languages and should not be taken for
granted."
"Don't worry. I want to learn these things. I'd love to be able to
talk to anyone I meet." Crossing her arms, she irritably added, "Actually,
I'd love to be able to be allowed to talk to anyone I meet."
The Beholder ignored her chide, only responding by glaring at her.
He brought us back to the issue at hand and began our nightly language
lesson.
The language this evening was the native tongue of the Atlantians,
a race of people living on a large island nation to the west. The Beholder
informed us we'd be visiting the isle of Atlantia before too long. The next
few nights were set aside to learn the languages of the various races native
to the island. When I asked him when we'd be going there, he said it
might be days or it might be years, but it was our next destination.
After our lesson, our father left the hut as my sister and I went off
to our rooms. I fell asleep almost immediately, once I was able to ignore
all the noise Valencia was making in her room. I actually enjoyed
sleeping. It was the waking up part that bothered me. Up until that night,
that was the only thing I found inconvenient.
As I slept, the parts of my mind still awake were working
overtime. I had a dream. I'd never had one before and it seemed so real
to me that when I woke up I wasn't sure what was real and what was not.
In the dream I was standing at the far end of a large room. At the other
end of the chamber, on a shimmering golden throne, sat a stunningly
beautiful woman. She had long, flowing pitch-black hair and deep brown,
almond eyes. This ravishing woman was clothed in an elegant, violet seethrough dress. Her entire body was visible beneath her flimsy garment.
This mysterious woman was no doubt the fantasy of every adult male on
the planet. I knew that for a fact for I felt an emotion that was completely
new to me: lust. In my mind, I wanted her for myself, to love, to cherish
and to keep as mine. She simply radiated beauty and sensuality. I
approached cautiously, my mind still not able to focus on anything but
this woman. All the while, I couldn't help feel as if I knew her.
"Don't be shy, child," she beckoned. Her voice was like a low
wind, soft and soothing. "Come over to me."
There wasn't any other option. It was as if my will was not my
own and I was drawn to her. "Who are you?" I asked as I stood in awe
before her.

30

"I am the Judge, the guardian of the doors to the nether realms. I
am Styx, my dear Vincent. It is a pleasure to make your acquaintance."
Since this wasn't real, and I was having more difficulty believing
that every second, I didn't question how she knew my name. There were
more pressing questions. "Where am I?"
Styx laughed, and it made me want to be with her all the more. I
wasn't even sure what I wanted with her. I only knew that my desire for
her grew larger. "You are where you were before. I'm the one that isn't
here." She smiled and I felt my knees go weak.
"What is this place? This isn't Egypt."
"No, Vincent, it is most definitely not Egypt. What you see
before you is Limbo, my home."
"How did I get here?" I asked, panicked. "Did I die?"
Styx laughed and instantly I felt calmer. "No, child, you're as
healthy as can be. I brought you here when you went to sleep. All I did
was manipulate your dream so I could talk to you. You see, I cannot walk
the planet's surface. I'm needed here at all times. I can, however, enter
people's dreams and talk to them. This is what I've done with you."
"Why?"
"Because I have something very important to talk to you about.
Come with me, Vincent. We haven't much time." She rose from her
throne and stood beside me. When she put her arm around my shoulder
I felt my heartbeat skip a beat. We walked through a large, ornate door
that opened into a world of wonder. Creatures of all shapes and sizes
roamed around freely, some feeding, some attacking others. There were
people milling about and their actions weren't that different from the
animals. The landscape was a mixture of hills and valleys, mountains and
rivers, sand and snow. The sun shone down from some undetermined
point to illuminate it all. "Welcome to Limbo."
"What exactly is this place?" I asked.
"Now is not the time for that, Vincent. We'll discuss that at a later
date."
"What do you mean by that?"
Styx threw her head back in frustration and scolded, "Do you
always have to ask so many questions?" I lowered my head at the rebuke,
more ashamed than if my own father had chastised me. "I apologize for
upsetting you but time really is of the essence here."
"I'm sorry," I said sheepishly.
"It's forgotten." Styx grabbed my shoulder to slow my progress
and we stopped at a flower garden. Flowers of all hues and types created
an explosion of colors, all mixed wildly into each other. I closed my eyes

31

and rubbed my forehead as I could feel a slight pain behind my eyes.
"Are you okay, Vincent?" she asked.
"It's the flowers," I replied, my headache worsening.
Styx glanced at the garden, then quickly back to me. "Is that
better?"
I looked up and saw that the flowers in the garden were now all
lined up by kind and color. At once, my headache was replaced with
feelings of relief and tranquility. "It's much better. To be honest, it's
beautiful."
"I thought you'd like it." She directed me to a stone bench at the
edge of the garden and we both sat down. "Vincent, you know much
about your family, correct?"
"I know some things but I'm sure I don't know everything."
"I'm sure you don't either. Most of what you've learned has been
from your father, The Beholder. I believe it's time you got some
information from a second source. You see, you are extremely important
in the grand scheme of the universe but you are not what your father
believes you to be."
"What do you mean by that?" I was utterly confused.
"Your father believes that you are the one that will bring order to
the Earth, and you shall try to do just that all your days. It is his methods
that raise questions. It isn’t all just him though. All of the Ancients watch
you with intense eyes, child. It won't be long before you start to hear
from them, and you'd be wise to listen to all they have to say."
"Why are they so interested in me? I'm only one of four siblings.
What about the others?"
"Yes, what about them," Styx cheerfully replied. "For now, let us
concentrate on you and your sister. The Ancients really don't have a use
for Valencia right now, and I personally doubt they ever will. She's too
unpredictable. Frankly, that's what I like about her. You, on the other
hand, are not as impulsive. You feel the need to take into account all the
facts and go from there. You're stable and orderly, just like you were
meant to be. Because of that, you have the best chance of succeeding at
your goal."
"What goal?"
"Bringing order to the world. The only problem there is how you
define order."
"Order is having everything as it should be."
"But according to whom? You? Your father?" I wondered about
that silently for a moment before she continued. "Your father has his
own ideas of how to achieve order, as do I. All of the Ancients want the

32

world to be orderly. We just all have differing opinions on what orderly
should be."
"What do you believe it should be?"
"We'll get to that some other time."
"What other time? Twice now you've hinted that we are going to
meet again."
"And we will. I didn't bring you here to tell you my motives. I
brought you here to warn you of his. You father believes that you will
follow in his footsteps and do as he does. Maybe you will and maybe you
won't, but it is a choice you are going to have to make eventually. What
you decide will determine whether or not we meet again under favorable
or unfavorable circumstances."
"I don't understand."
"What part?" she asked jokingly. I heard myself giggle before I
knew I was going to.
"Are you saying I shouldn't listen to my father?"
"Not at all, Vincent," she said, her words floating to me on a cool
breeze. "What I'm trying to tell you is to do what comes naturally. Take
into account all the facts and make a rational, sound decision. The
conclusions you draw may not always be what you want to do, yet you
must do it anyway without hesitation." She caressed my cheek with one
long, lovely finger and said, "Can you promise me that?"
My entire body was tingling from her touch and I would've
promised her the world at that point in time. I nodded vigorously instead.
She beamed at me, warming my spirit with her smile. Styx rose from the
bench and said it was time for her to be leaving.
"Don't you mean I should be leaving?" I asked.
"Vincent," she chuckled, "I told you already. You haven't gone
anywhere." With that, she waved her hand and was gone. Or I was. I
wasn’t sure exactly. I was awake now, lying on the floor of the hut. It
was still dark outside so I attempted to get a bit more rest. I was sleeping
again in no time, this time with the image of the lovely Ancient Styx
burned into my mind and a broad smile on my face.

33

Chapter 3
"Where's Valencia?"
From just his tone of voice, I knew my father was upset before I
opened my eyes. I had been resting comfortably until he spoke. The
Beholder hovered over me like the morning sun, his burning gaze hotter
than the beams of daylight now flooding into the hut. I rubbed my eyes
and tried to get my mind working again before I responded. My father
wasn't that patient.
"I asked you a question. Where is your sister?" he bellowed.
"I don't know. I was sleeping," I answered groggily. It became
apparent right away that this was not the correct answer.
"You have to keep an eye on her at all times, Vincent. Find her.
Now," he ordered.
I was still lying prone on the floor so I quickly jumped up, hoping
my rapid movements would get my energy level back to normal. It wasn't
nearly as effective as I'd hoped, but I felt a little better. My muscles were
stiff and my eyes were slow in gaining focus but I elected to start my
search right away for two reasons. First, my father was obviously upset.
Second, the longer she was out there alone the worse it would get, for her
and for anyone she might happen across. The two of us still didn't
understand all of our abilities. More to the point, we didn't even know all
the abilities we had. She could inadvertently end up hurting someone.
The Beholder was waiting just outside the hut tapping his foot in
irritation. As I joined him outside, I told him I'd check by the river if he
wanted to check in the village. The Beholder said he didn't think she was
in the village. He could feel her essence nearby. With the intensity of his
rage nearing catastrophic levels, I figured it would be best if I found her
first. I talked my father into checking the village anyway in case anyone
saw her this morning. Even if she wasn't in the village itself, it seemed
like a logical place to start. The river was the next most logical choice
since that was where I found her yesterday. The Beholder agreed to my
plan and headed off.
I wanted to see if Alipha and his crew were waiting for me this
morning, and that was another reason I worked hard to convince my
father to go to the village. I hurried down to the riverside to tell my new
friends I had to find my sister before I could do any work today.
Fortunately, or unfortunately depending on your point of view, this wasn't
necessary. Standing next to the ever-expanding pile of blocks, talking to
Alipha and Ihmo, was Valencia. Her back was to me, so she never heard
me approach.

34

"Valencia!" I shouted as I neared and she jumped in surprise.
"Vincent!" she cheerfully replied. "What took you so long?"
I ignored her question and threw her one of my own. "Can I talk
to you alone for a moment?"
"Sure!" she gleefully replied. She turned and said to Alipha and
Ihmo, "I'll be right back, guys. Don't go anywhere." Alipha and Ihmo
were clearly smitten with Valencia and enthusiastically nodded. Valencia
calmly strolled over and asked, with not a hint of awareness to the present
situation, "So what do you want?"
"Father's looking for you again," I began.
"No," she said and drew out the word sarcastically. "Again, you
are the one looking for me."
"Yes, well, this time he's looking for you as well. You should
consider yourself lucky I found first."
"Why? Is he mad?" she asked excitedly.
"Very mad. And why are you so happy about it? Are you trying
to get our father mad at you?"
"I don't care if he's mad or not. I just wanted to get away from
him for a while. You've been on your own since we got here. This is the
first time I've had the same opportunity. He can't hold me back forever,
no matter how hard he tries." Valencia's eyes were starting to grow
brighter as she spouted off about our father.
"Maybe he just…"
"'Maybe he just' nothing! He wants me under his thumb, for
some unknown reason, and I'm not going to play along anymore."
Her theory was supported by the facts. The Beholder never let
her go anywhere that he couldn't keep an eye on her. He never let her
talk to anyone. Now, when she finally got away, our father's first priority
was to find her and keep her under wraps.
"Valencia, why did you come here?" I asked.
She shrugged and said, "Because I knew there'd be people here."
"Not because you wanted to help out?"
"Are you kidding me?" she laughed. "Everything you've done
here is so neat and orderly it hurts my head just to look at it."
"Would you like to stick around a while?" I posed to her, knowing
the answer before I asked.
"I'd love to!"
I was right. "Fine, but we have to work something out here first
between the two of us."
"And what's that?" she asked skeptically.
"The things I'm working on, the playhouses, stay away from them.

35

You can work on things at the other end. Ihmo has dug out a long line
for blocks to be set in, so there's plenty of space for you to claim as your
own. I'll even talk to our father about letting you join me down here. I'll
tell him I can keep an eye on you this way."
"You'd do that for me?"
"As long as you leave me alone."
"What about getting some kids to help me?"
"As long as they want to, you can ask anyone you want. Except
for Alipha, Kalim and Ihmo. They're my new friends." I grinned down at
her after noticing her eyes had gone back to normal. "Get your own."
She grinned back and said, "I don't know. I kind of like yours. I
think they like me too." She nodded in their direction and I spun around
to look at them. Kalim was still absent, but Alipha and Ihmo were staring
at my sister intently. She winked at them and waved, causing them to
dreamily wave back.
Our jovial mood was broken by the arrival of our father. He
stormed past Ihmo and Alipha and headed straight for us. This was a
man on a mission and pain and suffering would assuredly be doled out to
anybody that got in his way. Thankfully, it was only the four of us here
when he arrived.
"What are you doing down here?" The Beholder demanded.
"I found Valencia here, talking to my friends. We were just going
to…"
"I was talking to Valencia!" he shouted at me.
"Why do you care?' she asked defiantly.
The Beholder raised his hand in anger again and this time I knew
in my heart he was going to strike her. Yet once again he did not. Maybe
it was the two other children standing nearby. Maybe it was that I was
standing nearby. Whatever the reason, I had a feeling Valencia wouldn't
be so lucky a third time.
"Father, it's all right," I said, trying my best to diffuse the situation.
"She and I worked out a compromise. She can stay here if she wants. I
don't mind."
Our father looked disapprovingly down at me. "I do mind. She is
not supposed to be here with you while you work. She's disruptive. She's
unmanageable. She's…"
"She's standing right here!" Valencia yelled.
Before The Beholder could wheel around and do anything to her,
I jumped in quickly and said, "And this is where she'll remain." I looked
up into my father's eyes and continued, "She'll be far enough away from
what I'm doing. It won't be a problem. Besides, I can look after her."

36

time.

"I don't need someone to watch over me!" she yelled, at me this

"Be quiet," I whispered to her. Back to our father, I said, "So, can
she stay? I promise there won't be any more problems. Look at it this
way. It's one less thing you have to worry about if I'm the one keeping
watch over her."
The Beholder, certainly unconvinced this was the way to go, gave
in. He simply turned and walked back to the village without a word.
"That was interesting," Valencia commented once our father was
gone.
I grabbed her by the arm and turned her so she was facing me.
"Valencia, that was not interesting. I thought he was really going to hit
you this time."
"I was worried for a minute myself actually. Thanks for your help,
Vincent."
"Don't mention it, and I mean that." She cocked her head and
gave me a cocky little smirk. "And don't do anything to make me look
foolish."
"I won't. I promise." We headed back over to Alipha and Ihmo
who were still waiting patiently. I informed them that Valencia would be
joining us in our project and they were both thrilled at the news. They
weren't nearly as thrilled when I told them that she'd be working at the far
end while we continued working here.
"You're going to make her work by herself?" Alipha asked, clearly
wanting to assist her.
"I'm sure she'll find people eager to work with her," I replied as I
glanced at my sister. She was smiling and looking past me. I turned in
the direction of her gaze and saw Kalim walking over with a small crowd
behind him. There must have been at least fifteen to twenty children with
him. Alipha ran over to him and they talked excitedly. Kalim addressed
his group and they all walked over in unison, lined up and awaited their
assigned tasks. Several of them were looking intently at Valencia and I
knew some of them would be following her around within the hour. I
had Ihmo introduce me to the new arrivals as I instructed them on how to
be of the most help. They all enthusiastically took to their tasks, especially
the ones I told to go with Kalim and accompany Valencia. Ihmo and
Alipha were upset that I didn't let them go with my sister since they met
her first, but I told them I'd rather have them assist me. I wasn't sure
what Valencia was planning on building at her end of the project. I wasn’t
even sure I wanted to know. I did know I didn't want these two
corrupted by her.

37

There were now twenty-three children, including Valencia and me,
gathered along the river working on various jobs. Some were making
blocks, some were responsible for shaping blocks for the corners of the
buildings, and some gathered reeds to lay the blocks on. I instructed
some of the children to start thatching reeds together tightly so we could
use the bundles for the roofs. We weren't quite ready to start on a roof
but I want to be prepared when the time came.
We worked all through the day and were astonished to see some
of the adults from the village checking in on us. They mainly just stood
around with expressions of wonder on their faces. They were simply
amazed their children could create something so grand in scale. Not only
that, part of our site was coming together rapidly. At least two of the
buildings actually looked like they would become habitable, with three
more just getting started. These rudimentary structures already looked
like they would be more stable than some of the huts in the village. I
scanned my surroundings and saw that we'd made considerable progress,
but we still had a way to go before we could call any building complete.
I didn't know what was happening at the other end of our
endeavor and felt good about that. Four other children during the day
opted to aid my sister in her venture. They probably didn't have anything
done since all I'd seen them do all day was laugh and joke around.
As the sun began to set, many of the adults came to retrieve their
children. I thought it was slightly odd that most of them were smiling
proudly. Not one child was chastised for being away from home all day.
No voices were raised in anger at the fact that all the children were
covered in mud from head to toe. When one parent suggested his son
clean up, the child looked at the others, spoke a few words and they all
ran into the river, laughing like maniacs. The child that started the charge
into the water, his name was Aristol, had been helping Valencia earlier, so
I wasn't totally shocked by his wild and carefree behavior. What was
funny was when Aristol started splashing water at the other kids. A water
war broke out instantly. All the children were laughing and splashing each
other with total abandon. Even some of the parents were laughing. I saw
Valencia standing by the shore, watching it all happen around her. Her
face bore no note of gladness at the current events and this puzzled me. I
eased up next to her and stood watching the children splashing around in
the river.
"Why so down, Valencia?" I asked.
"I'm fine,” she mumbled quietly.
"Then why do you look so sad?"
“I’m not.”

38

“You look like you are.”
Pausing to gaze out at the children at play, she finally said what
was on her mind. "I did that."
"Really? How?" I was quite interested in why she believed she
was responsible for the lightheartedness taking place before us.
"I was talking to Aristol all day. He's very open to suggestion."
"And what did you suggest?" I teasingly prodded.
A tiny smile crept onto her face as she said, "I merely advised him
to loosen up a little. He seemed very nervous around me. He wouldn't
leave my side, but he never looked like he was completely at ease around
me. By the end of the day, Aristol was beyond loosened up. He went
from uneasy to relaxed to completely goofy in one day. All thanks to
me." She turned her gaze to me and looked me dead in the eyes. The
smile on her face was broader than I’d ever seen. I had apparently
mistaken her prideful, awed silence for sadness.
I kept my eyes locked on hers for a minute and then began to
examine my sister closer. She, like the other children, was covered in
mud. I managed to stay clean by working mainly in stacking blocks. I
gave her a grin and she understood immediately. She broke away and ran
into the river to join our new companions in their revelry. She waved for
me to take part in the fun but I declined. I didn't want to get any messier
than I already was.
None of the parents made any effort to pull their children away.
They didn't really need to as the children slowly filtered out of the river
after a while. The coolness of the desert night was a welcome relief to
the searing heat we’d worked under all day. There wasn’t a cloud to be
seen, and the sky seemed to stretch on forever. The sun had all but set
and cast a dim glow onto the river. The waves flowed quietly and
changed the texture of the reflection the setting sun had spread across the
water. It hurt my head to see something so beautiful being disrupted.
The last two people were emerging from the water and I was not
surprised to see it was Aristol and Valencia. They hugged and Aristol ran
off to find his parents. She walked over to me, dripping wet from head to
toe. Before I could tell her we needed to get back home, she wrapped me
in a big hug, almost knocking the breath out of me.
"Thanks again, Vincent," she said as she released me from her
embrace. "This has been my best day yet."
"I said, don't mention it." I glanced down at my clothes and saw
that Valencia had been able to transfer a good amount of dirt and mud. I
looked back at her with annoyance and she got the hint right away. She
let out a small yelp and ran off to the hut. I knew I could catch her if I

39

really wanted to. Sometimes, though, it was the thrill of the chase, not the
capture.
I was laughing so hard at Valencia's antics as we weaved through
the village that my sides hurt. She was in tears as well from her gales of
laughter. Although I believed in order, I was still basically a child and
inclined to act as one. Chasing my sister around, and enjoying it
nonetheless, made me feel good. Granted, our father would’ve said I was
being disorderly but I had to disagree. She was being disorderly, as she
was prone to do, changing directions on me constantly throughout the
chase. Trying to stop her, by my definition, is orderly. At least, it
would've been orderly if I'd actually been trying harder to catch her.
Our revelry ended when we reached the hut. I grabbed her arm,
thereby ending the chase. As soon as I had her under control physically,
we were both still laughing hysterically, our father came out of the hut.
His eyes burned with such intensity that our laughter ceased immediately.
"Valencia, get inside," he growled at her. She quickly scooted past
him into the hut.
"What about me?" I asked.
"Wait here. This won't take long."
I did as I was told as The Beholder went back inside to have a
private chat with Valencia. I had a bad feeling about what was going to
happen but didn't want to disobey my father for fear of being on the
receiving end of his wrath. It wasn't long before my suspicions were
confirmed. I could hear The Beholder furiously reprimanding her. I
decided then and there to keep an eye on the situation before it got out of
hand.
I peeked inside and saw no one present, so I concluded they must
be in Valencia's room. I quietly snuck inside and stood just outside her
entranceway. The shouting wasn't limited to our father, much to my
surprise. Valencia was giving voice to her gripes as well.
"If you'd let me actually talk to people, I wouldn't need to bother
Vincent!" she screamed at him.
"You will only speak to whom I tell you to!" he shouted back.
"And that would be no one! How am I supposed to learn
anything that way?"
I peered inside briefly and saw Valencia standing tall against our
father. Tall for her isn't very tall at all but I admired her resolve.
"You will learn what I choose to teach you, is that clear?"
"No, it isn't. Why do you help out Vincent and not me? Why
does he get to learn on his own?"
"Because he's more important than you!" Before Valencia could

40

respond, The Beholder continued his rebuke. "You are nothing in the
grand scheme of the universe. The only reason you're here right now is
because I had to bring you along if I wanted Vincent. You are nothing, as
far as I'm concerned. It's not worth my time to teach anything to
someone as insignificant as you."
"Insignificant? I'm insignificant?" she barked.
"It means…"
"I know what it means!" she cried out in anger. I peeked back
into the room and wasn't the least bit shocked to see Valencia's eyes
glowing a brighter green than I’d ever seen before. "It means you think
I'm worthless. Well let me tell you something, father. You're the one
that's insignificant. There are only two people like me and my brother on
this entire planet, with two more waiting to arrive sometime in the future.
There are ten of you Ancients. You tell me, who matters more?"
The Beholder raised his hand to strike her and I honestly hoped
that he would stay his hand again. He didn't. I didn't know exactly how
fast I could move until I saw my father's hand arcing downward towards
my sister's face. In a flash I was in the room, grasping The Beholder's
arm with both hands.
"No," was all I said as I looked into his eyes. There was disbelief
in those eyes, as well as disappointment.
"Vincent, this is none of your concern," he said as I tightened my
grip. I had no doubt he could've slipped out of my grasp at any time.
"My sister is my concern, as well as yours. You won't hit her." I
let go of his arm and added, "Ever."
The Beholder was visibly irate. "You think you can tell an
Ancient what to do, child? I think not." In one fluid motion, he again
raised his hand and started to swing. I didn't know if Valencia was frozen
out of shock or if she just didn't care, but she remained in place the entire
time. This time someone else came to her rescue.
As his hand came crashing down, a rumbling sound began
underfoot. It sounded like the charge of hundreds of visceral beasts,
primal and foreboding. A pillar of Dark Flame arose from the ground
behind The Beholder and from out of the flames stepped forth Wraith.
At ten feet in height, Wraith barely fit in the hut. His horns,
curled and black, scraped the ceiling causing bits of reeds and mud to fall
on us. I watched as he physically shrank down to about seven feet in
height, thereby giving him more maneuverability. He glanced at us, and
his eyes burned with the black fires of Haedes itself. I jumped back in
utter fear, grabbing Valencia by the arm as I did. My sister and I crashed
into the wall as I saw Wraith reach out and grab our father by the throat.

41

The Beholder was no more than a rag doll in Wraith’s grasp.
Anger, tinged with sheer madness, radiated from my father’s stare. He
raised his arm to defend himself as the demon spoke.
“Don’t even bother!” he bellowed and threw him through the wall
of the hut. The Beholder tumbled a good ten yards away and came to rest
face down in the dirt. Wraith stormed out of the opening in the wall after
him. “What did you think you were going to do, Ancient? Strike her?
Beat her like a dog? Have you completely lost your mind this time?”
“They are my children,” he replied, regaining his senses and
standing. Valencia and I ran over to the hole in the wall to get a better
view.
“They are my kin!” Wraith cried and charged. The Beholder
instantly disappeared and reappeared in the hut behind us.
Our father spun us around and said, “Leave us. Now!”
“No!” shouted Wraith, now standing close by. “Stay, children.
Listen and learn.” His voice was now a low growl, fierce and overflowing
with rage. “Just step out of the way.”
“Okay,” Valencia chirped and skipped over to the entranceway
into the hall. I followed her, a whole lot less enthusiastically.
“I’m going to enjoy watching your body soak in a pool of your
own blood,” Wraith snarled at The Beholder. “I should’ve taken care of
you for good eons ago.”
“This isn’t your concern, Fallen One,” The Beholder stated with
contempt.
“You should know better than anyone else what my
responsibilities are. My sister asked me to watch out for them and I will
not let her down again. You will not now, or ever, lay a hand on them in
anger. Do you understand?” Wraith’s growl had grown in veracity, his
eyes burning brighter black, if that was actually possible.
The Beholder stood his ground and replied, “The prophecies are
more important than your duties to your sister, Fallen One.”
“Stop calling me that!” Wraith screamed at him. Black fire shot
from Wraith’s outstretched hands but The Beholder was able to move out
of the way unharmed. “You have no right to speak of other’s misdeeds.”
“Maybe not,” The Beholder responded, circling the demon. “But
what really gnaws at your soul is that you never had any real power over
me. You speak of destroying me. Me? An Ancient! You don’t have the
power.” The Beholder looked the demon in the eyes and said, “I will do
what I have to do.”
“Then so will I.” Instantly, hellfire rose from the ground around
The Beholder’s feet and quickly engulfed him. He screamed as the flames

42

began to sear his flesh. In the blink of an eye he was gone, reappearing
behind Wraith. He raised his hands, palms out and facing Wraith’s back.
With a twitch of his hand, Wraith was sent flying straight up into the air.
He soared through the thatched palm-leaf roof, flipped head over heels,
and crashed down head first onto the dirt floor. Wraith swiftly regained
his footing and raced at The Beholder before he could slip away again and
slammed into his chest shoulder-first. They both went hurtling into the
wall, just missing the opening they’d made earlier. Wraith once again
lifted our father by the throat and said, “Are we finished yet?”
There was blood dripping from underneath The Beholder’s mask.
Crimson droplets fell onto Wraith’s arm and around his feet. “We are,”
he weakly replied.
Wraith released his hold on our father and he collapsed on the
floor. I started to run over to see if he was all right when Wraith bent
down to him. I could hear them whispering to one another but couldn’t
make out what was being said. Much to my surprise, Wraith helped my
father to his feet and led him outside through the opening in the wall. I
carefully made my way that direction, more curious about my father’s
condition than before. As I neared the opening, Wraith returned, alone.
Without a word, he waved for me to go back and stand with my sister. I
was not going to argue.
“Your father asked me to stay here with the two of you for a
while. He has some business he has to take care of.”
“You protected me. Thank you,” Valencia chimed in.
In a gesture that sent me reeling, Wraith smiled. “No thanks are
necessary, little one. I was only fulfilling my duties.” Valencia actually
smiled back and, oddly, I wasn’t surprised. Wraith turned to me and said,
“You were right to interfere when he tried to strike your sister, Vincent.
He has neither cause nor claim that allows him such measures.”
“Will he be all right?” I asked.
“He’ll be fine. He’s out getting better right now.”
Before I could ask what that entailed, my sister interrupted. “Hey!
What’s this?” Valencia asked from behind the demon.
Wraith wheeled around, but apparently not in time to stop
Valencia from pilfering a large book from his possession. Valencia
jumped to the side, avoiding his grasp easily, as Wraith was trying to stop
her yet not hurt her. As big as he was, that had to be a challenge. She
opened the book and as soon as she did, she looked like she may drop it.
I detected a glint of anger in Wraith’s eyes, but it may have just been
annoyance.
"That is my book, Valencia," he growled at her, "And you would

43

do well to give it back."
“It’s heavy,” she commented, ignoring his plea. Wraith's hand
moved in a flash and snatched the book from my sister's grasp as she was
reading. He then strapped the book to his side where he'd had it secured
earlier.
"What does 'Iolcam Coraxo Telocvovim' mean?" Valencia asked.
Wraith shook his head in regret and said, "Those are words you
should not repeat aloud, little one. It is a summoning spell."
"Really?" Valencia asked excitedly. "Who does it summon?"
Wraith and I exchanged a weary glance. I whispered to him,
"Remember, I have to live with her."
Directing his attention once again to my sister, Wraith informed
her that the summoning spell was his and to use it carefully. "I don't want
you to call upon me unless it is a dire situation. Having me appear in this
realm," he said with disgust, "without good cause will severely affect our
relationship. Do you understand?"
Valencia nodded furiously, just happy to have finally learned
something other than languages. I was still worried about our father.
Wraith assured me that when he got back, he'd be fine. In an attempt to
change the topic, Wraith regaled us with stories of our family, namely his
brothers and sisters. It seems that there has been infighting amongst our
family since the dawn of time.
As Wraith was finishing up a tale about Loathe and his attempt to
defeat Cherub's armies, The Beholder returned. There was still blood
caked on his chin and there was a steady stream of droplets falling from
underneath his mask.
"Wraith, you can go. I'm better now," he said upon entering. His
walk was slower, as if his legs had turned to stone. There was still a
marked strength in his eyes and his voice carried the commanding tone I'd
grown accustom to hearing.
"I'd prefer not," he replied. The Beholder took a tentative step
towards Wraith and the demon raised his hand to stop him. "I would like
to do something before I go and I needed you to get here before I could."
"And what would that be?"
Without addressing The Beholder, Wraith uttered a short phrase
in a tongue I didn't recognize. Instantly, the room was filled with Dark
Flame. From these flames emerged several men, all small in stature and
dressed in black robes. They had hoods shading their faces yet I was able
to sneak a peek at one of them. I fell backwards into my sister when I
saw his eyes. They held the same inky blackness as Wraith's, telling me
even though these new arrivals looked passive, I shouldn't underestimate

44

them. Wraith made a few hand gestures and rapidly his minions got to
work rebuilding the hut.
"These are the Dark Clerics. They will repair all the damage done
here this evening," Wraith explained. With time barely moving now that
my sister, my father and I were all present inside the hut, the repairs could
take years and it would seem like seconds to the unknowing observer.
Wraith’s servants were well suited for the task. Since greater forces than
the hand of man built this hut, majickal means were more compatible. As
I watched the clerics run about, working on their assignments, I felt
myself smile. Everything was getting back in order.
The clerics made short work of the repairs and the hut looked
sturdier from their efforts. I mentioned this to Wraith and he informed
me that their one purpose in being was to please him. He certainly looked
pleased. Wraith was smiling and I assumed it was because of the clerics. I
was wrong.
Wraith dismissed the clerics and they evaporated in a plume of
Dark Flame. The demon then turned to The Beholder and said, "This has
been your warning, Ancient. You would be wise to heed it."
The Beholder was motionless, his anger paralyzing him. When he
spoke, the words oozed forth. "Your warning has been heard. Now,
leave."
Wraith's smile grew wider, his face stretching to contain its
unnatural expression. Without a word, he was gone, leaving nothing
behind except the odor of death and sulphur.
The three of us were once again alone in the hut. Our father was
still standing as he had been when Wraith departed. Valencia and I were
standing by the newly repaired wall. His back was to us and my sister was
making faces at him. He spun around, missing the last face she made, and
said, "There is no lesson this evening. Go to bed."
“We’re in my room,” Valencia reminded him.
“Just leave!” he shouted.
I obeyed right away and began to leave. Valencia wasn't moving
as swiftly as I was, so I grabbed her by the arm and pulled her out of the
room with me over her loud objections. I dragged her into my room
kicking and screaming. I gently pushed her down and told her to be quiet.
To my surprise, she complied.
I paced around the room, glancing out the entranceway repeatedly
to see if our father was listening. Apparently, he’d left the hut as soon as
we were out of the room because he was nowhere to be seen. "Are you
trying to get our father killed?"
"He can't be killed, stupid. He's immortal like us."

45

"Don't call me stupid, Valencia," I rebuked, glaring down at her
on the floor.
"But he is immortal."
"Yes, he is. And that means he can't be killed. But did you ever
stop to think that having him mad at us, especially you, might not be a
good thing?"
"He can't kill us," was her glib reply.
"But he can put us down. Did you know that?" The puzzled look
on her face told me that she didn't. "We can't be killed, as you said, but if
you would’ve been paying attention that first night you would've learned
that we can be put down."
"What do you mean?"
"There are ways to keep our bodies and our spirits separate.
Quartering your heart and keeping each section in a blessed, silver
chamber will do the trick. As long as the four parts of the heart are not
reconstructed, you will be as close to dead as you can get. Do you want
him to do that?" She shook her head frantically. "I didn't think so. From
now on, try not to get our father so upset. Wraith won't always be able to
save you. And neither will I."
Valencia stared back at me blankly, letting my advice sink in. She
stood up and, without a word, left my room and went to hers. I sat alone
in my room, thankful that everyone was still in one piece. Our father had
taken a severe beating at Wraith's hands. He seemed to have recovered
well enough. I couldn’t help but wonder why Wraith deemed us
important enough to protect like he did. That was never explained to us,
other than to say we are his kin, his blood. We're of The Beholder's
blood as well though. It was all too confusing. For a brief moment, I
though about discussing it with Valencia in the morning. She was an
expert at dealing with confusion. My momentary lapse of reason passed
and I tried to get some sleep.
Sleep once again did not find me. Last night's encounter had sent
my mind reeling and as morning broke I still hadn't put everything
together in a way I could make sense of. Preferring not to dwell on it, I
got ready to get back to my daily routine. I felt better having a set agenda
for the day. I would go down to the river, set the other children to their
tasks and get to work. The very idea brought a smile to my face.
Valencia apparently didn't sleep last night either. She was actually
waiting for me to get around. "It's about time you woke up," she said as I
emerged from my room.
"I wasn't sleeping," I mumbled in reply.

46

she did.

"I know," she said cheerfully, bouncing on the balls of her feet as

"Then why…" and I stopped. To continue on was sheer
foolishness when I already knew the answer. I slowly rubbed my
forehead as I felt a headache coming on. I lowered my head and
muttered, "Let's just go."
Valencia enthusiastically agreed and we made our way down to the
riverside. She was skipping merrily along as I trudged on behind her. As
we neared the river she stopped abruptly. I wasn't paying attention and
ran into her, almost knocking her over. Before I could ask what was
wrong, she was pointing in the direction of the river and stammering
uncontrollably. I looked to where she was pointing and saw our father
sitting on a log next to the large pile of blocks.
"Why is he here?" she demanded.
"I have no idea. Wait here and I'll see."
I left Valencia and went over to our father. Several children had
already gathered together and started making blocks. I even saw Ihmo
directing other children on how to properly build a wall. They were
working well yet I couldn't help but feel like something was amiss. As I
neared my father I figured it out. The children weren't talking to each
other with the same enthusiasm as they had before. Conversations were
short, clipped. There was a general feeling of sorrow in their words and
actions.
I reached my father and asked him what he was doing down here.
"I'm just here for the lesson," he replied. When I asked him what he
meant, he just said I'd find out soon enough. Realizing I was not going to
get any further explanation, I wandered over to Ihmo. As soon as I left
my father’s side Valencia ran over to join me.
Ihmo was guiding three children in the creation of a sidewall. The
only words coming forth from him were work related. Even those words
seemed like they were forced out of his mouth, a noticeable tone of
sadness and loss behind them. I caught his eye as he was working and
they were red and puffy. He had been crying and I wanted to know why.
I glanced at Valencia and she shrugged. I assumed she noticed the same
things I did and was just as confused. Lucky for her, she dealt with it a lot
better than I did. We eased over to Ihmo as he watched over his helpers.
“Are you okay Ihmo?” I asked. He stared out past the work area
and over the river, standing as still as a statue. I looked over at Valencia
and nudged her. She got the message.
Valencia slid up next to Ihmo, put her arm around his shoulder
and gently pulled him close. He leaned against her as she whispered,

47

“What’s wrong, Ihmo? You can tell me.”
Ihmo wiped fresh tears from his face, streaking mud across his
cheeks. “A friend of ours was killed last night by some savage beast. His
father as well.”
“That’s horrible!” she responded, utterly dismayed by the news.
“His mother is all alone, grieving over her lost family. I feel worse
for her than I do for myself, to be honest.”
I had made my way over to Ihmo’s other side and I found myself
smiling at his declaration. Here was a mere child, having just lost a friend,
worrying about his dead friend’s mother. My heart was filled with pride
and admiration for Ihmo and I knew then and there that I would call him
my friend all his days on Earth. “We’ll see to her, won’t we Valencia?” I
said. She nodded supportively. “Who was the unfortunate child?”
“Aristol,” he replied.
Valencia’s arm jumped off Ihmo’s shoulder as if his body had
suddenly caught fire. “Wait. Didn’t he work with me yesterday?”
“I think he did.”
“Where’s his mother?” she urgently asked.
Ihmo gave her directions and she took off. Her concern was
heartening and I knew it was genuine. Aristol was the first person she’d
really established any type of relationship with, even if it was just one day.
I also knew she wanted to see where it happened and try to figure out
what caused his death. I already had my suspicions.
I turned around and looked back at my father. He was standing
to get a better view of the proceedings. I could see his smile from where I
was standing. I told Ihmo I’d be right back and ran over to my father.
“It was you, wasn’t it? Last night, when you needed to recover,
you let out the lycan. Didn’t you?” I was practically shouting at my father
as if our roles had suddenly reversed. I expected him to lash out at me
but instead his expression never changed. Nor did he answer, not exactly.
“There was a time when I could’ve destroyed that damn demon,”
he wistfully remarked. “Not in this body, however. You see my son, the
sack of flesh I’m forced to inhabit limits me. Wraith is quite powerful,
have no doubt, but in another time I would’ve made short work of him.
Since I inhabit this lycan I am forced to deal with its limitations.”
I waited for more but nothing else was said. “You didn’t answer
my question, father. Was it you?”
“Your lesson for today, Vincent, is this: Do you tell Valencia?
You believe it was me. I can see it in your eyes as clearly as I see the sun
in the sky. Yet you have doubts. Not many, but they are there. Valencia
doesn’t even know of my unmasked form so you’d really be throwing a

48

lot of information at her at once. I wonder what would happen if your
sister, the bringer of chaos, were to get overloaded with negative
information? Do you think she could be dangerous? Neither you nor I
truly know what she’s capable of. If she reached the same conclusion as
you and thinks I killed her little friend, she might run away. Sounds
almost pleasant, doesn’t it? Problem is, you would then have the bringer
of chaos roaming freely about the planet. Is that going to help you in
accomplishing your goals, especially if she starts out filled with darkness?”
His smile never broke, remaining firmly planted on his face.
I was speechless. It was him. I knew it for a fact now. “Why did
you do it? I want to know,” I demanded, my voice soft but firm.
“I never said…”
“You said he was Valencia’s little friend. You did it to punish her,
didn’t you?”
Had I been asked, I would’ve said my father’s smile couldn’t
possibly have grown any wider. Proven wrong, he bared his feral teeth in
a grotesque smile that distorted every exposed area of his face. “Learn
your lesson, Vincent. I’m quite sure your sister has learned hers.” He
turned and left, walking back toward the village.
I wondered how I would be able to return to what I had been
working on knowing what I knew. I felt a tear roll down my cheek as I
thought of the despair my new companions must be feeling and figured
maybe working would help take their minds off of the unpleasantness. I
walked over to Ihmo as he was assisting three other children.
“Can I talk to you for a moment, my friend?” I asked him. The
three children continued on as Ihmo and I strolled a few yards away. “I
was wondering if the beast that killed Aristol was captured or killed?”
Ihmo sorrowfully shook his head. “No, my friend, it was not. No
one even saw it. It moved as if made of shadow and air. Aristol’s mother
never even woke from sleep. Her husband was sleeping in the same room
and this creature dragged him out of the room and…” He broke down
and began to cry, giving in to the tremendous weight of his sadness.
There was no shame, only pure despair and grief over his lost friend.
I reached out to comfort him but he stepped away. He was
embarrassed and I assured him there was no reason to feel that way.
“The only way you should feel any embarrassment at all would be if you
didn’t cry. That would be a disgrace and would dishonor your friend’s
memory.”
Ihmo wiped away his tears, streaking more mud on his cheeks.
Most of his face was caked in the stuff. “Thank you, Vincent. Your
support is greatly cherished.”

49

“And it is always available whenever it is needed. Now, shall we
get ourselves back to work and build our playhouses in his memory?”
Ihmo smiled for the first time today and replied, “It will be the
best built structures in all the land.”
We walked back, heads held high. Ihmo went around talking to
every single child that had shown up and telling them to honor Aristol
with our work. Everyone readily accepted this idea and it quickly became
the most productive day of work yet. The cloudy sky and cooler air
helped a lot too.
The only hitch was when Valencia came back. I caught her before
she could talk to anyone else and asked her how the widow was doing.
Valencia was visibly depressed by the day’s events but filled me in on her
condition. She also reaffirmed what Ihmo had told me earlier about the
stealth and brutality of the killer. Tears began to slowly roll down her
cheek as she told me of seeing the body. The savagery she described was
beyond horrific. She said she needed to see the body to truly face the fact
that her friend was dead. Unfortunately, it brought her no comfort.
Dark clouds dotted much of the sky, but there was plenty of
daylight left. Valencia decided to go to the other end of the village, where
I’d found her the other day, and sit by the riverside alone with her
thoughts. I told her I’d come for her at sunset and she set off down the
main path of the village.
I never told her about our father’s role in the deaths.

50

Chapter 4
My first day on Earth I came down to the riverside and ended up
making blocks out of the mud. I found it funny, looking back, that doing
something as simple as that led to what was now being built along the
river. Every day, more and more walls got started. Every morning there
were more children willing to spend the day working. Most of the
remaining children in the village joined our group after Aristol’s death.
They wanted to pay tribute to their friend.
The real surprise was when the parents showed up. At first they
would only stop by to get their children at the end of the day. Once
progress on the buildings was noticeable, more of them would drop by,
outwardly to check on their kids but in reality to inspect our work. When
the first building was finished, a few of the parents helped line the roof
with thatched reeds and palm leaves.
My sanctuary was complete. The day we finished it, Ihmo proudly
stood by the entrance and escorted me in. It was nothing special once
you were inside. It was one room shaped in a square, ten feet by ten feet.
The ceiling was flat and eight feet above the ground; making it actually
lower than the hut I resided in. It wasn’t the size of the room or the
simplicity of it that made it special. It was that we had built it and it was
solid. I heard one of the parents talking to another about how sturdy the
walls looked and they were both clearly impressed by our work.
Valencia was at the other end of the project, which now stretched
a fair distance along the river. I yelled for her, knowing that she was too
far away to hear me. One of us was always yelling for the other, so the
children in between would pass the message along. I waited patiently as
she took her time.
“What do you want now? I’m working!” she shouted at me as she
approached.
“It’s finished.”
She looked over and saw that we had indeed finished the first
building. “Great. Can I go back to work now?”
“In a moment. I just wanted to tell you that this is mine. Do you
understand?”
“Sure. It’s yours. Whatever. Can I go back now?” Valencia
seemed quite eager to return to what she was doing.
“Why are you in such a hurry?”
“I was in the middle of something when you called for me.”
“What are you doing down there?” I asked suspiciously.
She grinned and lowered her head slightly, causing her hair to fall

51

over her eyes, blocking them from my view. “Building things,” she
quietly replied.
“What kind of things?” I pushed.
Valencia straightened up and proudly stated, “You’ll see when it’s
done. Now, can I get back to it?”
“Sure. As long as you remember that this place is mine…”
“Right, right, it’s yours. I told you before I wouldn’t mess with
your end of the project and that included the finished product. I gave you
my word and I intend to keep it.” With that, she turned and ran off to
resume her project.
I found it heartening to hear my sister promise to keep her word
to me. Granted, she never used the word promise but the meaning was
the same. I was willing to bet she would go back on her word, without
pause, to anyone in the world but me. We may differ in our goals,
personalities, likes, dislikes, attitudes, the list goes on and on, but through
it all we were family. There were no other beings on this planet right now
like us, so we stuck together. We would probably never truly get along,
but at least we had some mutual respect.
The Beholder wasn't constantly watching us anymore and we only
saw him at night for our daily language lesson. Valencia and I picked up
the foreign tongues with the greatest of ease. We would practice all the
time when we were alone. We didn't like to talk in other languages
around the locals for fear it might arouse suspicion. I hadn't ventured
into the village in a while, preferring to concentrate on the building
project. The Beholder said he spent most of his time in the village talking
up the local leaders. Maybe I was avoiding the village so I wouldn't run
into him. It was a theory I simply couldn't discount. Ever since Wraith
showed up that night there'd been an underlying tension between the
three of us. The main friction was between Valencia and The Beholder
with me being caught in the middle. I had ill feelings for my father ever
since the day he killed Aristol. Valencia still didn't know it was our father
and if I had my way she never would.
I decided to take a stroll into the village today. I hadn't really had
an opportunity to explore it thoroughly. The only time I'd really been
through the village was when I went searching for Valencia. I was
moving so quickly at the time I didn't see much of anything other than
huts. This time I would be casual, examining every detail of the village. If
I could get the children working together I could probably get the adults
to do the same. I just needed to know how much I had to start with and
how much I'd need to help them.
I was astounded by what I saw in the village. Many of the adults

52

that had ventured down to the riverside to observe us as we worked were
using the knowledge they gained to improve the village. It wasn't just the
adults though. Every time I saw an adult planning out a new home there
was a child standing alongside. I quietly observed one child telling his
father how to support the walls by planting the base into the ground. His
father then began to do as his child instructed. I smiled as I watched this
and continued on. I saw a few more children coaching their parents in
the ways of construction. In every instance, both parent and child were
beaming with pride.
I knew I shouldn't have felt bad about it, but seeing parents and
children working together depressed me. There was no way I'd ever enjoy
that feeling. I couldn't work cooperatively with my sister. It just wasn't
meant to be. My other siblings weren't present on this plane of existence
yet so I didn't even know if I could work with them or not. I could
always join up with my father. I didn't know his intentions for my sister
and me, and a sense of foreboding overwhelmed me when I thought
about it. I wanted to believe my father wasn't a bad person. I just wasn’t
sure if what I believed and what was truth were the same.
A couple of children came running up to me as I wandered
through the village. They were very hyper, jumping up and down
constantly as if their feet were afraid of the ground. One of them, a tike
named Shi'ial, dragged me over to his hut to show me what he and his
father were doing. I went along willingly but that didn't stop Shi'ial from
pulling my arm to make me move faster. If I really wanted to show off I
could’ve run circles around him. I resisted the temptation however.
Shi'ial had been responsible for thatching reeds and palm leaves together
to make roofs for the buildings we were working on. He was quick for
his age and very efficient. He had apparently taught his father how to
make the better roofing material and he was now replacing all the old,
weather-beaten bits and pieces of his old roof with new, sturdier material.
I commended them both on their efforts and continued on my way.
It was good to see the villagers making improvements on their
own. I thought I would have to show them how to get their community
in order but they took the initiative and did it themselves. I slowed my
pace as I pondered the work they'd started. Time ran away from me as I
was lost in my own thoughts. In a blink, daylight turned to dusk. More
time had surely passed but I had no memory of it. I found myself at the
far end of the village near where I'd found Valencia many nights before. I
chuckled softly and casually strolled over to where she'd been sitting that
night. I looked out at the river as the sun was setting. The sight before
my eyes made my worries disappear. It was the most spectacular display

53

of color I'd ever seen. From brilliant shades of yellow to the darkest
orange, the glow of the setting sun reflected off the ripples of the river.
Bright rays of sunlight flashed into my eyes as the river directed the light
onto the shore. There were fish popping up out of the water to feast on
the insects hovering above the surface. Whenever a fish would come up
for a meal it would cause more ripples in the water. It was more chaotic
than I usually preferred, but there was an underlying order to it all as well.
I was watching the last throes of the day, cast by the sun onto the river in
a desperate attempt to continue. As light shot off of the river in all
directions, trying in vain to prolong the inevitable, it wandered into the
realm of the chaotic for one final gasp. Then the light was gone. The sun
had set and darkness now claimed the river as its own. Order, once again,
was restored.
I sat on the log and stared out over the river. Occasionally
another fish would jump up for a quick snack but otherwise all was calm.
I was so relaxed that when a large fish lunged out of the water, causing a
big splash as it re-entered, I almost fell off of the log. I didn't actually see
the fish but it had to be huge. I watched the river intently, hoping he
would make another appearance. Suddenly another splash erupted and I
realized it wasn't a fish. I craned my head around and saw my sister
bending down to pick up another rock.
"I thought it was a fish," I commented meekly.
"That would be one gigantic fish," she replied, grinning wildly.
The look on her face made me nervous. The laughter in her eyes had me
downright worried. She even let out a little giggle as she walked over to
where I was seated.
"What are you so happy about? Did you get a lot done on your
end of the project today?"
"Yes, I did, but that's not why I'm smiling," she said. Her voice
had a lilting, musical quality to it.
"All right. I give up. Why are you smiling?"
"Because of what I get to say." She was barely containing her
laughter and would burst any second if she didn't let it out.
"And that is…" I prodded.
"Our father is looking for you," and that was it. She didn't even
have the last word out before she cracked.
I felt my own laughter begin to build as I replied, "No, he isn't.
You are." My laughter gushed forth and flowed as easily as the river
before me.
"Same thing," she retorted.
"It is not!"

54

"Is too!"
Both of us were overcome with laughter now. My sides were even
beginning to hurt. I felt tears cascade down my face and couldn't seem to
wipe them away fast enough. Valencia was shaking so badly from
laughing that when she went to sit down on the log she nearly missed. It
took us a few minutes to regain our composure and I was extremely
thankful no one else was around. We must've looked like complete fools.
Valencia wiped the last of her tears away and said, "Seriously, he is
looking for you. We should get back."
"In a moment. How did you know I was here?"
"I didn't. I just wandered around. It was just blind luck."
"It is nice here, isn't it?"
"Sure is. I didn't think you'd like it very much. That lightshow
had to be irritating."
"Strangely, I kind of liked it. It was the way it ended. All that
chaos giving way to the order of darkness." I glanced over to see my
sister giving me a very disapproving look. "Nothing personal," I added.
"I understand. That's the part I don't care for. I usually start
throwing in rocks as soon as the sun sets. That way, the chaos of the
waves can soothe me."
"I find the symmetry of the waves quite orderly."
"It disrupts the stillness of the water. I like that," she said
wistfully.
“Haven’t we had this argument before?”
Silence settled over us as we watched the gently flowing river.
After a few minutes, just as I was about to recommend that we head
home, Valencia asked, "We aren't going to get along when we get older,
are we?"
"Probably not," I unemotionally replied. "You and I want
different things."
"Just because I want chaos and you want order means we can't get
along?"
"Pretty much. Besides, we don't get along all that well now and
we've only been here a short time."
"That's petty stuff though."
"Right. What's going to happen when the bigger issues come into
play?" I asked.
"We can work it out."
"With you doing the exact opposite of what I'm doing? That's not
going to work out well at all."
"Wait a minute. You don't like me, do you? Be honest," she

55

asked, pouting.
"I don't like what you are meant to do. It interferes with what I
have to do."
"Do you even know what we're meant to do? You don't, do
you?" She was screaming at me, upset with the truths I was telling her.
"Not exactly, but I have an idea. When our father was yelling at
you a few nights ago, I heard him say how you weren't important. Before
you start in on me, let me say I think he's wrong. But he was hinting that
I am important. I read some scrolls…"
"What scrolls?" she interjected, slightly calmer.
"Just some scrolls. Father left them lying around and I took a
quick glance at them. I didn't understand all of what I read at first. The
more I thought about them, the more things made some sort of sense."
“What did the prophecy say?”
“That one of the four of us will rule the over the Earth.”
“And you think it’s referring to you?” she skeptically asked.
“Actually, I think I do.”
Valencia was unconvinced. I could tell because she was giving me
a strange look, a mixture of disbelief and concern. "Vincent, do you really
think you're meant to rule the world? I mean, be realistic. Order can
never be totally established."
"Really?"
"Yes, really. As long as I'm here, and I don't go away, order will
never be totally established. It's the same way with me. I couldn't rule
this planet if I wanted to, and I don't really think I do, because chaos
cannot be complete. There will always be chaos just as there will always
be order."
"But Valencia, I think the scrolls I read were the writings of
Propheteus himself," I added.
"So?" Clearly, my sister did not grasp the gravity of the scrolls
and their author.
"So that means they are Ancient prophecies. Prophecies come
true, especially when they come from the main Seer in the known
universe."
"And he's never wrong?"
"Never."
“Hmm,” she mumbled, clearly sill unconvinced. She stood up
and motioned for me to join her.
"Are you ready to go home now?" I inquired.
"Not yet. I want to show you something. Follow me." Valencia
led me to the edge of the water. She leaned over, picked up a big rock

56

and heaved it into the river. A gigantic spray of water shot into the air,
casting a fine mist on the wind that was cool and refreshing as it fell upon
my face. "What did you see? Did you see chaos or order? I saw chaos
because it is what I wanted to see. I saw the random patterns of the
individual drops of water. I saw the ripples get distorted as they came to
shore. I saw the initial stillness of the river disrupted by that rock. What
did you see?"
"I saw the ripples drift out on the water in perfect circles," I
replied. "I saw the arc of the stone as you threw it and knew where it
would land. I saw more ripples formed by the spray and watched as the
smaller circles gave way to the more powerful ones."
"Vincent, that’s not what you saw," she said softly, looking up at
me, "I know, because we both saw the same thing."
"What?"
"All you or I saw was a rock being thrown into the river.
Everything else we looked for, we thought about. We saw the same thing
but we explain what we saw in terms we like. There was chaos in what I
did and there was order. In everything, there is always order and chaos.
One cannot exist without the other. The prophecies are the same way.
You can see whatever you want to in them and interpret them as fits your
needs. With that in mind, do you still believe that you are the one the
prophecy spoke of?"
I smiled, much to my surprise. My sister could really get into your
head when she talked. She did make sense and that was what worried me.
"How did you figure all that out anyway?"
She smiled back at me and replied, "I've been talking to Aristol's
mother lately. She's sort of adopted me since Aristol died. She's the
smartest woman I've met in the village and she's taught me a few things.
I'm not the dummy I used to be," she informed me, beaming with pride.
"I never said you were a dummy, Valencia. I may have thought it
but I never said it." I laughed and took off running. Thankfully, I could
run faster than she could throw because she tossed a rock at me in
response to my comment. I wasn't even running at full speed, which I'd
found out lately was incredibly fast. I was laughing the entire time she
chased me back to the hut. If we weren't destined to get along in the
future, the present would have to do.
Our father was waiting for us as usual. He had given up on
getting upset at us for our tardiness. He did chastise Valencia on one
other occasion since our visit from Wraith. Valencia stood her ground,
making The Beholder seethe with anger. Safe in the fact that he wouldn't

57

dare hit her, Valencia verbally ripped into him as much as he was ripping
into her. It ended well, no one got hurt, but we didn't get a language
lesson that night as punishment. Since learning new languages appealed
to Valencia, she did her best not to upset him again.
We followed our father inside and our lesson began. The
language tonight was very similar to the ones we'd been learning the last
couple of days. We were informed that they would be popular tongues in
the future. Having already learned all the current languages there was
nothing else left.
When our lesson ended, our father dismissed us and Valencia and
I went off to our rooms. The Beholder, normally exiting the hut as soon
as our nightly lesson was over, followed me into mine.
"Tomorrow, I want you to come with me instead of going to the
riverside," he said.
"But we're making progress!" I protested.
"I know. That's why I want you to come with me. They'll be fine
without you. I have something very important to teach you and we'll
need to be away from the village to do it."
"What are you going to teach me?" I wondered aloud.
The Beholder laughed and replied, "You will find out tomorrow,
child. Now, you need to rest." With that, he left my room and I heard
him exit the hut.
I tried to sleep but couldn't. I wanted to continue my work on the
project, but if my father wished to teach me something new I knew I had
to go. I tossed and turned, desperately trying to fall to sleep so I would be
completely prepared for my lesson. After about an hour, Valencia crept
into my room.
"What do you want, Valencia?" I asked with one eye open.
"I overheard our father change your plans for tomorrow. Sorry
about that," she sincerely replied.
I sat up and leaned against the wall. "Why do you care?" I asked.
"Now you can do whatever you want with the project. I can't stop you.
You could make the entire project your own."
"Why would I do that?" she asked, taken aback by my statements.
"Because you can. Isn't that what you do?"
"Not to you it isn't," she protested. "Besides, I've got my own
thing going on. I've been too busy doing that to give you a second
thought. So tell me, why would I now decide to ruin all you've worked
on?"
I lowered my head to avoid her accusing gaze. A wave of guilt
washed over me as I realized I may have misjudged my sister. "I'm sorry.

58

I’m just mad. I shouldn’t have taken it out on you. But you know why I
said what I did."
"Yes, I do." She sat down next to me and continued, "But you’re
my brother. We don't always get along, and knowing we will probably
despise each other as time moves on makes that a lot easier to deal with,
but I wouldn't do anything to upset you right now. We have too much to
learn, too much to work out, to be in constant conflict with each other."
"In that case, would you look in on Ihmo and Kalim every once in
a while? They may need some assistance throughout the day."
"What help would you have me give to them?" she asked with a
wink. Even at the tender age of seven, she couldn't help being a flirt.
"Just let him use some of your people if he asks, nothing more.
Do not, under any circumstances, help them yourself. One touch by you
could cause an entire wall to collapse."
"That's not true!" she claimed. "I haven't had one single wall
collapse the entire time I've been there."
"How many have you personally worked on?" I asked, eyebrow
raised in suspicion.
She sheepishly replied, "None. All I do is direct others on what to
do."
"You see?"
"Fine!" she cried out in mock anger, throwing her arms theatrically
into the air as she did. "No touching, and I'll keep an eye on things. But
you have to do something for me."
"And what's that?"
"The scrolls," she whispered.
"Scrolls?"
"Yes, the scrolls! The ones you read before. I want to see them."
This was a bad idea in the making. "I don't know where our
father put them," I lied.
"Then just tell me what they said. I'm sure you remember."
"I remember parts of them, but not all. I didn't even understand
half of what I read that night."
"But you understand now, don't you? And you remember more
than you're telling me."
"Why do you think that?"
"Because you wouldn't be trying to get me to back off if you
didn't."
She had me there. "Fine. I'll share with you what I read in the
scrolls. But if you tell anyone…"
"Who would I tell?" she interrupted.

59

"I don't know. I'm just warning you. I'm putting a lot of trust in
you, not just with the information on the scrolls but also with the
riverside project. Don't let me down."
She jumped to her feet and stood perfectly erect. She placed her
right hand over her heart and said, "You have my word and my pledge."
"Where did you learn that from?" I inquired.
"From one of the guys helping me out,” she replied, spoke at such
high speed that all her words ran together. “At first I thought he wanted
to get married or something, and I'm way too young for that, but then I
realized he was just promising to do what I'd asked. He was cute and all,
and maybe if I was older and he was older, but I was mistaken in what he
meant anyway, so…"
"Valencia", I interjected, cutting her off and saving myself from
more of her torturous rambling. I continued slowly and deliberately,
hoping she'd get the message, "Go back to your room. Go to sleep if you
can. Just go away for now. Please."
She grinned at me and said, "Am I bothering you?"
"Not as much as usual, but yes."
Her smile grew before my eyes and I expected her to continue
annoying me for a little bit longer. Instead, she silently turned and headed
out of my room. As she reached the entrance, she turned back and said,
"Everything will be fine at the project tomorrow. Trust me." The smile
on her face did not instill trust in any way.
I'd been sleeping less and less lately and last night was no
exception. I had discovered I was much more alert in the mornings if I
didn't sleep than if I did. Waking up always took so long and I ended up
feeling like my brain was filled with mud. When I stayed awake, I really
stayed awake. I spent all last night wondering about what today's
teachings from my father would be. Being away from the riverside for the
first time and actually getting a chance to venture outside of the village
was intriguing in itself. Add on that I'd be learning something more about
myself before the day was done, and I had more than enough thoughts
running around inside my head to keep me wide awake.
I left my room as soon as I heard my father return from his
evening activities. Valencia still wasn't aware of our father's lycanthropic
shell, as he liked to call it. Even stranger was that she never once asked
where he went at night. I was thankful for that small miracle but was
puzzled at the same time. I’d spend hours upon hours answering her
questions yet that one never came up. For someone who seemed to want
to know everything, and as soon as possible, to not ask about our father's

60

nightly strolls was peculiar.
"Are you ready Vincent?" he asked as I entered the main room.
"I sure am!" I excitedly replied. "So what are we going to be
doing?"
There was no reply, just his wide smile beaming back at me. He
silently exited the hut and I quickly followed him. Out of force of habit I
turned towards the river but my father promptly told me that we were
going to be going in the opposite direction. This confused me, as there
was nothing in that direction but miles and miles of sand. Kalim told me
that the desert was endless. Obviously this was an exaggeration but the
point was clear. There was nothing out there.
Kalim's words proved more than accurate. As we departed the
village and wandered out into the desert I assumed we'd happen upon
some landmark, some sign that life had been out here before. As far as I
could tell, there was nothing of the sort. The only thing I saw was sand
and it stretched as far as the eye could see. The Beholder evidently knew
where he was going because he never once paused to take in the
surroundings. Either that or the sight of miles and miles of sand held no
interest for him.
We walked for quite a while, leaving the village far behind. The
Beholder hadn't said a word since we left the hut and his silence bothered
me. I had almost mustered up the courage to ask my father where we
were going when he abruptly stopped. I was only a step or two behind
and his quick halt caught me off guard. I bumped into him, tripped and
fell to the ground.
The Beholder peered down at me as I sat on the sand, "Are you all
right?"
"I'm fine," I replied, embarrassed by my clumsiness. I stood up
and brushed off the sand.
"Then let us begin your lesson." The Beholder held up a hand,
signaling to me that I should stay put for now. He continued walking in
the direction we'd been traveling. As he walked, I saw him pull a stick out
of his satchel. The stick had a piece of cloth tied to the end of it and it
waved in the gentle breeze. I stood in place for what seemed like a long
time as I watched my father walk away. He planted the stick into the
ground almost too far away for me to see. In the blink of an eye, he was
back by my side. "By now you know that you can run very fast, but do
you know exactly how fast you can go?"
"Well, I beat a lot of the older children in the village. We were
having races the other day and I won almost every time."
"Almost?" he asked with an air of suspicion.

61

I timidly replied, "I let some of the children win. I could've
beaten them if I had really wanted to."
"I’m quite sure you could.”
"So what are we doing out here, father?"
The Beholder pointed out towards the flag he'd placed in the
ground. "Can you see the marker from here Vincent?" I nodded as he
continued, "You are going to try to get to that marker before I do."
I jumped back, shocked by this statement. "Father, you can
appear anywhere in the blink of an eye! How am I supposed to get there
before you?"
He laughed and replied, "You're fast, aren't you?"
"Yes, but not that fast!"
"Not yet." The Beholder's smile grew and his eyes echoed his
mood. "But for now, I guess I'll just have to give you a head start. Does
that sound fair to you?"
"How much of a head start?" I asked suspiciously.
"We'll do it this way. I'll tell you to start and then I'll count to
three. I won't move until I'm done counting."
"That's not a very long head start," I mentioned.
"But it’s all you will get. I want to see how fast you truly are. Are
you ready?"
"I guess so." I wasn't sure if I could reach the flag before he was
done counting but I was going to give it my best effort.
The Beholder looked out toward the flag and calmly said, "Go." I
took off like a bolt of lightning. I wasn’t sure how fast my father was
going to count so there was no way to know when he would teleport.
The flag that once seemed so far away was getting closer with every step.
I'd never run this fast before and the feeling was exhilarating. Alas, I was
not running quite fast enough. I was only a few steps from the flag when
my father appeared.
I tried to stop and lost my footing in the loose sand. I attempted
to plant my feet, failed and went tumbling. I rolled past my father, who
was now holding the flag firmly in his hand. He put forth no effort to
stop me as I rolled by. I finally stopped after what felt like an eternity but
in reality was mere seconds. When I stood up I was covered with sand. I
shook out my hair and watched the grains of sand fall back to the earth.
As I did this, The Beholder approached.
"I beat you, Vincent," he said with no joy or satisfaction in his
voice.
I continued to brush off the sand as I replied, "It's not fair. You
can teleport and I can't. I can't possibly beat you."

62

"Is that what you really believe?"
"Yes, it is. Even with a modest head start, you're still going to get
there first."
"Vincent, my teleportation has nothing to do with it. You can
beat me if you genuinely want to. All you have to do is believe."
For the first time since he almost struck Valencia, I was angry with
my father. "How am I supposed to believe that I can beat you when
everything points to the opposite?" My voice grew louder and I found
myself practically yelling at my father, "You can be there instantly! The
only advantage I have is your modest head start and that's not nearly
enough time."
"Vincent, it is actually more time than you really need. If you
believe you can get there first, you will." There was no anger in his voice,
no disappointment. He quickly teleported off into the distance, farther
away this time than the last time. He was so far away that I could barely
see him planting the flag into the ground. As soon as the flag was firmly
in the ground he teleported back. "Now this time, get there first."
"But how…"
"Go!" he commanded and I obeyed. This time I was determined
to get there first. I sprinted off toward the flag as fast as I could muster.
As I ran, I pushed myself to run harder. My legs churned faster and faster
until it felt like I was flying across the desert landscape. The flag drew
closer and closer and, just as I was almost on top of it, The Beholder
appeared. I dove for the flag, trying to snatch it away before he could
grab it. His hand was too quick and success was denied me once again.
I was face down in the sand, disappointed and angry at the same
time. I pushed myself up and brushed off the sand that had, once again,
accumulated in my hair and on my clothes. My feelings must have been
readily evident, for when my father spoke it was as if he could sense my
frustration.
"You did much better that time, Vincent. I thought you were
actually going to prevail," he remarked.
"I still failed," I replied irritably.
"You only failed to get here first, my son. On many levels, you
have succeeded far beyond what I'd hoped for."
"What do you mean?"
"The flag was closer the first time, yet I defeated you handily.
This time, there was a greater distance but you improved so much that I
barely got here first. That shows improvement."
"But not enough," I added.
"Not yet. Let's go again." In the blink of an eye, he was gone.

63

When he reappeared, he was so far away that he was a mere speck on the
horizon. My first thought was that the flag was too far, that I'd never get
there first. However, a second thought crept in that told me differently.
The Beholder wouldn't sustain this lesson if he believed I was doomed to
fail. In the same vein, he wouldn't have put the flag so far away if he
didn't think I could get there first. For the first time in my short time on
Earth, I felt my father's faith. It was like a blanket wrapped around me,
comforting and secure. In a flash, I knew I was going to make him proud
by the end of the day.
My father was once again by my side and I was eager to start. My
feet were firmly planted in the sand, the muscles in my legs taut in
anticipation. The wide smile on my father's face told me that my
preparation did not go unnoticed. When he gave the word, I was gone.
The wind whipped past me as I tore a hole in the air. I accelerated
with every stride and knew I could go even faster. My body responded to
my mind's surging confidence. The flag was rapidly approaching, growing
from its original miniscule speck to an observable presence. With no
nervousness at all, I leapt for the flag and grasped it just as my father
appeared.
The good news was I got to the flag first. The bad news was,
since I was traveling so fast, when I left my feet I didn't consider how to
land. The forces of nature took care of that as I came crashing down
onto the desert floor. I tumbled a few yards before coming to a stop and
made no immediate effort to get up. I glanced down at my hand and saw
the flag, its cloth fluttering in the breeze.
"I got it!" I cried triumphantly as I waved the flag.
"I see that," my father responded coolly.
"Aren't you proud of me, father?" I asked. His chilly attitude
troubled me.
"I'm pleased, Vincent, but not proud. You see, you were able to
best me this time by the slightest of margins. I believe you can do better."
"Better?" I was stunned. I couldn't figure out what he wanted
from me. "I just ran faster than I'd ever dreamed possible and you think I
can do better? How fast is fast enough, father?"
My father was unfazed by my outburst. "My son, you do not truly
comprehend what you are capable of. You must keep in mind that you
are not yet fully developed physically. This limits what you can do. There
will come a time, however, when time itself will mean nothing at to you at
all."
"I don't understand," I commented.
"I know you don't. You see, I can sense the power in you. I

64

know what you will be able to do as time passes. Once your body has had
a chance to develop, you will move faster than the wind. You will be
capable of traveling at speeds mortals simply cannot fathom. To you, it
will appear as if time has stood still. In reality, time continues. You just
run alongside it."
I looked at my legs in wonder at what I'd be able to do with them
as I got older. The words of my father rang true to me, as if he were
speaking of deeds already done. I would run faster than the wind. I
believed it. I would run so fast that others seemed to be standing still. I
completely believed it. I had faith that no mortal would ever be faster
than me. Even at this tender age, I knew I could outrun anyone and
anything. I had faith in my abilities and that my abilities would only
improve over time. I believed.
I jumped up from the sand, energized like never before. I was
ready, willing and eager for more tests. "You want another chance,
father?" I asked confidently.
A grin accompanied his affirmative reply. He teleported and this
time I had no idea where he'd gone. I scanned my surrounding, trying to
pinpoint his location. Before I could find him, he was back. He pointed
out into the barren land and told me the flag was in that direction. Since I
couldn’t see the flag, he gave me until the count of four this time. The
result was the same as the last time, except this time I won by a large
margin. I didn't even have to dive at the flag. I had successfully uprooted
the flag and was calmly awaiting his arrival when my father appeared.
This time his pride was obvious. "Very good, Vincent!" he
beamed. "Now let's try something different. Take a look around and tell
me what you see."
I did as I was told and was quickly sorry about it. There was
nothing to see but an ocean of sand. "There's nothing out here. Is there
supposed to be?"
My father laughed and replied, "No, Vincent, you see exactly what
I meant for you to see. For your average mortal, we are a few days walk
to the village. We are in the middle of a vast desert. Scattered about
along the rivers that cut through the desert are villages. There aren't many
and we won't see any of them today. Other than those villages, there is
nothing, no landmarks, and no markers of any kind to guide you along.
"Now, what I am going to do is teleport. I will be nice enough to
tell you what direction I'm going in to start. Once I appear I will count to
five. If you have not reached me by the time the countdown is done, I
will teleport again in a random direction. If you get close enough to see
me you will see me point out the next direction. Your task is to catch

65

me."

"That won't be easy," was my surprisingly calm retort.
"Nothing worthwhile is." He raised his arm and pointed off into
the distance, "I'm going that way. Find me." I blinked and he was gone.
His sudden departure caught me off guard and I wasted a precious
sliver of time in hesitation. Quickly composing myself, I darted off in the
direction my father had indicated. My speed increased as I silently kept a
paced count in my own head. When I reached four I saw him on the
horizon. I had halved the distance between us as I heard my internal
countdown end. When it did, my father raised his arm and pointed to his
left. In a blink he was gone.
I had not yet tried to turn when running this fast but it was
actually easier than I'd imagined. My footing seemed better the faster I
ran. I was concentrating on my maneuvering as I made the turn, keeping
me upright and on track. Once pointed in the correct direction, I picked
my speed up again. Once again, just I neared my father he teleported
away.
The chase lasted for what felt like days. The sun never set though,
and I kept running. Sometimes I would get so close I could almost touch
him before he'd teleport. Other times, I would barely see what direction
he was pointing before he was gone. I lost track of how many times I'd
changed directions. I had no clue how far away from the village I was
anymore either. None of this mattered one bit. I was running after my
father, and when I was running the world went away. After so many close
calls and near misses, I finally caught him.
"Your countdown has already expired, Vincent. You didn't catch
me in time," he remarked.
"I thought so. So why did you stop?"
"Because we're home."
I looked around and saw that we were indeed back on the path to
the village. "I'm quite pleased with your progress today, Vincent." With a
proud smile on his face, my father turned and walked toward the village.
We were at the end closest to our hut and my construction project. I
gazed around in wonder, trying to wrap my mind around how far I'd run
today and how quickly we were able to get back to the village. Mortals
wouldn't be able to cover the ground I did if given thirty days and nights
to do it. I repressed a smile at the thought as I followed my father home.

66

Chapter 5
The hut was empty when we got back, which meant Valencia was
still working down by the river. I was exhilarated at what I'd been able to
achieve today. I could tell by my father's demeanor that he was quite
pleased with the results as well. My training was picking up, the project
was coming along nicely and I felt like a king among men. Everything
appeared to be following a long, well-tuned plan. Elated with everything
so far, I asked my father about what lie ahead.
"It's funny you should ask that, Vincent," he replied. "I was going
to wait until your sister returned, but I may as well tell you now. We are
going to be leaving for Atlantia in the morning."
"Atlantia?" I asked, confused. "Why there? Why now?"
"I told you before that you would be visiting the Isle of Atlantia in
the future. I will admit, I didn't think it would be this soon, but you are
developing so rapidly that I really have no other alternative. I’ve spoken
with Genepool and he is just very enthusiastic about your arrival. With
his help, you will begin your academic studies."
"Academics? You mean things like mathematics?"
"Precisely. You will study under the greatest minds on this realm.
The inhabitants of Atlantia are much more advanced than the Egyptians.
I'm sure you'll find their company much more enlightening."
"I'm sure I will," I responded uneasily. I knew I was going to
regret my next question, but asked anyway. "What about Valencia?"
"Vincent," he began as he knelt down to look me in the eye,
"Your sister is an impediment. You, my son, are destined for great things.
Your sister is a stumbling block, a fallen tree in the road to your fate.
Soon you will realize you can accomplish nothing as long as Valencia
walks the surface of this planet."
"Soon, but not yet." I locked onto my father's stare and met it
with grim determination. "She's still only a child, father. She's also my
sister, and though we will no doubt be at odds in the future, that time is
not now. All she's learned, she's learned on her own with no help from
you, except for languages. The least you can do for your daughter is let
her get an education. Let her come to Atlantia and study. With her
inability to pay attention to any one thing for more that a few minutes, it
will take her centuries to learn what I can learn in a year. She'll be out of
harm's way."
My father frowned at my suggestion. "I do not think that's a wise
decision. How is having your sister accompany us is any way orderly?"
A sick feeling rose from the pit of my stomach. The more I tried

67

to find a way to rationalize my choice, the worse I felt. Finally, I just gave
the best answer I could. "Because keeping the family together is orderly,
and that's what we need to do. We need to at least pretend to be a
family." Saying this made my queasiness fade to a tolerable level.
The Beholder stood up and now hovered over me. Displeasure
etched his face as he gazed down at me. "Fine," he said, resignation
oozing from his simple words. "Go get your sister." He waved me away
and I wasted no time running out of the hut.
I spotted Valencia chatting with Kalim and Ihmo and was
instantly uneasy. I tried to be casual as I strolled up to them. As I grew
closer, I could hear bits and pieces of their conversation. They were
talking about the project and, in a flash, my uneasiness changed to
complete terror. Remaining calm no longer seemed possible. I hurriedly
walked over and asked how everything was going, expecting the worst.
"Everything is just fine, my friend," Ihmo reassured me. Valencia
was looking at me weirdly and it took me a moment to figure out why. I
was standing with my fists clenched.
"Couldn't be better, so just relax," she advised. I noticed her
glance down at my hands. It was enough to tell me that her advice was
sound, for once.
"So what are the three of you discussing?" I asked.
"Just comparing notes. Your sister is working on a very different
project than we are," Kalim informed me.
"Is that so?" I was back to being suspicious again.
"It sure is," she said proudly. "You can make all the little
playhouses you want. I'm being more creative than that."
"What are you building anyway? You've never told me."
"And you've never gone down and sneaked a peek?" she asked
slyly.
"No, I haven't. I told you I'd leave that end of the project for you
to work on." I leaned over and whispered in her ear, "You aren't the only
one that keeps your promises, dear sister."
When I leaned back up, her smile was so sunny it knocked me
back a step. "Thank you, brother. So what have you been doing all day?"
"I've been with father. That's kind of why I'm here. I need to talk
to you." Turning to Ihmo and Kalim, "Would you excuse us?"
I took Valencia gently by the arm and we began to walk along the
river towards our favorite spot. "We aren't going to walk all the way to
the other end of the village, are we?" she asked.
"Not if you don't want to."

68

"I don't. I've had a busy day."
"Me too." I let out a sigh and Valencia stopped dead in her tracks.
"What's wrong? You've never been this strange before." She held
up her hand to stay my reply, and then added, "I mean, I've always found
you a little strange, but this is different. I don't like this kind of
strangeness."
After a deep breath to compose myself, I said, "I've got some bad
news.”
"What is it?" she asked with genuine concern.
"We're leaving."
"Leaving? Where are we going?"
"Atlantia."
"Atlantia!" she cried out in delight. "We're going to Atlantia
already? I didn't think it would be this soon! There's so much to do here
yet. I'll have to have Alazar finish the project while I'm gone, but he's
more than capable. And I'll have to make sure…"
"Hold on a moment!" I interjected. She got quiet at once and just
stared at me dumbfounded. "Aren't you upset?"
She gave me a puzzled look and said, "Am I supposed to be?"
"I would think so. We're leaving behind the only friends we have
on the face of the planet and you act like its nothing! The only people
we've known, the only place we've known, how can you just toss that all
aside?"
"Vincent," she began with her most soft and soothing voice,
"We're immortal. This place will still be here. The people, probably not,
but we were going to outlive them anyway. Yes, I'll miss my friends but
I'm sure we'll make new ones on Atlantia. It's you I'm worried about."
"Me?" I asked, caught completely off guard.
"Yes, you. You're the one that's always been the leader of the
building project. Now we're leaving and you won't get to finish it."
Her concern appeared genuine and that made me feel terrible.
There was no way I'd be able to tell her that father didn't want her to
come along. "Like you said," I forced out, "it'll still be here."
"Great! So when do we leave?"
"Tomorrow morning. Not sure when exactly, so be ready."
"No sleep tonight!" she sang out and ran off to her end of the
project. I examined the area of the project we'd stopped in front of. By
my estimation, and coming as no real surprise, we were at the exact
middle of the entire undertaking. I had a dreadful feeling Valencia and I
wouldn't be meeting each other halfway for very much longer.
I wandered back to Kalim and Ihmo and found that Alipha had

69

joined them. Alipha has been the most helpful person I'd met in my short
time here. Where Ihmo was very valuable when it came to design, Alipha
was fantastic at getting everyone to work together with the actual
construction.
"Where's Valencia?" Ihmo asked upon my arrival.
I let out a sigh and said, "She's down at her end of things."
"She's nice," Kalim added.
"Try being around her all the time," I mumbled in response.
"What?" he asked.
"Nothing. Look, I have to talk to the three of you for a moment."
"What's wrong?" Alipha asked.
"My sister and I are leaving tomorrow morning. You're going to
have to finish the project on your own."
The three of them looked back and forth at each other, not
knowing how to respond to my revelation. Finally, Ihmo spoke up.
"Vincent, I promise you here and now that we will finish it and make you
proud. We couldn't have done this without you."
"Thank you, my friend," I said, fighting back tears.
"No, thank you. For all you have done for us and the village," he
continued. "As we speak, there are children teaching their parents what
they've learned here. Our village will soon be a better place and we owe it
all to you."
"Will you be back?" Alipha inquired.
"Maybe someday. I'm not sure when though," I replied.
"So what would you like to do for your last day here?" Ihmo
asked.
I smiled and said, "I'd like to just spend it with my friends."
"But we're going to be working," mentioned Kalim.
"Then work it is. Shall we?"
The four of us made our way to the construction area and went to
work. I caught myself looking around at all the children that had come to
the riverside to volunteer their time and effort. There were noticeably
fewer children around lately. Some had, no doubt, remained in the village
to show their parents what they could do, just as Ihmo had said. Every
time I glanced over at Ihmo, Kalim and Alipha there were broad smiles
on their faces. That was all I needed to see to put me more at ease with
the idea of leaving. In my heart, I knew they would be fine.
As the sun began to set on my last day in Egypt, I found, much to
my amazement, that I had more friends than I'd thought. Word spread

70

rapidly throughout the village that the newcomers were leaving and it
seemed like the entire population had come out to wish us well. Valencia
decided to join me at my end of the project, thereby making it easier for
well-wishers to converse with us. Most of the parents that stopped by
spoke at length to Valencia, since she was the one that spent the most
time in the village itself. Every child in the village approached us at one
time or another. It was a very heartfelt gesture from the villagers and
Valencia and I both made a point to tell them how much we appreciated
their kindness. The only emotional outburst came when Aristol's mother
paid us a visit. She picked up Valencia and clenched her in a hug so tight
I thought my sister might break in half. However, the tears I saw in
Valencia's eyes weren't from the pain of the embrace. I peeked over at
my sister as she was wiping away some stray teardrops, ready to comfort
her if needed. She motioned that she was fine and we continued greeting
people until everyone that had lined up got a word with us. I never
realized how many people lived in this village. I should've explored it
more when I had the chance.
With the sun now at rest for the day, my intention was to head
back to the hut. My sister had other plans. She grabbed me by the arm
and led me in the opposite direction, to the village itself. She didn't need
to tell me where we were going. I already knew.
I wrested my arm from her grip and walked quietly beside her.
She wasn't talking, which was unusual in itself, and I assumed she was lost
in thought. We continued on in silence until we reached the far end of
the village and proceeded directly to our usual place along the riverside.
We sat on the log and stared out over the river.
After a few minutes of peace and tranquility, she finally spoke.
"This is the end, isn't it?"
"The end of our time here, yes."
"That's not what I meant."
"I know."
Stillness reclaimed the moment, blanketing us with its relaxing
silence. The primary sound was of the rushing river creating natural
music for all to hear, should they take the time to listen. I had never really
done that before and now I wished I had. I could hear the birds off in the
distance calling out to one another. As the fish jumped out of the water,
attempting to snack on the insects floating around, I could hear not only
the sound of their re-entry but their exit from the watery depths as well.
The humming emanating from insects themselves was audible to me. All
these sounds, distinct from each other, blended together in a cacophony
of musical splendor. It should've been chaotic by nature, as nature itself is

71

chaotic, yet all these wonderful sounds aligned perfectly with each other.
I'd never been this at peace.
The tranquility was broken when Valencia asked, "What do you
think we'll end up doing in Atlantia?"
"Schooling," I replied.
"What kind?"
"Academics. Mathematics, science, that sort of thing."
"Sounds boring. Maybe I'll…"
"Maybe you'll do what's being asked and learn something. Isn't
that what you want?"
She snapped her head in my direction, hitting me with her hair as
she did. "So now you're going to tell me what to do?"
"Yes, Valencia, I am," I responded irritably. "If you want to be
able to go out into the world someday, these are things you'll need to
learn. Atlantia is the best place for you to do it too. They are much more
advanced than the rest of civilization and can show you things you'd never
find out anywhere else."
Her gaze tore through me and her eyes were glowing mildly. "It
still sounds boring," she said. "I could just stay here."
"And learn what? From who?"
"Well, Orona, Aristol's mother, is pretty smart. I see her writing
things down all the time and most of the villagers can't even write at all!"
"But she won't be able to show you what the Atlantians can.
Would you really deny yourself a chance to see Atlantia just because you
think your studies will be boring?"
That made her eyes adjust back to normal. "You have a good
point. Besides, I won't be studying all the time. I'll still get to have some
fun while we're there, right?"
"Right," I replied and instantly regretted it. "Wait a moment.
What do you mean by having fun?"
She smiled, winked and stood up to leave. I think I liked it better
when her eyes were glowing. She didn't grace me with a response as she
turned and began walking back to our hut. I sat alone for a moment, still
organizing my thoughts. The more I thought about what her definition of
fun might be, the more nervous I became.
"Valencia!" I shouted as I leapt up to chase after her.
I caught up to her in a flash, literally. She hadn't made it very far
into the village but I wasn't going to waste any time prying a response out
of her. As it turned out, I could've taken my time because she wasn't
making any attempt to answer me. No matter how many times I asked
her what she'd meant by ‘have some fun’ all I got in return was her sly

72

little smile.
When we arrived, The Beholder was nowhere in sight. We
searched the hut and found no trace of him. Not knowing what else to
do we departed for our rooms. I knew Valencia wasn't going to sleep so I
figured I may as well stay awake as well. As soon as I lay down, however,
I was fast asleep.
I awoke at sunrise to the sound of my sister singing in the other
room. An exceptionally discordant tune with rambling lyrics assaulted my
ears. I'd never heard it before, and judging from the quality neither had
she. I stood up and stretched out my still tired muscles. Yesterday's
activities had strained my young body more than I’d originally believed.
There was a dull throbbing in my legs from all the running I'd done. I
must not have noticed it earlier due to my father's revelation and my
desire to spend time with my friends.
The singing continued unabated and I decided I'd had enough.
"Valencia, would you be quiet!" I bellowed. She ceased singing
immediately and I considered the matter settled. Apparently she did not.
"You didn't like my song?" she asked, peering into my room.
"Not really," I grumbled.
"Oh." She squinted her eyes and glanced down at her feet, then
around the floor seemingly lost in thought. Her head snapped up and she
looked me dead in the eye. There was no anger or rage in her eyes, as I
had expected. In fact, there wasn't much emotion there at all. Without
another word, she left.
I resumed stretching out when she peered in again. "Have you
seen our father anywhere?" she asked.
"No. I just woke up, remember?"
"Oh. Right." And as suddenly as she had appeared, she was gone
again.
Now my legs and my head ached. She’d done this before and it
didn’t bother me nearly as much. I understood her eagerness, but that
didn’t mean she could pester me until we left. Sadly, she wasn’t finished
yet.
Peering around the corner for a third time, she quickly asked,
“You don’t think he left without us, do you?”
“Valencia!” I shouted. “Would you knock that off!”
She stepped forward, coming completely into view. “Knock what
off?”
“Your constant questions, that’s what!”
“There’s no need to yell at me!” she yelled.

73

“Can’t you just ask your questions all at once?” I angrily requested.
“Apparently not. And you never did answer my last one.”
I sighed in desperation and replied slowly and deliberately, “No,
Valencia. I’m sure he did not leave without us. It would be
counterproductive. Why would he say he was taking us to Atlantia and
then go without us?”
“Because he’s not a nice guy?” she proposed.
“He’s our father!” I was shocked at her assessment of our father.
He may not be nice to her, but that didn’t mean he deserved to be
insulted like that.
“And he’s not a nice guy. I just call it like I see it.” She entered
my room as she continued, “In fact, I wouldn’t be the least bit surprised
to find out that he didn’t want me to come to Atlantia with the two of
you.”
“Why would you say that?” I asked, hoping she hadn’t figured out
the truth.
“Well, why would he want me to come along? He didn’t want me
here. It’s you he wants.”
“Our father wouldn’t leave you here alone. He’s not that cruel.”
“First off, I wouldn’t be alone Vincent. Remember, Orona would
take me in. Second, I happen to believe The Beholder is cruel enough to
abandon me. He’d do it in a heartbeat.”
“Maybe he finally decided to help you along. Did you ever
consider that possibility?”
“No, and for good reason.”
“And what reason is that?” I was getting tired of this game of
back and forth we played all the time. Before she could answer, our
father called out to us from outside of the hut. I looked at Valencia
fleetingly and left the room. She followed unexcitedly.
Outside, the sun was once again shining in all its brilliance. The
warmth felt good on my face and I could feel the heat loosening up the
muscles in my legs. The Beholder was standing at the side of the hut
facing away from the village. It looked like we were going to leave by the
same path that we’d entered. I had assumed incorrectly.
Our father beckoned us to stand next to him. Once we did, he
grabbed our hands and told us to hold on at all times. I saw Valencia was
gripping his hand so tightly the veins in her hands were bulging. I could
also clearly see the small muscles in her hands and forearms straining to
make her grasp even more potent. Without a word, The Beholder bowed
his head and a mere second later, the three of us were in Atlantia.

74

Chapter 6
At first I couldn’t comprehend all I was seeing. Atlantia was so
different from Egypt it was hard to believe the two places existed on the
same realm at the same time. Where Egypt was primitive, Atlantia was
advanced. In Egypt, the people wore shabby clothes that should’ve been
discarded years ago. The citizens of Atlantia wore colorful, radiant garb.
Most importantly, the Egyptians we’d spent our time with needed my
influence. The Atlantians were far beyond the point of needing my help.
All around us were buildings of carved stone. Large stone
columns supported the facades of many buildings. Giant marble
archways decorated other entranceways. Intricate engravings marked the
buildings as to their function and purpose. Having learned the local
language, I could easily pick out the judicial building, various shops,
security for the city and many others. The streets were paved with bricks
that looked almost like the ones I’d made in Egypt. When I bent down to
get a close look, I noticed that they were much sturdier than mine.
People didn’t wander around aimlessly, as so many in Egypt had
when we’d arrived. Everyone seemed to have a purpose for what they
were doing. I could overhear a few passing conversations and that was
enough to tell me I was going to enjoy my time here immensely.
The only thing I found odd was the fact that we’d teleported
directly into the center of town and this caused no alarm amongst the
citizenry. When we arrived, very few people even gave us a second
glance. A remarkable occurrence such as that should’ve at least raised a
few eyebrows. These people looked upon our arrival with nothing more
than passing curiosity.
All of these things taken together made it seem like the most
wonderful place imaginable, yet it wasn’t the buildings, the streets or the
people that made me so happy to be in Atlantia. When I saw Valencia
frowning and rubbing her head, trying to excise the pain she was feeling, I
couldn’t help but smile. I knew right then and there I was going to like it
here.
As I continued to gaze around in pure awe, our father informed us
we had an appointment to keep. He directed us toward a building
without an inscription on its façade. There was a crowd gathered at the
entrance awaiting their turn to gain admittance and they all parted as we
approached. The huge doors of the building were at least fifteen feet
high. The dark wooden doors were ornately decorated with elaborate
metal designs that ascended all the way to the top. Halfway up its length,
the metallic artwork branched off and spelled a single word written in the

75

language of the Aseraphim. The word was "life".
When we got closer to the doors, I saw two men in green robes
guarding the entranceway. They bowed their heads in respect to The
Beholder and quickly opened the doors. What met my eyes was
something I would remember forever. If the outside of this building was
beautiful, the inside was astonishing. We crossed the threshold into a
large antechamber that emptied into a long hallway. Along the walls were
decorative lights made of a shiny, golden metal. Each lamp held three
candles, giving the hall a radiant glow. Chandeliers hung from the ceiling,
which was at least thirty feet above the floor. The candles in the
chandeliers remained unlit but it took nothing away from their
magnificence.
At the far end of the hallway, barely visible, was a throne. Seated
upon the throne was a man dressed in a green robe similar to what the
guards were wearing. As we neared the stranger I saw my father's
expression change. He no longer looked impatient, as he had as we were
traversing through the throng outside the doors. He was calm, and I even
caught him smiling.
"Good day to you, brother," our father said.
Valencia glanced over at me and whispered, "Brother?"
The man on the throne replied, "And to you as well." He stood
from his throne and came over to the three of us. He was of average
height and somewhat chubby but those were the only normal things about
him. His skin had an unusual green tint matching his eyes, and his hair
was a shade of brown normally reserved for tree bark. He shook our
father's hand warmly and then turned his attention to us. "So these are
the first?"
"They are," he replied.
"Order and Chaos. Fantastic," he said approvingly. The man
knelt down and asked, "So what names are you two going by on this
realm?"
"I'm Valencia and he's Vincent. Who are you?" my sister
answered.
"And how do you know about our origins?" I posed to him,
suspicious of his knowledge.
He rose up and laughed, "Because I've known you for a long time.
Hasn't your father informed you of my identity?" My sister and I both
shook our heads in response. "Then allow me. I am Genepool, the giver
of life. It is my utmost pleasure to meet the both of you. And for future
reference, there's no need for the formality of my full name, just
Genepool will suffice."

76

"You're an Ancient!" Valencia exclaimed excitedly.
"I most assuredly am, my dear lady," he warmly replied, causing
my sister to blush. I couldn't recall that ever happening before.
"I've made arrangements for the both of you to begin your studies
right away," The Beholder interjected. "Genepool has been kind enough
to recruit some teachers for the both of you."
"It wasn't that difficult, really," Genepool informed us. "All I had
to say was that they'd be instructing the children of the Aseraphim and
there was a line out the door. You may have even seen some of them
when you came in."
"All of those people outside want to teach us?" I asked in wonder.
"Not exactly, Vincent. All those people out there are here to see
you. Only some of them are teachers."
"So they know about us?"
"They know many things. Fortunately for the both of you, they
are eager to impart their knowledge onto you. I have handpicked your
teachers and I think you'll find them more than adequate."
"Are we starting right away?" Valencia inquired. "I'd really like to
see some of Atlantia first."
"Your studies will not commence until tomorrow, so, please, take
in the sights. In fact, I'd be honored to show you around myself."
"Genepool, I have a much better idea. Why don't you show
Valencia around Atlantia and I'll take Vincent," The Beholder
recommended.
Genepool leaned down and replied softly to Valencia, "Isn't that
what I was saying?" Valencia smiled back, her face going another shade
deeper into the red. She let out a small, childish giggle as well. Genepool
straightened up and said to The Beholder, "I think that's a splendid idea,
brother. You already know where you'll be staying, correct?"
"Correct."
"Then it's settled. Come, Valencia. Let me show you the wonders
of Atlantia." He turned his attention back to The Beholder and said, "I'll
have the teachers sent to your house in the morning. There are separate
teachers for the both of them. Most likely, the teachers will take the
children back to their homes. It's easier than carrying all their materials
around with them."
The four of us walked back down the brightly lit hallway to the
main entrance. There was still a crowd of people waiting to catch a
glimpse of us as we departed. Genepool and Valencia went north while
my father and I headed south.
"That worked out quite well, I must say," my father commented

77

after we'd left the multitudes behind.
"What do you mean?"
"Genepool will be able to keep your sister under control for a
while. He's very good with people. I think your sister likes the attention,
too. She won't be a bother while we're here."
"See? I told you." I regretted my rebuke almost as soon as it had
left my mouth.
"Yes, you did," he responded, glaring down at me. "Now we just
have to hope that everything continues on its current path. As long as
your sister is enthralled with Genepool we should be fine."
"How long will we be staying here?"
"Many years, most likely," he replied. "There is much you need to
learn and do before your time here is finished."
"I'm looking forward to it," I said smiling.
"As am I," my father remarked, smiling wide as well. "So what
would you like to see first?"
"Everything," I gleefully replied as we set off to see the sights.
The streets of Atlantia were filled with people going about their
daily business. The citizens mainly wore robes and togas, their colors
varying from black to white and all the colors of the rainbow. My father
informed me that you could tell a person's tendencies in life by what color
they were dressed in. I would have to learn for myself exactly what that
entailed as he didn't explain it any further. The only added piece of
information was that I should avoid the ones dressed in black, for they
were extremely unpleasant. I assumed these people were either evil or
criminals of some sort.
We walked around a magnificent stone fountain after a few
blocks. The statue in the center of the fountain was of Genepool.
Standing at easily fifteen feet in height, the sculpture displayed every detail
of his countenance. Small stone animals of every variety scurried around
in the fake flowers at his feet. Vines climbed up his body and wrapped
around his form as to accent his physique. The water of the fountain
flowed from his outstretched hands, cascading into the pool below.
On the other side of the fountain, my father stopped abruptly and
looked around. Before I could question him, he pointed and started off
around the other side towards a man dressed in a yellow robe.
As we approached, the man stood and greeted us. "Hail, Ancient
one," he said to my father. He then stooped down and addressed me.
"And hail to you as well, child of the Aseraphim."
"Hail," I said in response. My father was staring down at this man

78

with contempt in his eyes. I couldn't figure out why. He seemed nice
enough.
"I've been told by The Beholder that you are called Vincent. Is
that right?" he asked.
"Yes, it is. What's your name?"
"Very good. You get right to the point." He stood up straight
and announced, "I am Samir Lantarna, but you can just call me Sam."
Sam looked to be in his late twenties, with ash blonde hair falling
to his shoulders and dark blue eyes that were almost violet. He was much
shorter than my father, standing a mere five and a half feet tall. His broad
shoulders proclaimed his athleticism and physical prowess. What I
noticed most of all was his friendly smile, which put me at ease instantly.
"Sam is going to be your lead instructor, Vincent," my father
informed me. "Listen to what he has to say. He may appear, at first
glance, to be too young to be intelligent or experienced enough to teach
someone as special as you, but Sam is wise well beyond his meager years."
"Thank you, Ancient. That was the most awkward compliment I
think I've ever received." Sam was still smiling, apparently taking the
praise for what it was worth.
"Will you be coming to us in the morning for the lesson or shall I
send him to you? Genepool had stated that you would be stopping by,
but it might be easier if he went to you," my father inquired.
"Well, why don't we let him decide?" Looking down at me, he
asked, "Vincent, what would you prefer?"
"Honestly, I'd like to go to you. I like walking around this city.
It's wonderful," I replied in earnest.
"Do you really think so? What do you like best about it so far?"
"Just the way everything is organized. The streets are perfectly
straight and well marked. The buildings are marked clearly as well,
making finding your way so easy. The people all seem to know where
they're going and what they need to do. It's all so orderly."
Sam smiled brightly and said, "I am so glad it meets your approval.
It's the same reason I like it here. Still, tomorrow I will have to meet you
at your home, since you don't know where mine is yet."
"We should be going, Vincent," my father informed me. "There is
still much you need to see before the day is done." He turned to Sam and
said, "Thank you for your time, teacher. I will see that Vincent is ready on
time."
"I don't think that will be a problem," Sam said, smile never
fading.
The Beholder took my hand and led me back on the path we'd

79

been going. "I like him. He's nice," I remarked as we walked away.
"He's young and innocent, and hasn’t seen much of the world
outside of Atlantia. Still, he is a very smart young man and the personal
selection of Genepool. I’ll have to defer to my brother's judgment in this
case."
We continued onward as my father pointed out certain buildings
of interest, such as the library, the hospital and the temple. It was this last
one that apparently held the most appeal for him. We climbed the steps
of the temple to the main doors. They were locked but my father wasn't
concerned.
"The temple is for the worship of the Ancients," he began as we
stood at the top of the temple's steps. "Genepool is the main
representative of the Ancients on this realm, so in turn he is the object of
praise at their services. All of the Ancient Ones, however, have stature
here."
"You're worshiped here?" I asked in amazement.
"Indeed I am, my son. In time, you too will be glorified as well."
His words sent shivers down my spine. "Me? Why will I be held
in such high regard?"
"It is your destiny. As the prophecy reads, 'There will be four
born of the Aseraphim sent to inhabit the realm of Man and they shall be
as siblings to one another. Two then two shall be visited upon the Earth.
And as time passes, one shall command dominion over all the creatures of
the land, the air and the sea.' You are that destined child. You should
know that all I've done, and all I have yet to do, is to assist you in fulfilling
your destiny with me at your side. Together, I can show you the ways of
true order and you can succeed where your siblings will fail. Keeping
your sister at bay is the most difficult task right now, and I must admit
your suggestion of bringing her here was wise. She will be sequestered
with her own lessons while you proceed with yours. Have no doubts,
Vincent, though you are both still children you should start to view your
sister with animosity now rather than later. For later, you will have no
choice.
"Now let us leave here. We should be getting back to Genepool
and your sister so you can see where we will be living."
He descended the steps in front of me. I was taking my time as
my mind was teeming with new information. I was having difficulty
processing it all at once, so I decided to break things down. All he'd
done, from teaching me languages, to showing me how fast I can run, to
trying to keep Valencia and her chaotic influence away from me, had been
to steer me down this preordained path. Considering all he had done for

80

me, and the more I thought about it the longer the list grew, I could be
patient and learn of his wisdom in time. Having read the words of the
prophecy before he told them to me, I had my suspicions earlier. He just
now confirmed them.
The four of us met up again back at Genepool's temple.
Genepool and my father went off into a side room for a private
discussion, leaving me alone with my sister. Valencia was spouting off
about the zoo and all the different animals. She said there were creatures
there that didn't exist anywhere else on the planet. Genepool said he’d let
her help around the zoo and with other things. When I pressed for more
details, she said she didn’t know. He was being very secretive about it. I
tried to explain to her that Genepool was the one that populates the world
with animals and, where they may not roam free now, most of those
animals are simply awaiting their time. None of that mattered to her
though. She just continued rambling on about this creature and that one.
Her voice was starting to grate on me severely. I was never more thankful
to see my father as I was when he finally emerged from the adjoining
room.
Genepool wished us well and the three of us started off for our
new home. Since we were going to be living here for years to come, I
began to think of Atlantia as my home. Entering the section of Atlantia
where everyone lived was like stepping into a whole new town. The
homes were of various materials. There were grand houses made of stone
and brick as well as simple wooden structures. All of the houses had one
thing in common and that was their elegance. Every measure of care was
taken to keep these homes looking like they were built yesterday.
The house to which our father led us was stylish in its simplicity.
It was a two-story stone home with large wooden doors. Extending from
the second floor was a patio surrounded by an iron railing. At first glance,
I couldn't put a finger on why it pleased me so much. I should've seen it
right away and was a little upset that I hadn't. The house, when looked at
from the front, was perfectly symmetrical from left to right.
Our father swung open the doors and we followed him inside.
Candelabras on the walls and a chandelier from the ceiling provide more
than enough light for us to take in our surroundings. The floor was
covered in soft, pale blue carpeting. The furnishings were simple yet
inviting. Pillows were neatly placed at the end of each long couch. The
cushions on the chairs were as supple as the pillows. Our father led us to
the stairs at the end of the hallway and the three of us proceeded upstairs.

81

I glanced over at Valencia when we reached the top of the stairs
and noticed that she had her sandals in her hands. I shot her a
disapproving look, to which she responded by saying that I should try it
before I criticized her. I shrugged off her impetuousness and continued
exploring the second floor. I saw my father beckon me and I quickly
obeyed.
"This will be your room, Vincent. Behind that door, your time is
your own," he told me.
"Until she barges in," I replied, nodding my head back in
Valencia's direction.
"That will only happen if you allow it to." He opened the door
with a key and dropped the key in my hand. "This will ensure your
privacy. If you lock the door, all she can do is knock. If she persists in
bothering you and won't go away, I will handle her." He noticed the look
of concern on my face and clarified, "I will not harm her, Vincent, have
no fear. I will simply lock her in her room. She will not have the same
privileges as you. She does not get her own key. It's better for everyone
that way."
The thought of Valencia not being able to pester me all the time
sounded good to me. Locking her away might seemed a tad extreme but
Valencia could be persistent and it might be the only way to get her to
leave me alone. I smiled and entered my room as my father went off to
get Valencia and show her where she'd be sleeping, when she chose to.
My bedroom consisted of a large bed, a couch, two chairs and
some small tables. Three windows were evenly spaced around the room,
allowing ample sunlight to shine in. I eased around the room, soaking up
every last detail. I eventually ended up at the bed. It looked so
comfortable and inviting that I couldn't just sit down on it casually. I
leapt into the air and flopped down on the cushiony mattress. I sprang
back up into the air slightly and crashed down for good. Getting a good
night's sleep wouldn't be a problem anymore, not with a bed like this and
my sister locked away. Atlantia was becoming more appealing every
second.
I lay on the bed and watched through the window as the sun set
behind the mountains to the west. As I was relaxing, my father entered
my room and informed me he was going to take care of some business
before the day was done. He asked that I kept an eye on Valencia in his
absence. I wasn't thrilled with the task but accepted it. When I asked if
that meant there would be no language lesson this evening, he told me
that there would be no more lessons from him at all. That was now Sam's
responsibility.

82

No sooner had our father departed for town than Valencia was at
my door. "So, you're stuck with me for the evening? You must be
overjoyed," she sarcastically remarked.
"I don't think I'd use that particular word to describe my feelings
about the situation," I replied.
"I figured as much. But I'm not here to make your life difficult,
Vincent…"
"Not yet, at least," I interjected.
"Exactly," she continued, letting the admonishment pass on by.
"What I want is for you to uphold your end of our deal." She was
smiling, and not in a good way.
"What deal?" I asked, fearing the worst.
"The scrolls."
My fears confirmed, I asked, "What about them?"
"Don't play stupid with me, Vincent. You and I have a deal. I
kept things running on the construction in Egypt while you were out
getting tutored by The Beholder. In exchange, you promised to tell me
about the scrolls you'd read. It's time to pay up." She was smiling even
wider now and I knew there was no way I'd get any peace until she was
satisfied.
"Fine. What do you want to know?"
"Where are they?"
"Our father has probably hidden them. They were more than
likely in his satchel when we teleported here."
"He didn't have his satchel on when he left this evening. That
means they must be here somewhere, right?"
"I would assume so."
"So let's look for them," she said and started out of the room.
If she found those scrolls, she might learn some things that father
didn't want her to know just yet. I couldn't let that happen. "Valencia,
you just stay here. I'll find them."
"Why can't I help?" she pouted.
"Because you don't know what they look like and I do."
"They're just scrolls. It's not that difficult."
"And I'm sure you'd be able to identify the scrolls containing the
prophecies just by looking at them. Our father probably had hundreds of
scrolls. You'd be there all night and you'd get caught. Let me go and I'll
bring back whatever I can find."
I left the room and ventured down the hallway to the master
bedroom. It was located directly across from Valencia's room, thereby
making it easier for our father to keep her under his thumb. My father's

83

room was almost twice the size of mine. After searching for less than a
minute, I found his satchel. One quick look told me there were several
scrolls inside. I pulled them out and began examining them. They were
all prophecies, as I had suspected. I wasn't going to show them all to my
sister, so I selected the two that would have the most meaning given our
current situation.
I casually walked back to my room and dropped the two scrolls on
the bed. "This is all I could find," I stated.
"You didn't look for very long," she retorted.
"I looked long enough. Do you want to read them or not?"
Without answering, she opened the first scroll and began to read it
aloud, "For as it is foretold, the Ancients shall have dominion over
Atlantia but not over the will of its people. Atlantians will search for
Power and succeed, and this success shall be its undoing. For once the
Power is brought to the surface, Atlantia shall be swallowed by the waters
surrounding it. Atlantia shall survive, forever changed by its quest for
ultimate Power."
"I've read that one before."
"That doesn't sound good at all, especially since we happen to be
on Atlantia," Valencia commented.
"I'm sure it's a long time off."
She hurriedly dropped the first scroll and picked up the other one.
I retrieved it from the floor with a groan of disgust at her disrespect. I
walked over to the table near the door and set the scroll down carefully. I
stayed across the room as she briefly scanned the second scroll. A quick
inspection of the manuscript was all that was needed. "This is the one,
isn't it?"
"Yes, it is."
She jumped up and down on the balls of her feet in excitement.
Her voice was rapid and expressed her enthusiasm quite well. "'There will
be four born of the Aseraphim sent to inhabit the realm of Man and they
shall be as siblings to one another. Two then two shall be visited upon
the Earth. And as time passes, one shall command dominion over all the
creatures of the land, the air and the sea. Born to this world, this chosen
one shall lead armies against enemies great and small. Blood will flow as
crimson rivers around the sibling's feet and allies and enemies shall cower
in fear of the wrath that follows. A preordained aspiration shall be met, as
this one shall watch over mankind to maintain balance upon the Earth."
We both stood there, her in stunned silence, as Valencia finished
reading the scroll. I glanced over at Valencia and noticed she was still
grasping tightly to the scroll.

84

"Do you want to put that down now?" I asked her.
My voice broke her paralysis and she dropped the scroll like it had
caught fire. "Get it away from me."
I went over to where she was standing and gave her a dirty look
before I bent over and picked up the scroll off of the floor. Standing
back up, I asked, "What's wrong?" assuming it was the graphic nature of
what she'd read that had her so upset. I walked back over to the table and
set the scroll down with the other one.
"That’s not about me, is it?"
"I don’t believe so."
"But how do you know?" she asked, clearly upset.
"Valencia, I'll admit, I don't know for certain. However, if you
have so much trouble with what this prophecy says, then I’d have to say
you most likely aren't the one it refers to."
"Are you sure?" she asked, breathless.
"Positive." I smiled and added, "I never thought you'd get so
upset about a little bloodshed."
"What do you mean by that?" she asked, no anger evident in her
voice, just bewilderment.
"Well, the prophecy does describe some gory events and…"
"That's not the reason, Vincent," she broke in.
"Then what is?"
"Balance. I can’t handle that. The very concept is upsetting.”
She grimaced in revulsion as she spoke.
“Let me get this right. You don’t mind the bloodshed, but the
thought of everything working together in perfect balance and harmony
bothers you?”
“Of course. Just thinking about a perfectly balanced and orderly
world makes me sick. I actually pictured it for a moment there. You
didn't honestly think it was the violent depiction that upset me did you?"
I nodded enough to let her know she was right and that was all it took to
get her laughing. "Vincent, if I were interested in becoming the ruler of
the world I’d have no problem spilling a little blood here and there to get
what I wanted. Would you?”
“I’ve never really put much thought into it,” I honestly replied.
After a moment’s hesitation, and noting Valencia waiting patiently for my
answer, I said, “I could do it. If it was necessary to establish order, I
could lead armies.”
“Now that I think about it, the first people you’d attack would be
chaotic people. That’s me!” she surmised.
“Well, not you personally. Just people like you.”

85

“Right, but you’d have to kill me eventually if you wanted to
succeed.” Her voice was getting louder and I could see her eyes
beginning to glow.
“Valencia, I can’t kill you, remember? You and I are immortal.
Just calm down,” I reminded. Her drastic mood change caught me
completely off-guard.
“You said before that we could be, how did you put it, put down.
That’s it. Put down.” She was slowly walking towards me, her voice
lower now yet more menacing and sinister. “You’d have to do that to me
if you wanted to command dominion over all as is written. Could you do
it, Vincent? If it came right down to it, could you put me down?” Her
voice was nearly a growl as the light emanating from her eyes now
flooded the room. What I found strange was that we were both standing,
and I was a modest few inches taller than her, yet she was now nose to
nose with me. The light from her eyes burned into mine and made her
face look as if the light was radiating from her skin as well as her eyes.
I never broke the lock on her gaze as I steely replied, “If I had to,
I could.”
“Because you’re the chosen one,” she said with a sly note of
sarcasm.
“I could be. If it needs to be done for me to complete the
prophecy, then it’ll have to be done.” I grinned at her and added,
“Nothing personal.”
She flashed a dark, brooding smile and said, "You won’t succeed.
Not if I can help it."
"You can't. It’s already been written. You don't have a choice."
Her wicked smile grew larger as she said, "There's always a
choice." That said, she turned and departed for her room. It was only
then that I realized how she had been able to look me dead in the eye as
she had. She was floating, her feet dangling a few inches above the floor.
Casting that thought aside momentarily, I left the room as soon as
I heard Valencia’s door slam shut. I hurriedly put the scrolls back where
I’d found them and returned to my room. The words of the prophecy
rang in my ears. I had read it before but, with everything else going on in
Egypt, never put much thought into what it truly said. I would command
armies. People would cower in fear. I had to admit it all had a certain
appeal. Most of all, I would have order. My father told me he would
show me what true order was. Knowing violence was going to be
involved, oddly enough, didn’t bother me that much at all. As I told
Valencia, if it had to be done, then it had to be done. It wasn’t the
violence that put the smile on my face however. It wasn’t even the fact

86

that the prophecy used the word balance in describing the end results. It
was the way Valencia knew I’d have to eliminate her that had me so
delighted. It’s not that I wanted to be rid of her for all eternity. I just
wouldn’t complain about it very much. As for doing away with her
myself, I could do it if I really had to. What was even better was she knew
it. The breathtaking image of a world without chaos filled my mind as I
lie down on the bed and fell to sleep.
The sun was shining in all its glory my first day there in Atlantia. I
opened my eyes and saw my room flooded with light. The next thing I
noticed was the smell of food being prepared. I sprang from the bed,
loathe to leave such comfort behind, got dressed and ran downstairs. I
expected my father to be the one making breakfast. We rarely ate while in
Egypt, but when we did father always did the cooking. The person
making the food, currently eggs mixed with bits of some meat, wasn’t
Valencia either. I’d never seen Valencia cook. I didn’t even know if she
could. Even if she could, I didn’t think I could trust her cooking. That
aside, since this wasn’t my sister, and it wasn’t my father, I figured I’d
better find out just who this mysterious cook was.
“Excuse me, but who are you and what are you doing here?” I
asked.
The stranger was dressed in a green robe with a white sash
running from his left shoulder to his right hip. He turned and smiled at
me warmly. “There’ll be time for that later. Help me with these onions,”
he offered as a reply.
Confused and not awake enough yet to argue, I strolled over to
the counter he was pointing to and picked up an onion. “What should I
do with it?”
He looked disapprovingly at me, yet never let the smile fall from
his face. “What do you think I want you to do with it?”
“Cut it up?”
“Very good! You’re a quick learner. That’ll make Samir happy.”
He pointed down the counter and said, “Use that knife and make the
pieces small enough that they’ll mix well with the eggs and ham.”
I retrieved the knife and set to cutting up the onion. My eyes
began to water as I worked. Before I could ask, I was told this was a
normal occurrence when chopping onions. I was halfway done with the
first onion when the cook asked, “Is that all the faster you can cut that
up?”
I looked over at him in annoyance and noticed he was still wearing
that glowing smile. My annoyance quickly faded and I took the challenge,

87

for that’s what it was. I carefully moved the cut pieces of onion from the
cutting board to a small plate. The cook took the plate from me and
examined my work. He nodded with approval as he dumped them into
the pan, stirring them into eggs and ham. From the moment he took the
plate from me until he turned back to me was less than twenty seconds.
Yet when he turned back, I had the knife in my hand and the rest of the
onion cut up.
His smile stretched so far across his face it looked painful. I
winked at him and grabbed the plate. I handed it back after transferring
the onions and he again inspected my work.
“Even better!” he burst out. He dumped the remaining onion
into the pan and after a quick stir turned and said, “I’m Kiyusin Lantarna.
It’s an honor to finally meet you Vincent.” He extended his hand and I
grasped it warmly.
“Are you our cook?” I asked.
“No, my dear boy. I’m a teacher.”
“I thought Sam was going to be my teacher,” I replied, wondering
if my father had a change of heart regarding Genepool’s choice of
instructor.
“He is. I’m your sister’s teacher.”
He was still smiling, apparently not fully aware of what awaited
him. “You know, my sister is a little bit, how can I put this politely…”
“Different, yes, I know. Don’t believe for a minute that I’ve taken
anything for granted. Your sister is to be the mistress of chaos, and from
what I hear she’s got some interesting natural abilities.”
This was news to me. “How do you mean?”
That removed his smile. “I’m confused. You’ve never noticed
what she can do?”
“No, not really. She seems mostly harmless to me.”
“That’s because she isn’t fully aware of her true capabilities yet. In
time, she will be tremendously powerful. Has your sister ever sat and
talked to you and afterwards, you just felt a need to do what she was
hinting at?”
“That used to happen a lot, honestly. Not so much lately though.
I guess I’ve gotten used to her.”
“Consider yourself lucky.”
“Believe me, I do.” We shared a quick grin and he got back to
working on breakfast. “So, if you’re Valencia’s teacher, what are you
doing in our kitchen?”
“Cooking,” was his dry reply.
“I can see that. Why?”

88

“I got here early and needed something to do. Besides, I’m a
fantastic cook and growing children need a healthy meal to start the day.”
Before I could object, he added, “Immortal or not, you’re still a child and
you should have something to eat. Now go and set the table for four.
Samir should be here soon.”
"What about my father?" I inquired.
"The Beholder left a short while ago. Apparently he had some
urgent business to attend to."
It took me a while to find the plates and cutlery to actually be able
to set the table. These things were not included in the tour when we
arrived. Sam arrived as I was setting everything up and Valencia appeared
from upstairs just as I finished. Anyone else and I’d say it was good
timing. Since it was Valencia, I chalked it up to coincidence.
“Good morning,” I gleefully declared.
She slowly turned and bore down on me. Her gaze bespoke the
extreme disfavor she was feeling toward me from our conversation last
night. I felt so good this morning I had all but forgotten about it until
now. One glance was all I needed. If she thought she could do it, she’d
beat me to a pulp right here and now. She wouldn’t stand a chance, but it
wouldn’t have stopped her from giving it her all. “What’s so good about
it, brother?” she grumbled.
“Sleep well?” I decided I was not going to let her moodiness
upset my day, so I remained as cheerful as possible.
“No, I didn’t, and thank you so much for asking.” Her hair was
standing up in every direction. It actually hurt to look at it. At the same
time, I couldn’t help but feel like laughing. She looked ridiculous. “Not
for a lack of trying though. Every time I would be just about out, I would
get all these pictures of an orderly, methodical, systematic world and I
would get jolted awake. It was horrible,” she spit out.
“Sounds good to me,” I replied.
“It would,” she groused and went to find a place to clean up. I
informed her breakfast would be ready shortly and she proceeded to
completely ignore me. Sam called me into the kitchen as Kiyusin entered
the dining room and began serving the food.
“Kiyus tells me you’re pretty fast with a knife. Accurate too.
Every piece of onion was exactly the same size,” he said as I entered the
kitchen.
“That’s because I was being careful. He was picking on me for
taking my time,” I remarked with a grin.
“So you felt challenged?”
“Yes, I did.”

89

“And you took up that challenge why?”
I looked up at him and locked my gaze with his as I replied,
“Because I knew I could do it.”
He smiled and said, “Very good, Vincent! Did you know your
hands were as fast as your feet before this?”
“No, but I had a feeling. When he teased me about going slow, I
knew I could go faster. I knew it right away. It wasn’t until he said what
he did that I wanted to go faster. My whole body moves that fast?” I
asked in wonder.
“In time it will. At this young stage in your life, you are merely
faster than the human eye. When you're older, you'll be faster than the
human mind. Right now, you’re still limited by your physical body. But
patience is a virtue, Vincent.” He leaned down and whispered in my ear,
“Just wait. Before you leave here, you will be able to do things your
dreams cannot conceive of.” Sam stood back up and finished the
conversation by saying, “Now go sit down and eat. Today we work on
strengthening your mind. Your body can wait for another day.”
Kiyusin was seated and waiting good-naturedly for the rest of us
to join him. I sat to his left and Sam took a seat directly across from him.
The food Kiyusin had prepared smelled absolutely fabulous. My mouth
was watering in anticipation from the second I walked into the room. I
picked up my fork and was about to start eating when Kiyusin told me to
wait for Valencia.
"You do realize it could be sundown by the time she decides to
come into this room again?" I pointed out.
"I'm well aware of that possibility, Vincent," Kiyusin replied, "but
we shall wait anyway. It's impolite to start eating before everyone is
present, especially when the person you're waiting on is a lady."
"We aren't waiting for a lady. We're waiting for my sister," I
calmly explained.
"That she may be, but she's also a lady and should be treated with
respect."
"If you say so," I mumbled to myself.
Valencia meandered into the room a moment later. Her hair
wasn't quite as dreadful as it was earlier, but a good bit of it on her right
side was now sticking straight out. I thought I could contain my laughter,
and I did try. I failed, and let out a small chuckle.
As she sat down, she turned her gaze to me. Kiyusin scolding me
for expressing amusement at Valencia’s hair troubles cut my revelry short.
I muttered a half-hearted apology and considered the matter settled. The
food tasted as good as it smelled. We all enjoyed a quiet morning meal

90

together before setting off for our lessons.
"Kiyusin is your brother?" I asked Sam as we parted company
with Valencia and her teacher.
"Yes, he is. He's my older brother."
"Does he ever get on your nerves?"
Sam leaned back and broke into gales of laughter, "Oh, you have
no idea. However, I'm quite sure he'd say the same about me. It's part of
being siblings."
I let the subject drop and took in my surroundings. We were still
in the residential area of town, only a few blocks from my house. Elm
and willow trees lined the brick streets, their green leaves scattered along
the walkway. People roamed the streets, heading to the main part of
town. I again wondered about the different colored robes and asked Sam
why he wore yellow and his brother wore green.
"Because I believe differently than he does," he answered.
"Your color denotes your beliefs?"
"Correct. Since my brother is a follower of nature, he wears
green."
"So who is represented by yellow?" I inquired.
"Why, order of course."
"Really?" I cheerfully asked. "Is that why Genepool picked you to
teach me?"
"Yes and probably."
A puzzling thought popped into my mind. "Who does your
brother serve?"
Sam looked at me, beaming with pride, "That was the question I
was hoping you'd ask."
"Why?"
"Because it is the subject on which you have the least amount of
information. The more information you have, the better chance you have
of putting everything in order. Now, to answer your question, basically he
worships Genepool. In all actuality, he and his kind are awaiting their
messiah, their leader. He is prophesied to come, but the prophecy is
extremely vague as to when."
"What about chaos?"
"They wear the black robes. You'll probably want to avoid them.
I don't think you'd find them much to your liking. On a personal level, I
get along with a lot of the chaotic types. They aren't bad people. They
just bother you after a while. For now, just pass them by."
"My father told me to stay away from them too. He made them
sound like criminals and degenerates."

91

"Well, I wouldn't go that far in describing them. They’re more
mischievous than dangerous."
"What about the others?"
Sam explained the meaning behind all the colors in our walk to his
house. Citizens dressed in blue robes were followers of light and love.
Those in red were believers in darkness and hatred. Sam was obviously
leery of these folks and warned me that, if I did encounter one of them, to
be extremely polite. Basically, what it came down to was, if I left them
alone, they'd leave me alone. It sounded like a good plan to me.
It was the other colors that knocked me for a loop. The other
two colors of clothing I'd seen were silver and white. Sam explained that
the ones in silver were the scientists, the scholars and other elite
intellectuals. Sam spoke briefly of a major undertaking currently under
development outside of town. He didn't have many details unfortunately.
These men weren't technically the leaders of Atlantia but they did hold
significant influence.
"And last are the white robes. These are the writers, the poets,
and the literati. They hardly ever speak to anyone and they seem to be
everywhere at once. You'll notice them scribbling away, writing down
everything they see. After you're here a while, you tend to ignore them."
"Do people get to read their writings?"
"They do allow ordinary folks like us enjoy their poems and such
every once in a while. The things they write in everyday life, the goingson of Atlantia and their part in it, we never get to see. That is between
them and those they follow." He pointed to a house across the road and
steered me in that direction. "You may have noticed some of them
wearing a different colored sash as well."
"I was just about to ask you about that. Doesn't Kiyusin wear
one?"
"Yes, he does. It is what you'd call a secondary characteristic. My
brother is a follower of nature but he also subscribes to the principle of
recording events as they happen. Also, you may see someone in a blue
robe with a black sash. This shows that, while this person is a follower of
light, they will use the forces of chaos to obtain their goals."
"So someone in a black robe with a red sash would be a follower
of darkness and chaotic?" I asked, shivering at the very concept. "That
has to be the worst combination on Atlantia."
"Close, but not quite. The ones you really need to avoid are the
ones in white robes with red sashes."
"Evil poets?" I scoffed. "That doesn't sound bad at all."
Sam smiled as he led me to the door of his home. "Vincent,

92

everything the men in white transcribe is passed on to others of their ilk.
Eventually, the words spread to the realms of death, both Haven and
Haedes. The words of the clerics in white and red are sacrosanct in
Haedes. For when these mortals die, they become known simply as Dark
Clerics, under the command of Wraith, the Fallen…"
I held up a hand to stop him and said, "I've met them. They
aren't that bad."
"Physically, they are insignificant. Do not doubt their power
amongst the hierarchy in Haedes, Vincent. For my sake, if you happen to
witness one watching you and writing, leave the area. Move away and
keep moving until they're gone. It's probably more than you really need
to do, but it'll make me feel better."
His eyes bore out his sincerity and I promised to stay away from
the red and whites. I couldn't figure out why Sam was so worried about
some silly writers. I guess he had his reasons.
He finally opened the door and waved me inside. Sam's house
was similar to mine with two glaring exceptions. First, it was quite a bit
smaller. Secondly were the books. Every wall, from floor to ceiling, was
filled with books. I scanned the tomes as I passed by, wondering when I
would get to read the various volumes on architecture and biology. Sam
led me into a large parlor off of the main corridor. This room was clearly
where we would be spending most of our time. Furnished sparingly, with
only a large table and two chairs, the rest of the room was overflowing
with books. I watched Sam walk around to the back of the table. I
spotted four books on the table and as I drew near I saw they were
opened. Sam invited me to sit down and I practically jumped into my
chair.
He handed me the first book and began his lesson. The first
subject of the day was mathematics, a topic at which I was moderately
experienced. Sam gave me a test and told me he wanted to see how much
I knew so he'd know where to start. The exam consisted of forty math
questions and I completed it in short order. After checking my answers,
he took the math book from my hands and opened it to the middle.
"We may as well just start here," he remarked. "Trying to teach
you things you already know is a tad redundant, wouldn't you say?" I
matched his broad smile with one of my own as we continued.
We had almost finished the rest of the mathematics book when
we stopped for lunch. I reminded him I didn't have to eat and he politely
reminded me that he did. When he rejected my idea of eating and
teaching at the same time, I gave up and resigned myself to having to

93

study on my own for a while. Sam left for the kitchen and I resumed my
math studies. Upon his return, I was ready for another one of his tests.
So far today I had taken three and passed them all with perfect scores. He
had all of the tests prepared ahead of time because he wasn't sure how far
we'd get on our first day. That was turning out to be a wise decision. He
handed me the next exam and I tore through it, hardly pausing to think. I
finished the test in a flash and once again aced it.
The rest of the day stuck to the same format. Sam would go over
a lesson in one of the math books and then there'd be a test. I'd answer
every question correctly and we'd go on to the next lesson. I wasn't just
learning how to do certain mathematics problems. Sam made sure to
include the practical application of what I was being taught. He explained
that knowing the information showed intelligence. It was putting that
information to use that defined knowledge.
We finished off the first book, which was all basic mathematics,
and moved on to the next in line. The next tome covered basic geometry
and I dove into it with the same enthusiasm. Sam was very pleased to see
me so eager for an education. The geometry lessons weren't as simple as
the basic math lessons but I picked up the information easily. Three
perfect test scores later and Sam was ready to quit for the day. I asked if I
could take a book home with me to continue my studies privately but Sam
turned me down. He didn't want his irreplaceable books leaving his
home.
I left Sam's house, promising to be back tomorrow bright and
early. The sun was just beginning to set and it cast a dull glow over the
landscape. Long shadows formed from the trees lining the streets,
making the twilight appear darker than it actually was. I walked home
through the gloom of the dying day, joyfully kicking the leaves and
pebbles I found in my path. I was ecstatic about the day's events and I
could conceive of nothing that would dampen my spirits.
I stepped through the front door of my house and was abruptly
proven wrong. Valencia was sitting at the dining room table, evidently
trying to finish up some schoolwork that Kiyusin had given her. Her
brow was furrowed in concentration and her head was virtually buried in
the book. I decided to quietly sneak past her so I could get a snack from
the kitchen. I accidentally kicked a chair sitting by the entranceway and
that was all it took to get her attention.
"Vincent, come over here a moment, would you?" she asked
pleasantly.
I was not going to be fooled by her passive tone. I leisurely
walked over to her and asked, "What do you want? I want to get

94

something to eat."
"You don't need to eat," she pointed out and quickly added,
"Besides, I need your help with something."
"And what would that be?"
She held out her book for me and it was a math book similar to
the first one I'd studied today. Unlike me, however, Valencia was still in
the very beginning of hers. "Is this as far as you got in your math lesson?
What else did Kiyusin teach you?"
"Just this, now are you going to help me or not?" she angrily
replied.
I tried not to, but I couldn't help but laugh a little at my sister's
dilemma. This earned me a nasty, eyes-glowing stare. I simply didn’t
care. Her attitude only made me laugh more.
Her displeasure grew more intense when I told her, "No, I'm not
going to help you." I immediately turned and headed back to the kitchen.
I could hear my sister yelling at me in frustration. I ignored her and
found what I was looking for. I grabbed an apple and ventured back out
to the dining room. As I came into the room, Valencia stopped her
diatribe and sat motionless, stewing in her own anger.
"So why won't you help me?" she defiantly asked.
"Why should I?"
"Because I need your help!"
"Valencia, you've got to learn these lessons on your own. If I help
you, you won't learn anything."
"I'm not asking you to do the work for me. I just need you to
show me how to do these problems correctly."
"And if you're having difficulties, you should tell Kiyusin. He's
your teacher, not me."
"But you're my brother!" she cried out.
"And what difference does that make? I should be made to learn
my lessons and then help you learn yours all because I'm your brother?" I
was really getting frustrated and it showed in my voice. "I'm sorry,
Valencia, but it doesn't work that way. If you seriously want to learn
anything you're going to have to do these things on your own." I took a
bite of my apple and winced in pain.
"Are you all right?" she asked, then added, "Not that I really care
one way or the other right now."
"I'm fine. My tooth hurts. I think I have a few loose. Didn't
father tell us that would happen?"
"I think so. I've noticed that some of mine are loose too."
"I guess I'll have to deal with the pain, just as you will have to deal

95

with the pain of your studies. Besides, math isn't that difficult."
"It's too orderly," she complained.
"That, my dear sister, is impossible," I remarked and left the
room.
I ventured upstairs and examined the books along the walls.
These weren't like the books I'd seen in Sam's house. These looked old,
and by old I meant as old as my father. I gently pulled one from the shelf
and opened it to the front. The first thing I noticed was it was written in
the language of the Aseraphim. Needing something to do to pass the
time, I closed the book and took it back to my room.
I hopped onto the bed and sprawled out. Flipping the book open
again, I gave the tome a closer inspection. The title was one word, written
in lavish script along the top of the first page: Legends. I stared at that
word for a while, envisioning all this book might contain. The word
legends could mean many things, from heroes to stories. What stories
and heroes were contained in this book, I wondered. I was shaking in
anticipation until I could hold out no longer. I carefully turned to the first
page and began reading.
From the first words, I knew I would get no sleep this evening.
This was not a book of prophecy, that much was clear right away. The
opening line of the book read, "Herein lie the recorded events of the
initiation of the Aseraphim Wars, chronicled for all time so as to reveal
for future generations the genesis of their hostility and warn them of the
bloodshed yet to come."
As I finished the opening sentence, my father called me
downstairs for dinner. Regretfully, I closed the book and slid it under my
bed. It would simply have to wait until after dinner.

96

Chapter 7
I ate quickly, eager to get back to my room. My sister was still
mad at me for not helping out with her schoolwork and wasn’t speaking
to me. If this was supposed to be some sort of punishment, I’d take
getting punished more often. My father asked me some questions about
my first day of school but didn’t pry too much. He seemed to want to
know more about Sam’s teaching methods than what I was being taught.
Other than that we ate in silence. As soon as I had the last bite finished
off I cleared my plate and darted upstairs.
I opened the drawer on the table by the door and retrieved the
key. There was no way I was going to be disturbed while reading this
book. Once the door was locked and the key returned to the drawer it
was time to get back to the book. I slid it out from its hiding place and
took a seat in a chair. The sun was almost completely over the horizon
now and as beautiful as the sunset over Atlantia was, I was more
concerned about being able to read in the dark. I lit a few candles in
anticipation of the coming night.
I opened the book and reread the first sentence again. The
somberness of the words weighed on my mind as did the importance of
what I was about to read.
Herein lay the recorded events of the initiation of the Aseraphim
Wars, chronicled for all time so as to reveal for future generations the
genesis of their hostility and warn them of the bloodshed yet to come.
The impudence of Nacht, in defiance of the Ancients, caused his
banishment to the planet of Haven. Tag, not wanting to be apart from
Nacht, urged the Ancients to reconsider. The Ancients, in their wisdom,
refused. His transgression could not go unpunished as he was responsible
for the destruction of life on Earth. Tag refused to accept the judgment
and asked to be allowed to go to Haven to be with Nacht. The Ancients
refused to grant her wish. In retribution, Tag refused to bathe the land in
light. She made clouds to cover the planet so not one single beam of light
would reach the surface. The Ancients demanded that she disperse the
clouds and let the light shine once again. Tag remained steadfast and the
Ancients finally relented and allowed her passage to Haven.
The removal of Tag and Nacht left their children, the Aseraphim,
to walk upon the Earth. Born from their union in the land of Limbo, the
Aseraphim were sent to the Earth to carry on their parent’s works. These
children were like no other seen on Earth. They walked as humans, yet
were more than any mere mortal could wish to become. To look upon

97

Christi Lona, she of the purest white wings, is to see kindness and beauty
incarnate. Her sister Lillith had similar features, but where Christi Lona
was brightness, Lillith exuded darkness. Her wings, though white, seemed
to fade into the shadows around her. Her hair was dark black as opposed
to Christi Lona’s luminous blonde mane. Their brothers, Cherub and
Loathe, each resembled one of their sisters better than one another.
Cherub shared Christi Lona’s pale features while Loathe resembled his
dark sister.
An Ancient visited the four Earthbound Aseraphim upon their
arrival. First he spoke to Christi Lona and Lillith of Tag and Nacht’s
fates. Christi Lona, she of the gossamer wings of light, fell to her knees,
weeping for the loss of her mother. In her grief, she vowed to continue
the works of her mother on the Earth. Lillith did not share her sister’s
compassion and fell into a rage at the loss of her father. Lillith, her dark
beauty as captivating as her kindly sister, vowed to do the works of her
father on the Earth. The Beholder advised them to come with him to
speak to their siblings, Loathe and Cherub. The Beholder spoke to the
four of them of the prophecy of the one that is to hold dominion over
Earth. His words sank deep into the souls of all four children. Cherub
sided with his sister Christi Lona in doing the works of their mother.
Loathe stood by his sister Lillith in her aim of doing the works of their
father. The animosity of the Aseraphim was born of this moment, when
they learned that one of them may hold dominance over this plane. The
Beholder was well pleased with his efforts to pull apart the bonds that
held the Aseraphim to one another, for he had his own motivations.
The Beholder had become infatuated with the first-born
Aseraphim, Starz. Her beauty called to him from the moment of her
creation. Starz was the most favored of the Aseraphim by all the
Ancients, all for their own reasons. Only The Beholder’s admiration had
driven him to near madness. Obsession drove him to plot to bear
children with Starz by any means, believing it was his right as an Ancient.
Starz, having been tasked to observe the events on the Earth for future
generations, was unaware of the prophecy told to her siblings. The
Beholder found Starz and devised a plan to accomplish his goals.
Removing his mask from his current life form, he set it down in her path.
Upon finding the mask, Starz was compelled to place it upon her
captivating face. Once this action was performed, the essence that is The
Beholder combined with the essence of Starz.
Unbeknownst to The Beholder, the child Wraith, tasked to record
the events born witness by his eldest sister, was dispatched to Earth to
begin his responsibilities. Wraith appeared before his sister and witnessed

98

her struggling to remove the mask of The Beholder from her personage.
Wraith instantly withdrew his spellbook and began reciting a spell in an
attempt to rescue his sister. His spell accomplished its intended function
and the mask fell to the ground. The creature that had previously worn
the mask crawled out of the darkness in an effort to retrieve the mask for
itself. Wraith spied this creature as it found the mask and waited for the
creature to wear it once more. As soon as the mask was being worn and
The Beholder was in physical form once again, Wraith pulled his axe from
its strap and beheaded the creature, taking its pain for the pain caused to
Starz. Wraith took possession of the mask of The Beholder, taking it
upon himself to see to it that he would never harm an Aseraphim again.
Starz was granted an aura by Wraith at this time, and as the only being to
come of the true love shared by Tag and Nacht, she is the only one of two
children with an aura of gold and black. Calling upon The Power Cosmic
and The Will Cosmic, Wraith asked for a way to ensure that their
counterpart, The Beholder, would never again be able to mistreat his
sister. The Power Cosmic and The Will Cosmic, knowing that The
Beholder would likely attempt this deed again if granted the opportunity,
dispersed the essence and the aura of Starz to the sky so she could keep
watch over the Earth from above. They also granted her the gift of
omnipresence. She knew every action taken upon the Earth as it was
done. The Power Cosmic and The Will Cosmic also decreed that no one
of Aseraphim blood shall ever be able to wear the mask of The Beholder
again from this point in time. As a reward for his compassion and caring
for his sister, Wraith was given a telepathic link to Starz so as to ease his
task of recording the events of the Earth.
Upon her dispersal, Starz bore four essences into the ethereal.
These would be known as Order, Chaos, Love and Hate. All four of
these essences were born of the union of Starz and The Beholder. Order
was born of The Beholder’s goals, Chaos of Starz’s memories, Love from
Starz’s feelings for her siblings and Hate from The Beholder’s impudence.
Their essences were not unknown to the Ancients as they were not new
to the universe. These four were to be held in the ethereal by Wraith with
the assistance of The Will Cosmic and The Power Cosmic. The Earth
was not prepared for their presence. It was decreed that, when these four
were born unto the Earth in ages to come, whenever the four of them
were assembled together in life, one of the three of them shall emerge and
offer guidance and advice. The four shall also be warned of what a true
union of all their powers would produce.
Centuries of hostility between the Aseraphim leading a life in the
name of Tag and the Aseraphim leading a life in the name of Nacht

99

fermented into aggression. Christi Lona and Cherub gathered armies of
likeminded races to battle the forces of darkness. Lillith and Loathe did
likewise, forming armies to do battle with the forces of light. In the
ethereal realm, in was decreed by the Ancients that any and all mortals
that perished fighting in these battles would come unto Styx to be judged
and appointed to their proper realm. Those fighting for Nacht would
spend eternity in the darkness now known as Haedes. Those fighting for
Tag would spend eternity bathed in the light of Haven. Those that did
not choose an affiliation of darkness or light would be relegated to Limbo
until judged either ready to be born again to Earth or be banished to
Haedes if found to be unredeemable. Many mortals did indeed perish in
the centuries that followed. Entire races were exterminated in the fierce
fighting. Rivers flowed red for ages and great lakes were formed in these
waterways, their currents interrupted by piles of corpses obstructing the
natural flow of the water.
The knocking at the door startled me and I jumped up out of the
chair. I swiftly closed the book and slid it back under the bed before
making my way to the door. I picked up the key and asked, "Who's
there?"
"It's me," Valencia replied. "Who did you think it would be?"
"What do you want now?" I was annoyed at the interruption and
it surely showed in my tone of voice.
"I wanted to apologize for yelling at you earlier. I shouldn't have
gotten so mad. You have your studies and I have mine. I need to learn to
do things for myself."
I was caught off guard by her frank admission. "That's very
decent of you Valencia. Thank you."
There was the briefest pause before she asked, "Can you open the
door?"
"I can. Whether I will or not depends on what else you want."
"Well," she began, trying to sound sweet and innocent.
Thankfully I knew better. "I figured you'd be bored since you didn't have
any schoolwork to worry about. I thought we could sit and talk about our
first day of school. You know, just chat about what we've learned and
all."
"In other words, you want me to tell you how you should do your
lessons."
"Not at all. I just want to know how you would do it. There's a
difference."
I slammed the key into the lock and forcefully threw open the

100

door. Valencia noticed my displeasure and sprung back into the hallway.
"Listen to me, Valencia. I am not helping you with your lessons. Stop
bothering me," I growled. She opened her mouth to speak but I cut her
off. "No. Not a word. Just go and figure it out on your own. I'm trying
to relax and I can't do that with you pestering me. Now leave me alone!"
Valencia never looked scared or worried. Her expression of calm
was infuriating. "There's no need to shout," she serenely replied. "I'll just
come back later when you're in a better mood."
She turned to walk away and I grabbed her arm, spinning her back
around. Now her expression changed. Her calm veneer was broken and
shock filled her eyes. I pulled her closer and said, "No, you will not come
back later. If you do, our father is going to send you to your room and
lock the door. That will keep you away from me."
She grinned and said, "No problem. I'll just unlock it when I get
my key."
"You aren't getting a key."
"Sure I am," she said confidently.
"Don't you think if you were getting a key you'd have it by now?"
She thought this over for a second and replied, "Fine. I'll leave.
Just don't expect my help when you need it."
I let go of her arm and laughed at the very idea. She got mad at
my rudeness and stormed off to her room. Now that she was gone I
could get back to the book. I hurriedly locked the door, retrieved the
book and hopped up onto the bed. Stretching out, I opened the book to
where I'd been before I was rudely interrupted.
The next chapter was a graphic description of the first battle
between the two divisions of Aseraphim. I was totally captivated by this
story. It began with Christi Lona charging Wraith to lead the armies of
mortals on Earth. He gathered up the strongest and bravest creatures to
fight for the side of Light. Lillith's armies were the most vile and
dangerous beings on the planet. Their evil knew no bounds and Lillith
held sway over all of them. She put her brother Loathe in command of
the soldiers of Darkness. The events described in the book were violent
and disturbing. Yet in my mind I could see the fight taking place and was
not frightened or wary. The images in my mind were strangely pleasant,
as if my mind was welcoming them so I could better understand what had
transpired. I saw bodies crushed like bugs, the victim's blood splashing
onto those beside him. I could picture Loathe, bathed in the blood of his
enemies, slicing through crowds of mortals with his halberd as if cutting
leaves from a tree. I witnessed Wraith calling out to his minions to
advance and watching them fall one by one to Loathe's forces. When

101

Wraith retreated, his army had been cut down to the tiniest fraction of
what it had been.
I kept reading, fully engrossed by the first story and now
compelled to read on. The next chapter was another battle played out so
I flipped forward a bit to see if there was anything else of interest. As it
turned out, the rest of the book was all descriptions of battles in the
Aseraphim Wars. I went back to where I'd left off and continued from
there. If I was going to read it, I might as well read it all. I spent the
entire night reading about the battles. After their first crushing defeat the
forces of Light regrouped quite well. The Light won most of the major
skirmishes with only a few exceptions. Lillith didn't take her losses well
and directed Loathe to seek more ways to gain an advantage. Loathe's
armies had taken prisoners and he began questioning them himself. Slow
painful torture was involved but he got the information he needed.
Loathe then set forth to capture their forces instead of just killing them.
Some he tortured for information, others he tried to bring to his side. At
either task, he succeeded much more often than he failed. There was
someone important on the side of Light he was able to turn to the
Darkness. He sent this traitor back to Wraith and his armies, under the
guise of having escaped. This person was able to create havoc from
within the ranks, causing several setbacks in Wraith’s plans. The forces of
Darkness were able to make gains in the war again due in large part to the
actions of this traitor.
Darkness gained more and more ground at every turn. The only
problem was, the more they fought, the more mortals died. Entire races
were being erased from existence in the fighting and many others went
into hiding. Soon the Aseraphim could not recruit as many mortals as
they once had. To survive, the creatures of Earth refused to acknowledge
the Aseraphim. Their battles would be unto themselves. Not all mortals
denied the Aseraphim but the remaining followers were few. With the
numbers on both sides severely diminished, the Aseraphim were forced to
resolve the problems themselves. Christi Lona extended an offer of peace
to her sister Lillith, hoping to at least be able to discuss bringing an end to
the war. Lillith agreed to the talks to see if they could work something
out. This marked the beginning of the end.
Centuries had passed since the Aseraphim Wars began on Earth.
The five siblings grew stronger with every victory and learned hard
lessons in defeat. A result of this was that, separately, their powers were
beyond mortal comprehension. When any of them combined their
efforts they were virtually unstoppable. Consequently, the only beings

102

that could destroy them were just as powerful as they were. A stalemate
had ensued.
Christi Lona extended an invitation to her sister Lillith with the
hopes of working out a compromise that would be beneficial to all parties.
Lillith, skeptical of her sister’s motives and untrusting by nature, refused
to come alone. She demanded that Loathe be allowed to participate in the
talks. Christi Lona agreed as long as Cherub was allowed to stand at her
side as well. Wraith, though aligned with the side of Light, was tasked to
serve as a mediator. His impartiality was born from his being charged
with recording events verbatim. A neutral site was selected and the five
siblings met on the isle of Atlantia.
The inhabitants of Atlantia consisted of the Granites, a race of
people whose entire countenance is of solid rock, the Magmites, like the
Granites also made of stone yet their rock is still molten, and the
Atlantians. All races on Atlantia had refused to choose an allegiance and
remained neutral throughout. The meeting took place in the main temple.
Seated at one side of a grand oaken table was Christ Lona, with Cherub to
her right. Across from her was her sister Lillith, with Loathe to her left.
Wraith sat between them, his great axe drawn and lying across his legs.
Flashes of bright white light filled the room as Christi Lona stared
at her twin. Patches of pure darkness broke the light intermittently as
Lillith matched Christi Lona’s gaze. No words were spoken for many
hours as they merely sat in each other’s presence. Without warning, the
room was cast into total darkness for a length of time. No sounds echoed
in the great hall. No creature, large or small, moved an inch in the gloom.
When light was finally restored, Christi Lona asked her sister if they could
begin negotiations. Lillith was impressed with her sister’s ability to trust
her, enough to let the darkness overtake her. The fact that she did not
fear the darkness impressed Lillith enough to listen to Christi Lona’s
proposal.
Christi Lona first surmised that the prophecy that The Beholder
spoke of must not refer to any of them. Since they had all become too
powerful for this realm, it would be impossible for any one of them to
triumph. Lillith agreed that there was a certain logic to her reasoning but
asked if there was any proof to her allegation. Christi Lona said that
maybe The Beholder hadn’t been completely forthright with them when
he had recited the prophecy all those centuries ago. Since they were on
Atlantia, the home of the Ancients, they called for Propheteus to join
them in their meeting. Propheteus strenuously objected to any
involvement in their proceedings and did not heed their call. Once it was
made clear to Propheteus by Styx that a fellow Ancient may have twisted

103

his prophecy for personal gain, he honored the Aseraphim’s invitation in
an attempt to maintain the integrity of his prophecies. The Aseraphim
explained what The Beholder had told to them as prophecy and asked
simply for verification from Propheteus, and nothing more. Propheteus
solemnly informed them that the prophecy as told to them was not
completely accurate. The prophecy spoke of children, not of Tag and
Nacht as The Beholder had implied, but of the Aseraphim themselves.
Lillith inquired as to what children this prophecy truly spoke of.
Propheteus was reluctant at first, but after Christi Lona reminded him of
all the dead caused by The Beholder’s heresy, he told them of the children
of Starz and The Beholder. The Aseraphim were very displeased with
Wraith, as he knew of their eldest sister’s offspring and never once said a
word about them. Propheteus left, telling them that this was the reason
he did not want to be involved.
Cherub stood and began to argue with Wraith about the existence
of these children of Starz and The Beholder. Christi Lona tried in vain to
get the two Aseraphim to remain calm. Lillith and Loathe sat quietly on
the opposite side of the table as chaos ensued among the leaders of Light.
Lillith waited for just the right moment, as her sister leaned forward to
rise from her seat, to set the room into darkness again. Caught off guard,
Christi Lona had no time to cast her light to the chamber, and darkness
prevailed long enough for Lillith to strike. With one powerful thrust that
cut through the darkness itself, she plunged her hand into Christi Lona’s
chest. With her razor-sharp nails, Lillith was able to dig the still beating
heart out of her sister’s chest. As soon as Christi Lona’s heart was
exposed, Lillith let the darkness fade so that all present could witness her
triumph.
The darkness had lasted no longer than a few seconds but it was
long enough to stop Wraith and Cherub from arguing. As soon as a
modicum of light had returned and they saw what Lillith had done, they
drew their weapons and charged at Lillith and Loathe. Lillith held up
Christi Lona’s heart and warned them not to come any closer if they ever
hoped to resurrect their beloved. Knowing that they would need Christi
Lona’s heart to bring her back to life on this realm, they heeded Lillith’s
warning. The four of them stood at the ready. Wraith was gripping his
axe so tightly his fingers indented the hardwood of the handle. His gaze
never left Loathe, who was standing next to Lillith with his halberd drawn
and pointed back at Wraith. Cherub had drawn the Daybringer blade as
soon as he noticed Lillith’s misdeed and still had it firmly in hand. He did
not point it directly at Lillith, but his eyes never left her. She casually
ambled around the room, always staying close to Loathe. She was

104

relentlessly teasing Wraith and Cherub with all of the perverted things she
could do to her sister’s now still heart. Suddenly, she stopped her pacing
and faced Cherub and Wraith. Loathe stood next to her as she clapped
the heart between her hands and began to smear her blood over her face,
her neck and her chest. Lillith bellowed with laughter as she desecrated
her sister’s very existence with her unholy act. Her exuberance echoed
throughout the temple. As the blood was spread out across her skin,
Lillith began to change physically. Wherever Christi Lona’s blood had
come into contact with Lillith, the skin was now darker than the void.
Soon the inky blackness began to flow over her body until it became her
body. From head to toe, wingtip to wingtip, Lillith had transformed.
Looking upon her form was as if looking into the void itself. Strands of
black ooze dripped from her wings. She still had a discernable form but
you had to strain your eyes and your mind to be able to distinguish it from
the surrounding shadows. His paralysis broken, Cherub screamed out in
anguish and charged at Lillith, as did Wraith. At their first step, the room
fell into utter darkness. Without Christi Lona to help cast light against
Lillith, they were virtually powerless to regain control of the situation.
When light was restored, Cherub and Wraith stood alone in the great hall
of Atlantia. Wraith, in mourning, spoke a spell to teleport Christi Lona's
body to Haven, as she could once again inhabit her body in that realm.
When Cherub and Wraith left the great hall, they encountered
Propheteus waiting patiently for them. Cherub drew the Daybringer from
its sheath and held it to the throat of the prophet. Cherub demanded to
know why, if he knew what would happen, he did nothing to stop it,
blaming him for Christi Lona’s death. Propheteus explained it was not his
place to interfere with the prophecies. He only knew what would happen,
not why. Propheteus reminded Cherub that he did not want to attend
their meeting but was instead convinced to by a fellow Ancient. His goal
was only to clear up any misgivings about what had been told to them.
Every other piece of information that was passed to them, and every
subsequent action, was directly due to them calling on him and asking for
more than was offered. Wraith asked Propheteus if he knew of any
reason The Beholder would do such a thing as lie about a prophecy. The
only reason Propheteus could surmise was that The Beholder believed he
knew whom the chosen one was that the prophecy speaks of. His actions
may speak of a plan to ready the world for that one’s arrival. Cherub
came to the conclusion that Lillith would most likely attempt the same
ends. If she believed she knew whom the chosen one was, she may try to
gain favor by controlling the world until the one arrived and was strong
enough to take command. Propheteus informed Cherub and Wraith that,

105

before Lillith departed Atlantia, she visited The Beholder's temple and
stole the Black Stone. The Black Stone of the Ancients, created by The
Beholder at the beginning of time, denotes rule over Haedes. If Lillith
were to be killed she would be sent to Haedes to begin her reign as queen.
Propheteus, in an attempt to correct the imbalance created by Lillith's
actions, departed for Haven to present Christi Lona with his gem, the
Light Stone. The Light Stone, created by Propheteus at the beginning of
the universe, denotes rule over Haven. Christi Lona would become the
queen of Haven, welcoming all who were deemed worthy to bask in her
loving embrace. Knowing Christi Lona was destined for greater things,
Wraith and Cherub vowed to fight on in her memory and pledged, on
Tag’s name, that they would be victorious.
My father lied to them. After reading the story that was the one
prevailing thought echoing in my head. He lied to them. He said he
knew I was the chosen one, so maybe he lied to them to help me. It
sounded possible, but so were many other scenarios. There was no way I
could ask him without letting him know I'd read this book. I didn't even
know if he'd object to my reading it or not.
As I mentally reviewed what I'd read, I was able to put certain
facts together that led me to another possibility. Since I was in Atlantia,
and Atlantia was where the meeting took place, there could be some way
to get more information from the locals. Atlantia was also the home of
the Ancients, so the local I need to talk to was Genepool. He may not
have had firsthand knowledge of the incident, but he probably knew
enough to help me fill in the blanks. For now, I just wanted to get back
to reading.
The next story continued the tale of the downfall of the
Aseraphim. After Lillith's slaying of Christi Lona, the forces of Darkness
grew to be more powerful than ever. Cherub and Wraith continued to
fight for the side of Light and while their armies were well motivated, they
simply lacked the numbers and the strength to defeat Lillith. It wasn't
until Cherub himself led the charge at the Battle of Eireland that the
advantage seemingly began to shift back to the Light.
Cherub had gathered his forces in Eireland, having been pushed
northward in retreat from Lillith's advancing army. He sent Wraith to
command the forces in Egypt, hoping to marshal enough troops for an
attack from the south. Az and Benevolence, the two lesser Aseraphim
charged with commanding from amongst the troops, were in the east,
hoping to recruit some of the more civilized lycan races to join in the

106

battle. Cherub knew there was very little chance the lycans would
cooperate. They had always been known as races with great personal
pride and phenomenal strength and agility. These proud races were also
well known for their neutrality, only doing battle in self-defense and selfpreservation.
Lillith had become obsessed with putting an end to Cherub and
his forces. Loathe had almost done Lillith the favor in a recent battle.
Loathe had met Cherub on the shores of Eireland upon his arrival.
Cherub had brought with him the remaining armies from his attempt to
overthrow the leadership of Normandy. Loathe, fighting alone,
slaughtered most of Cherub's remaining forces as they set ashore. Cherub
yelled out orders but his troops perished quickly. Cherub flew over the
dead lying before him and charged at Loathe. Cherub swung the
Daybringer blade at Loathe as he descended from the sky. Reacting at the
last second, Loathe raised his halberd to ward off the attack and was able
to narrowly escape being beheaded. Cherub's armies pulled back as
Cherub advanced and he and Loathe fought each other alone. Cherub
had landed next to Loathe and pulled the Daybringer back again. Loathe
knelt down and swung his halberd forward with his right hand, hitting
Cherub in the knees and dropping him to the ground. Loathe spun and
rose up, twisted the halberd around and thrust the blade downward.
Cherub rolled away and Loathe's strike caught nothing but the feathers of
Cherub's wings. Cherub swung his legs around and was able to knock
Loathe's feet out from under him. Cherub rose and prepared to attack
when Loathe evaporated into the shadows. Cherub roared in anger at the
lost opportunity to kill his dark twin.
The fact that Loathe had chosen to fight alone caused confusion
among the leaders of the armies of Light. Wraith and Az wondered aloud
to Cherub if Loathe believed he could defeat the three of them himself.
Cherub brushed that aside as lunacy. Since Lillith was the one who would
hold court in Haedes, Loathe most likely was doing her bidding to gain
favor. If Lillith believed she could take over the planet in preparation for
the arrival of the chosen one, she must have also believed the chosen one
was going to worship the Dark. Lillith's goal appeared to Az and Wraith
to rule over Haedes and Earth. If Lillith controlled the Earth and Haedes,
there would be no souls going to Haven, there being no souls deserving
anymore. If that were to happen, Lillith might be able to find a way to
take over Haven since the numbers on the side of Light would be severely
diminished. It was then that Cherub sent Az to the east and Wraith
southward to gather more fighters. The only way to stop Lillith was going
to be by taking the fight to her and going on the offensive.

107

Knowing that Loathe was still nearby, Cherub began to recruit
reinforcements among the tribes of Eireland. His labors were only
moderately successful as most mortals lived in fear of Lillith and her
minions. Those courageous few who joined Cherub in his struggle were
strong and Cherub was very thankful for his good fortune. As his army
grew, Cherub encountered more and more creatures aligned with Lillith.
The experience was a blessing for his troops, for though they were great
fighters they had never before fought an enemy such as this. Creatures
that were once so similar to these simple beings were now twisted, vile
beasts. Their very countenance was transformed by the darkness coursing
through their veins. Cherub and his troops slaughtered every last one
they came across, considering it mercy killings to put these poor creatures
out of their misery.
Lillith was well aware of Cherub’s works and was pleased. Every
time Cherub and his army killed one of her minions, their soul ascended
to Haedes. The more Cherub killed, the more the population of Haedes
grew. Lillith and Loathe planned to increase the number of denizens in
Haedes while she took over Earth. This way, once Loathe was granted
dominion over Earth, she could depart for Haedes and begin preparations
for the invasion of Haven. Cherub was still overwhelmingly outnumbered
so Lillith believed it was worth the risk to sacrifice a few soldiers. When
Lillith decided enough time had passed for Haedes to gain significant
numbers, she ordered an attack on Cherub’s forces.
Come dawn the next day, over the hills of Eireland, Cherub
marched on Lillith’s encampment. Loathe had yet to fully assemble his
remaining forces as they were all still in the surrounding woods searching
for Cherub. Loathe still had greater numbers at his disposal and called his
troops to action. The element of surprise had worked as planned for
Cherub as he and his army were able to slay many enemies before a solid
defense could be mounted against them. Once the forces of Darkness
had gathered their numbers together, they realized they were now the
ones outnumbered. The forces of Light marched onward, paying no heed
to their flanks. This was unfortunate as a battalion of Dark soldiers
emerged from the woods bordering the encampment. Taken unaware,
the forces of Darkness were able to kill many soldiers of Light. Loathe
sensed a break in Cherub’s advance and ordered his troops to attack.
The soldiers of Darkness that had come out of the woods
attacked in a frenzy and the reason became clear as a great army appeared
behind them in pursuit. The assembled forces of Az and Wraith had
driven the Dark soldiers through the woods, killing all that moved.
Wraith swung his axe and cut down every creature in his path. Soon

108

every one of the creatures that came from the woods was slain.
With Loathe’s forces advancing, they ran headlong into the
combined forces of Light. There was no hope for the Dark troops from
the first encounter. Loathe saw that the battle had turned against him, so
he marshaled a small force to protect Lillith. The forces of Light
slaughtered every last being that fought against them before hunting for
Lillith and Loathe. They were found preparing to decamp and Lillith
alerted Loathe to their presence. There were twenty guards around
Loathe and Lillith as they faced hundreds of fighters for Light. Lillith
raised a hand and told them all to leave. To Cherub and Az’s amazement,
all of the forces of Light, as well as the twenty guards, departed.
Lillith remarked to Cherub that this was a family matter and
should be kept within the family. Wraith charged at Lillith but Loathe
stepped into his path. Wraith swung his axe at Loathe’s chest and Loathe
jumped back to avoid the attack. Loathe, halberd in hand, stepped
forward as Wraith continued his swing and stabbed at his chest. His
halberd found its mark but wasn’t able to penetrate Wraith’s armor.
Wraith brushed aside Loathe’s weapon with his right hand and brought
the axe back around with his left. Loathe ducked down and the axe
breezed past his head. He thrust his halberd upwards into the thigh of
Wraith and pressed the weapon into his flesh until the blade hit bone.
Wraith bellowed in pain, grabbed the halberd and wrenched it from his
leg. Loathe kept hold of his weapon and stood as Wraith pull the halberd
free. Loathe went to attack again when Lillith commanded him to stop.
During the fight, Cherub never took his eyes off of Lillith. The
Daybringer was withdrawn and at the ready and Cherub was well prepared
to kill Lillith when the time was right. When Lillith told Loathe to cease
his attack, Cherub knew the time would be soon. Lillith spoke to Cherub
about having to take the advantage when it presented itself. When
Propheteus told them it was going to be one of Starz’s children that
fulfilled the prophecy, she knew she had to remake the Earth into a place
of evil and to help Hate prosper. Lillith stated her belief that only Hate
could be the one to command dominion over Earth, as it was the only
thing inherent to every living creature. Lillith enforced her point by
reminding Cherub that, no matter how much love he was capable of, he
still hated her. Lillith explained that Hate is ever present, where Love
fades. Cherub mentioned Order and Chaos but Lillith only laughed at the
idea of one of them controlling this realm. According to her reasoning,
Order and Chaos had no chance to prevail because Chaos was inherently
unruly and the definition of Order had yet to be clearly determined. Hate,
said Lillith, could be directed with accuracy, again citing Cherub's hatred

109

of his dark sister, and it was well defined. Cherub informed Lillith he was
done talking about Hate. He wanted to finish this war and to do that he
needed to kill her. Lillith spread out her arms and wings and invited
Cherub to do what he wished. Loathe invoked an enchantment and
evaporated into the shadows, leaving Lillith alone with Wraith, Az and
Cherub. Cherub smiled and plunged the Daybringer into her chest and
twisted. As he withdrew his sword, Lillith smiled and muttered a
departing word of appreciation. Her dark form collapsed to the floor,
lifeless at last. Cherub bent down and cut into her chest again and
removed her black heart. Hovering above her dead body, Cherub held
the heart in his hand and violently clenched. The heart exploded,
showering Cherub with Lillith’s blood. He quickly reached into his
satchel for a bottle of Blessed Water and washed off the offending blood.
Wraith walked over to Cherub and gazed down at Lillith's body.
He spoke an incantation and banished Lillith's body to Haedes. When her
physical form departed this realm, the Black Stone of the Ancients
departed with it, giving Lillith dominion over Haedes. This had been
Lillith's plan all along. With her armies increased in Haedes, Lillith chose
to leave Loathe in charge on Earth as she readied things in Haedes. With
the leaders of Darkness now split between realms, the forces of Light felt
secure in the knowledge that they were in command of the situation.
Truth be told, Lillith and Loathe were the ones in complete control.
All this talk of crushing people’s hearts was getting to be a little
disgusting. The violent images in my mind were becoming more and
more disturbing. The chaos and the death involved in war awoke a sense
of dread in the very depths of my soul. Knowing this was my family
engaged in such brutal warfare didn't make the facts any easier to take.
The forces of Darkness were the worst of the bunch. Lillith didn’t seem
like someone I'd want to confront. I didn't like the ends she wished to
achieve but upon further consideration, I had to admit her plan was quite
good. She must not have succeeded since the world wasn't an evil place
upon my arrival. Not wanting to wait any longer to see where it all went
wrong, I continued reading.
Cherub reunited with Wraith and Az and mapped out a plan to
continue their advance on the forces of Darkness. Cherub would scour
the Eireland countryside in search of Loathe. Wraith was to take his new
troops and head east and recruit anyone that Az may have missed. Az
was sent south to do the same. Benevolence, carrying Az's children in her
womb, asked to stay in Eireland with Cherub but he sent her off with Az.

110

Cherub told her if he were to find Loathe, it might be too dangerous for
her and her unborn children. Benevolence reluctantly agreed and
departed with Az for Egypt. Az was accompanied by some of the lycans
he had recruited in the east and made it their primary mission to guard his
bride.
Cherub's army had grown considerably with the additions Wraith
and Az had brought back. Wraith and Az only took a small band of
fighters with them, leaving the rest with Cherub to continue the battle in
Eireland. Days of searching the woodlands revealed no sign of the elusive
Loathe. No local villagers had seen him and no indication of his presence
was to be found. Believing he must have departed from Eireland after
Lillith's demise, Cherub regrouped and led his men to the shores. Across
a small strait was a large continent where Loathe could easily find refuge
and reinforcements.
When arriving in Eireland, Cherub had docked his ships in a small
village on the western shore. When Cherub and his soldiers reached the
village it had been torn asunder. Every house in the village had been
burnt to the ground. The dead were left decaying in the streets. Blood
painted the streets in crimson. Cherub knelt to examine one of the
deceased and noticed the wounds were still fresh. As Cherub rose to his
feet, he ordered his men to stand ready.
Cherub sent some soldiers to check on the ships. Not long after
they left to fulfill Cherub's order, Cherub could hear their anguished cries
as they came under attack and were slaughtered. Before Cherub could
react and send more troops to the shoreline, Loathe and his army
appeared and charged through the gates of the village. Cherub's soldiers
were ready but unorganized. The screams of terror emanating from the
shores did nothing to enhance their moral. Though slightly unprepared,
the forces of Light fought valiantly. The battle was intensely fought by
both sides and both sides took many casualties. The Dark battalion that
had been sent to the waterfront appeared and attacked the soldiers of
Light from the rear, effectively surrounding Cherub's army. Cherub
turned and single-handedly laid waste to the soldiers of Darkness
advancing from behind, leaving the remainder of his troops to repel the
advance.
The soldiers of Light, though outnumbered, fought fearlessly and
gained the advantage as the forces of Darkness were made to withdraw.
Loathe shouted orders from the rear and commanded his troops to hold
their positions. Loathe emerged from the ranks and advanced on
Cherub's soldiers alone. The front echelon of the forces of Light charged
at Loathe as he pressed on. As the soldiers of Light neared, Loathe raised

111

his free hand and spoke an enchantment. The followers of Light halted
immediately, their progress frozen by Loathe's words. With one wellplaced swing of his halberd, Loathe decapitated half of the ranks before
him. The spell he had cast was broken by his violence and he barely had
enough time to enact the same sentence upon the remaining men before
him. Loathe signaled for his troops to follow him as they broke through
the ranks of Cherub's army. The soldiers of Light attempted to slay
Loathe as he passed and all met their demise. The entire march forward
Loathe was reciting an enchantment that made his enemies trust him
implicitly. Once he had accomplished that feat, he was able to pass
through their ranks unmolested. The forces of Light continued to battle
the Darkness as Loathe searched for and found Cherub.
Cherub had dispatched of the last soldiers of Darkness to come
into the battle from the waterfront. He turned and saw Loathe emerging
from the throng of fighting soldiers. Cherub did not rush at his brother,
but stood ready, as he got closer. Loathe slowed his pace and asked
Cherub if he was ready to be reunited with his sister. Cherub replied by
asking Loathe the same question. Their banter and taunting continued as
they began to circle each other. When Loathe began to wistfully
reminisce about Lillith and the despicable act of desecration she had
performed with Christi Lona's heart, Cherub roared in anguish and
charged. Cherub, Daybringer clenched tightly in his right hand, swung
upwards from his hip, aiming for Loathe's abdomen and chest. Loathe
was able to get the halberd up just in time to block the attack. Cherub
continued to ferociously attack his brother but to little avail. Loathe was
able to ward off most of Cherub's attacks and the blows that did connect
were minor. Cherub pressed on, vowing to do away with Loathe or die
trying. Cherub raised the Daybringer above his head and brought it
crashing down towards Loathe's head. Loathe raised his halberd with
both hands and stopped the blade from finding its mark. Loathe kicked
out, catching Cherub in the stomach and propelling him backwards a step.
When Cherub fell back, Loathe dropped his halberd and grasped the
Daybringer's blade between his hands. Loathe twisted his wrists,
wrenching the sword from Cherub's hands. Loathe tossed it into the
melee behind him and pick up his halberd. Cherub lunged forward,
slamming his shoulder into Loathe's chest and driving him into the melee.
Cherub sprung to his feet and stepped away from the crowd. Loathe
remained on the ground, dazed by Cherub's attack. The soldier Loathe
had collided with was a follower of Light, and upon seeing Loathe on the
ground, he stabbed the dark Aseraphim in the chest with his spear.
Loathe gripped the offending weapon and pulled it from his chest.

112

Cherub was just stepping forward as Loathe yanked the spear from the
soldier's hands and threw it at Cherub. The weapon flew true and pierced
Cherub directly in the chest. Loathe gathered up his halberd, killed the
soldier that had wounded him, and walked over to his brother.
Cherub was lying on the ground, writhing in pain. Loathe casually
pulled the spear from Cherub's chest and the light Aseraphim cried out in
agony. Tossing the weapon aside, Loathe proceeded to taunt his brother,
chiding him for choosing the side of Light over Darkness. As a final act
of mercy, Loathe promised to cut off Cherub's head before removing his
heart. This way, Cherub would be spared the indignity of witnessing his
own demise. Cherub slid his hand into his satchel and, unbeknownst to
Loathe, grabbed a vial of Blessed Water and removed it. Before Loathe
could rise to his feet, Cherub emptied the water onto Loathe. Steam rose
from Loathe's body as he jumped off of Cherub's prone form. The
Blessed Water was scorching Loathe's flesh everywhere it came into
contact. Cherub had made sure some of the water ran down Loathe's face
and into his eyes, hoping to blind his adversary. Loathe staggered around
screaming and Cherub wasted no time. He chanted a location spell and
the Daybringer blade flew out of the battle and fell at his feet. Cherub
slowly bent over to retrieve it and dropped to one knee in pain. The
wound to his chest was severe and he'd lost a lot of blood, but nothing
was going to stop Cherub from finishing off his brother.
Loathe regained his bearings just as Cherub was rising with the
Daybringer in hand. Loathe was still in a great deal of pain from Cherub's
attack but was clearly in better condition than Cherub. Loathe thrust
forward with his halberd and Cherub met the attack with his sword,
knocking the halberd away. Loathe followed by swinging his weapon in
an attempt to slice open the Aseraphim but again Cherub was able to
defend. Cherub was notably weak as he kept his free hand pressed against
the open wound in his chest to staunch the flow of blood. Loathe pushed
the attack harder and Cherub was forced to draw back slightly. Loathe
thrust his halberd at his brother's torso time and time again, to no avail.
Cherub succeeded momentarily in defending against Loathe’s attack.
Loathe stepped forward again and instead of lunging forward, he feigned
an attack. As Cherub lowered his sword to defend, Loathe swiftly raised
his halberd and plunged it into Cherub's throat.
Cherub fell to the ground, halberd still lodged in his neck. Loathe
went over to his brother, violently pulled the halberd from his neck and
impaled Cherub in the chest. Cherub breathed one last time and Loathe
smiled. Loathe quickly twisted the halberd so as to open up Cherub's
chest enough to fit in his hand. Once the gap was large enough, Loathe

113

reached inside and withdrew Cherub's dead heart. He held it up to the
sky and bellowed in laughter. Loathe arose from the ground, heart in
hand, and progressed toward the still raging battle. When he reached the
edge of the throng, he cast his trust enchantment and a path opened up
for him. Loathe walked past soldiers fighting and dying for their
respective sides yet remained untouched. He ordered his troops to fight
valiantly and then let themselves get killed. Loathe assumed Lillith would
need their numbers in Haedes more than he would need them here. As
Loathe nonchalantly strolled through the intense fighting, he began to
devour Cherub's heart, taking bites out of the organ as if it were a fresh,
ripe apple. Blood cascaded down his chin and fell onto his body as he
walked and he reveled in the sight. As Loathe ate, his physical form
began to change. Horns grew out from the top of his head and his skin
took on a sickly, bluish tint. His height increased, as did his muscle
stature, making Loathe into an even more fearsome looking creature than
he had been previously. He emerged from the fighting as a true demon,
much like his sister Lillith. All that was left for Loathe was to dispose of
Wraith and Az. Once he’d accomplished that task, all Loathe and Lillith
had to do was patiently await the coming of the chosen one. Once the
chosen one was under their thrall, then Darkness could truly conquer all.
Az and Wraith met at the shores of Eireland days after Cherub's
demise. Upon returning to the village and the scene of the battle, the two
Light Aseraphim found some of the remaining soldiers of Light holding
vigil over Cherub's body. The remaining soldiers told them the story of
the great battle and of Cherub's death. Wraith vowed to end this war
once and for all. He ordered the soldiers left from Cherub's battalion to
round up the rest of their group and meet back here as soon as possible.
Wraith cast a spell to deliver Cherub from this plane of existence to the
other. Cherub's body evaporated and was reborn in Haven at his sister's
side.
Az, Benevolence and Wraith had marshaled a considerable
amount of troops to fight for the side of Light in their travels. The lycans
Az had gathered in the east were very helpful in persuading other races of
their kind to join in the fight. Wraith also had great success in the east, as
he was able to enlist the services of many other breeds of lycans that Az
could not. Wraith brought along the Orinthians who were creations of
Genepool combining the elements of humans and birds. Also from the
east came the Taurins, another of Genepool's creations combining the
elements of man and bull. Both breeds were tremendous fighters and
Wraith was well prepared to use these race's natural abilities to the fullest

114

extent. Az, Benevolence and Wraith planned for a total frontal assault as
soon as the remaining soldiers of Light arrived back at the village. The
only difficulty was in locating Loathe. Believing he may have fled to the
mainland, Benevolence volunteered to lead a search party to the south.
She would take some of the Orinthians to search from the air and would
be escorted by Pridians on the ground. Wraith agreed, since the vision of
the Orinthians was extraordinary and the feline sense of smell inherent to
the Pridians was likewise as sharp, they would be the perfect scouts to
assist Benevolence. Az objected due to Benevolence’s condition of being
pregnant, but she assured Az that no ill will would befall her. Az
reluctantly agreed and Benevolence and her troops set sail for the
continent.
Three days past as Az and Wraith awaited the return of the
soldiers of Light that had fought with Cherub. The soldiers that had
remained behind told Az and Wraith of the command that Loathe had
given his fighters upon departing the battlefield. Az could not understand
why Loathe would issue such a command but Wraith did. Loathe was
hoping to build up the forces in Haedes with the slain soldiers, so asking
them to die in battle was akin to stationing them on another front in the
war. Az was taken aback by the senselessness of the plan and swore he
would see it fail. The remaining troops that had fought with Cherub
returned just before sunset on the third day. They were able to recruit
more fighters as they rounded up the ones that had fought by their side
before. Wraith explained to the assembled crowd that they would fight
the battle to end the Aseraphim War once and for all. Wraith split the
troops evenly between himself and Az and told Az to go back inland and
to the north to continue gathering fighters. Wraith said that he would
search in the south and they would meet back here in five days time.
When the five days had passed, Az and Wraith met back at the
seaside village. Both Aseraphim had better luck than they could have
imagined and their army was now three times what it had been. The
soldiers of Light boarded their ships and set sail for the continent to
search for Benevolence and check on her progress in the search for
Loathe. Upon reaching shore, they discovered a horrific scene. Many
fighters for Light lie dead upon the sandy shores. Their corpses were
butchered. Long, gaping wounds like perverted smiles covered their
bodies. Heads were chopped off of bodies and set resting atop the chest
of the victim with the face turned back toward where the head should've
been. The sands were soaked in red from the excessive blood spilled.
Wraith screamed in anger at the scene before him and ordered his troops
from the ships to search for survivors. Az bolted from the ship in search

115

of his bride, Benevolence.
The soldiers found only one survivor, an Orinthian, weak and
wounded but still alive. He spoke of Loathe and his minions, attacking as
soon as the ships set ashore. The dying soldier could not surmise how
Loathe knew where they would come aground until the battle was ending.
The Orinthian was airborne and saw Loathe charge at Benevolence in the
melee but halted his attack once he recognized his intended target.
Loathe casually turned away from her with an evil smile. The soldiers
informed Az and Wraith that Benevolence made no move to attack
Loathe as he retreated from her. It was shortly thereafter that the
Orinthian was pierced by an arrow and plummeted to the ground. He
landed in this exact spot and was left for dead. Az accused the wounded
soldier of fabricating his story and threatened to kill him for his insolence.
Wraith stayed Az's attack, temporarily sparing the soldier's life. Wraith
inquired if the Orinthian could be mistaken about what he witnessed.
The soldier held firm to his story and apologized to Az for upsetting him
with this news. Az refused to believe the soldier's words, claiming
Benevolence would never betray the side of Light. The soldier told Az
and Wraith that, during and after the battle, some of the forces of Light
rushed into the woods just past the shore, their cowardice saving their
lives. Those that chose to stay and fight perished, except Benevolence.
She apparently made for the woods as well, hoping to reunite her troops.
The Orinthian did not believe she was trying to gather her forces again,
but aiming to kill them. Az grew angrier with the soldier for his
supposition and lashed out at the wounded fighter, telling him he had to
be mistaken. After mumbling a final apology, the Orinthian passed away.
Wraith was able to settle Az's emotions as they collected their troops and
planned the search for Benevolence.
The search did not last long as Benevolence emerged from the
woods just as Wraith and Az were about to enter. Wraith confronted
Benevolence with the Orinthians allegations and Benevolence vehemently
denied the accusations. When Wraith continued his interrogation, Az
angrily confronted Wraith and demanded he cease his questioning and
take her at her word. Wraith turned away from Az and ordered the
troops into the woods to search for Loathe. Benevolence told Wraith she
knew where most of the remaining soldiers of Light were encamped.
Benevolence led the troops into the woods and shortly came upon her
remaining soldiers. One of the Pridians mentioned he had seen some of
their enemies to the southeast. Az wanted to march off in that direction
but Wraith advised against it until they could refortify their ranks. Wraith
recommended going southwest and scouring the countryside in search of

116

those who would stand and fight against the Darkness. Az reluctantly
agreed and the forces of Light set off to the southwest.
For days, the Aseraphim and the soldiers of Light recruited both
man and beast to join with them in the fight against the Darkness. All
races of mortals knew of the battle raging and felt the conclusion on the
horizon. Although they knew that joining with either side would most
likely seal their fate, the races of mortals freely enlisted. The forces of
Light grew exponentially as time passed, but Wraith was worried the
forces of Darkness might have had the same successes. When they could
march westward no longer, Wraith led the soldiers east to search for
Loathe and finish this war begun so many centuries ago.
On the march east there were scattered skirmishes with small
battalions of Dark soldiers. The overwhelming numbers the forces of
Light had at their disposal made short work of these renegade troops.
Wraith sensed chaos and disorder among the ranks of the Darkness and
grew more optimistic about their chances. Az did not share his fellow
Aseraphim's attitude and became weary as time passed. When Az
reminded Wraith of the soldiers left to die in Eireland so their souls could
feed Lillith's army in Haedes, he surmised the troops they'd encountered
might just be sacrifices for her benefit. Wraith said that, though Az may
be correct, there would be no mercy for their enemies. The encounters
with the soldiers of Darkness grew more fierce by the day and the
Aseraphim assumed they must have been nearing Loathe's encampment.
This proved correct when a Pridian scout returned one morning at sunrise
and reported that he spied Loathe's armies in a valley a day's march to the
southeast. Wraith readied the army of Light with a rousing address,
claiming that this war would end and the forces of Light would stand
victorious.
The army of Light, thousands upon thousands in number, made
camp a few scant miles from a ridge leading to the valley where Loathe's
army was based. That night, under the pretext of searching for food
among the foliage, Benevolence broke away from the encampment and
met with a soldier of Darkness. Well away from the prying eyes and ears
of those suspicious of her, Benevolence spoke to the soldier about the
plan Wraith had drawn up for their attack. Benevolence returned to Az's
side shortly thereafter, secure in the belief that her treachery went
unnoticed. The soldier went back to Loathe with the information
provided by Benevolence. He was well pleased, knowing now that victory
was assured. Loathe alerted his troops to be prepared for an attack at
daybreak.
The army of Light was awake and alert before dawn, ready to do

117

battle to the death. Wraith told his troops to stand ready as he detailed
the plan of attack. He would lead the army around the ridge they now sat
atop and attack not out of the west but from the north. The path leading
east was too exposed for Wraith's liking and he saw the forest was quite
dense to the north. Also, taking the path would mean charging downhill
in a column and Wraith deduced they would take too many casualties with
that plan. Wraith said they would gradually lead the army downhill
through the forest, thereby being on level ground for the attack. This was
not the plan that Benevolence had relayed to the soldier of Darkness and
she grew worried. If the army of Light attacked from the north instead of
the west, Loathe might incorrectly assume she had betrayed him. As the
army marched onward around the valley, Benevolence openly questioned
Wraith's rational for his battle plan. Wraith became irate with
Benevolence. As they reached the staging point for the attack, he
expressed his opinion that she may indeed be a traitor. Just before he left
to organize his troops for the attack, Wraith told Benevolence that if she
happened to survive this fight, she would have to deal with him and
explain herself and her actions.
The small village Loathe had chosen to occupy with his army did
not have any walls around it for protection, making it easy for his forces
to overrun its previous occupants. Unfortunately, it made the village
more difficult to defend. Loathe set up his defenses heavily to the west,
anticipating the forces of Light’s march down the ridge.
Wraith’s armies watched the village from the surrounding forest as
the sun crept slowly into the eastern sky. He was well pleased to see that
Loathe had concentrated his forces to the west. Wraith had specifically
told Az and Benevolence of his original plan to attack from that direction
to verify his suspicions about Benevolence. Seeing Loathe’s soldiers
gathered to the west confirmed his beliefs. Wraith commanded the forces
closest to Loathe’s defenses to engage and the battle was begun.
Loathe was standing behind his battle lines, awaiting sign of his
enemies. When the forces of Light came out of the woods on his right
flank, he was caught unaware. Benevolence had said that they would
come out of the ridgeline and Loathe swore to witness her death before
the day was done. He ordered the troops on his left to support the
defenses under attack. Loathe turned around and saw Wraith leading the
soldiers of Light out of the woods. Realizing now that victory was going
to come at a cost, he ordered his troops to follow him and charged at
Wraith. Wraith raised his right hand and cast an enchantment on Loathe,
causing the demon to burst into flames of Holy Fire; white and as hot as
the sun. Loathe screamed out in agony as his flesh bubbled and dripped,

118

burning, to the ground. Loathe fell to his knees, writing in pain. Shortly
he fell silent and still. His armies had halted their progression, amazed at
what they’d witnessed.
When Loathe rose to his feet, a sound broke through his armies
like waves crashing on the shore. The forces of Darkness continued
marching forward behind Loathe once again. The demon was
smoldering, a wicked grin on his face, as he resumed his charge at Wraith.
Loathe drew a spear and threw it at Wraith. The weapon sunk into
Wraith’s left shoulder and continued through, destroying meat and bone
in its travels. Wraith grasped the spear and yanked it from his body, only
flinching slightly as he swallowed his pain. He proceeded to toss it into
the air, caught it, and hurled it back. Loathe was able to dodge the
projectile but felt the breeze of the spear pass by his head. The spear
sunk into the chest of a soldier behind him and his army simply marched
over his fallen body. Loathe withdrew his halberd and ran at Wraith,
lunging forward with his weapon aimed at the Aseraphim’s chest. Wraith
grabbed the halberd and stopped the blade from striking him with nary an
inch to spare. He pushed the halberd back at Loathe, causing the dark
Aseraphim to step back to maintain his balance. Loathe was able to loose
the halberd from Wraith's grasp as Wraith unsheathed his axe. Wraith
swung at Loathe's head, again barely missing his mark. The forces of
both Darkness and Light surrounded them in their march to battle and
soon Loathe and Wraith were separated and lost in the crowd.
Wraith took out his frustration of failing to kill Loathe by
mercilessly and brutally slaying every soldier of Darkness that had the
misfortune to come near him. Az had brought the remaining soldiers of
Light in from the northeast, outflanking the forces of Darkness and
gaining the early advantage. Those fighting for Darkness were pushed
back as the soldiers of Light advanced, killing all that stood in their path.
Benevolence fought and killed many dark troops herself. She attacked
with reckless abandon, slicing down her enemies as if she were swatting
aside insects. Wraith took notice of her actions and felt no conflicting
emotions. She had betrayed them and must be punished.
Man and beast fell to the ground, their blood collecting in pools
that formed into flowing streams. Both the side of Light and the side of
Darkness took heavy casualties in the initial assault. Men lay on the
ground with weaponry protruding from their chest, faces torn apart by
savage beasts, limbs hanging onto bodies by the smallest threads of skin
and muscle. The planet had never before seen such savagery, and she
cried. Rain began to fall from the sky, turning the field of battle into a
quagmire. The falling rain, mixed with the blood of the fallen soldiers,

119

made the small streams created by their lifeblood into rivers.
The weather worked to the advantage for the forces of Darkness.
The soldiers of Light had been using arrows that had been set aflame and
were now unable to do so in wet weather. Loathe's forces made gains
when the arrows stopped flying and viciously set to exterminating all they
set their sights on. The brutality displayed by the soldiers of Darkness
had a demoralizing effect on the forces of Light. Several soldiers resigned
themselves to their fates and were torn asunder by Loathe's minions.
Oceans of blood formed before the sun set in the western sky, and the
battle raged on.
Because their numbers had been seriously depleted, the one large
battle had broken down into several smaller skirmishes. Both the army of
Light and the forces of Darkness claimed victory in these fights and both
sides lost many more soldiers. The soldiers of Darkness had greater
numbers as night turned to day, yet to say there was any advantage
anymore would be untrue. All those fighting, mortal and immortal, man
and beast, felt the strain of the prolonged warfare. Reactions to the strain
varied from elation to fatigue. All battled on until only a few hundred
remained. It was then that Wraith finally found Loathe.
All day and through the night, after their initial confrontation,
Wraith made it his mission to dispatch of his evil older brother. To have
turned Benevolence to the darkness enough to make her betray the forces
of Light fed a fire in his soul that could only be quenched with Loathe's
blood. Though he knew what he must do in regards to Benevolence,
Wraith did not blame her entirely. Loathe was the master of lies and his
treachery came as no real surprise to Wraith. Wraith knew he would
either have to kill or banish Benevolence, now pregnant with Az's
children, and the anger of this knowledge got him through the battle
unscathed. Awash in the blood of his enemies, Wraith hunted Loathe for
hours on end, determined to take his wrath out on the dark Aseraphim.
Loathe spied Wraith approaching and readied himself for combat.
Wraith drew near slowly, casually tossing his great axe from hand to hand.
Loathe noted the smile on Wraith’s face as he neared and promised the
Light Aseraphim he would personally rip the grin from his face. With
that, Loathe rushed at Wraith, swinging the halberd with a fury. Loathe's
initial attack was blocked by Wraith but he pressed on. Even in Loathe’s
current demonic form, he was outsized against Wraith. The dark
Aseraphim was using his smaller stature and quicker reflexes to great
benefit. Loathe was able to connect with his halberd on a few occasions
but Wraith sustained no considerable injuries. Wraith was able to fend off
the assault and began to mount one of his own.

120

Knocking aside Loathe's weapon again, he stepped forward and
was able to get Loathe turned sideways. Wraith swung his axe and it
connected under the shoulder, sinking into his charred skin. Loathe
bellowed in pain and Wraith jerked the weapon free of its target. Loathe
stumbled away and before long fell to one knee. As Wraith approached,
Loathe swung backwards with his halberd and sliced into Wraith's lower
leg.
Wraith staggered backwards, reeling from the cut to the back of
his ankle. Loathe had struck with precision, slicing the tendon expertly.
His left leg fell numb and as he tried to step forward to finish off Loathe,
he fell to the ground. Loathe slowly stood and walked over to Wraith.
The pain was obvious on Loathe's face, as was the anger. Loathe bent
over and began to berate Wraith as he lay in pools of blood and muddy
earth, chastising him for believing he could possibly win this fight. When
Loathe was done talking, he straightened up and raised his halberd above
his head. Suddenly, his eyes grew wide and a scimitar burst forth from his
abdomen.
Benevolence had seen Wraith fall and ran to assist him. She
plunged her scimitar into Loathe's back with little time to spare.
Benevolence took her hand off her weapon and Loathe tried to reach
around and remove the offending object. Az witnessed her acts and ran
over to help dispose of Loathe for good. Az, whip in hand, snapped the
weapon and it locked around Loathe's neck. With one strong tug, Az's
razor-sharp whip sliced Loathe's head from his body. Knowing this
would not completely end Loathe's reign on this planet, Az retrieved
Loathe's halberd and speared him in the chest. Once the weapon was in
deep enough, Az twisted it in the same manner as Loathe had done to
Az's father. Az pulled out the weapon, bent down and removed Loathe's
heart. Of the thousands upon thousands of beings that began the fight
the previous morning, only a hundred survived to witness the death of
Loathe. Fewer still would bear witness to the end of the Aseraphim Wars
on Earth.
The scattered troops that remained either fought with enthusiasm
or ambled off into the woods. Benevolence watched the end of the
fighting as Az helped Wraith to his feet. Az spoke to Wraith of
Benevolence's actions that resulted in Loathe getting his due and asked
that her previous transgressions be forgiven. Wraith freely admitted that
she did fight with honor but he could no longer trust her. Wraith told Az
if the battle plan had not been changed, they might all be dead instead of
Loathe. Because of her sins, Benevolence could not remain with them.
She was tainted by evil. Benevolence begged for her life and Wraith

121

informed her she was not going to be killed, proclaiming there had been
enough killing. Her punishment was banishment, but Tag and Christi
Lona would not judge her. Benevolence would be judged by the Ancient
Styx, she who holds the keys to the three doors of death. Styx would send
Benevolence on her path at her will, be it Haedes, Haven and Limbo.
Before Az could object, for he knew objections would be made, Wraith
spoke his spell and Benevolence was gone from the realm of mortals.
Az was furious at Wraith for his decision and began to scream at
him. Wraith told Az the choice was hers and she made the choice to side
with Darkness. If forgiveness was to be given, Benevolence must receive
it from Christi Lona and Tag, if Haven was where Styx decided she
belonged. Az did not relent and kept yelling at Wraith for his deeds.
Wraith pushed Az aside in an attempt to walk away and remove himself
from the situation. Az responded by striking Wraith with his whip,
catching Wraith in the face. The whip slashed a line across his cheek. A
small trickle of blood, washed in the remaining drizzle of the rainstorm,
flowed down Wraith’s cheek. Having had his fill off bloodshed, his own
and others, Wraith again tried to free himself from Az’s protestations.
Barely able to stand, Wraith, raising his weapon, informed Az that he was
still strong enough to hold his axe and angry enough to use it. Az said
nothing and reached his arm back, looking to strike with his whip one
more time. Wraith sprung at Az and caught him by the throat. He lifted
Az into the air and threw him. Az was agile enough to land on his feet
and ran at Wraith full speed, hoping to drive his shoulder into Wraith
chest and knock him back and off his feet. Wraith anticipated this and
swung the axe expertly. Right as Az was about to make contact with
Wraith, he sank the weapon into the base of Az's skull. Az fell to the
ground dead. More to his dismay, Wraith felt no remorse for his actions.
He spoke the same words he had when Christi Lona was killed at the
hands of Lillith, yet with no sorrow in his voice this time, and Az's body
ascended to Haven.
Wraith sheathed his axe and noticed something amiss. The mask
of The Beholder, given to him centuries ago to watch over, was no longer
in his satchel. Assuming it must have fallen out during the battle, Wraith
frantically searched for it. Before he could locate it he felt his body being
pulled from this plane and teleported to another. Wraith found himself
standing before Tag herself, her warm glowing aura healing all granted
audience. Tag informed Wraith that, though he fought valiantly for the
forces of Light, his brutality could no longer be permitted in Haven. The
slaying of Az was also deemed impermissible and inexcusable. Wraith
pleaded his case but to no avail. Tag judged Wraith to be unworthy of

122

Haven and cast him out. As Wraith fell, his aura turned to black, save one
last speck of gold that was the love of his sister Starz.
Here ends the tale of the Aseraphim Wars as pertains to the
battles fought on Earth. These words are hereby written by the Clerics of
the Earth as told to them by Each, The Ancient.

123

Chapter 8
I read these last words and carefully closed the book. Personally, I
thought Tag's judgment was a little harsh. Wraith didn’t really have much
of a choice. Benevolence had betrayed them so punishment was
warranted. Now I also knew why he appeared when my father almost hit
Valencia.
My father was a completely different subject altogether. He lied
to the Aseraphim and thereby started a war. My first thought was to talk
to Genepool, but now I wasn’t so sure. I decided talk to Sam first. He
was a teacher so I assumed he’d know something about the Aseraphim
Wars and my father's role in it.
I glanced at the window and saw that the sun had come up during
my reading. I jumped off the bed to get ready for the day when there was
a knock at the door. After sliding the book back underneath my bed, I
ran to the door and unlocked it. My father was standing on the other
side, looking down at me and smiling.
"Good morning, Vincent. Sleep well?"
"Actually, I didn't sleep at all," I replied.
"I know," he replied. He leaned down and whispered to me, "I
know what you read last night. These are my books after all, and I know
when one is removed from the shelf. You have questions and I have
answers. We will talk more this evening. Do you understand?" His voice
was even and trusting and I readily agreed to his request. He patted me
on the back and told me to go downstairs.
Kiyusin was already in the kitchen preparing something to eat
when I arrived. He was making something different today by the smell of
it. There were potatoes, peppers and a host of other vegetables I didn't
recognize, all lined up on the counter.
"Would you like some help?" I asked.
Kiyusin looked down at me and replied, "No, but thank you for
asking. Is your sister awake yet?"
"I have no idea. I haven't seen her yet this morning."
"Would you mind checking on her for me? I figured she'd be up
by now."
"You never can tell with her," I informed him. "She doesn't
exactly keep a regular schedule."
Kiyusin laughed and said, "No, I guess she wouldn't."
"Can I offer some advice?" I asked politely.
"Sure. About what?"
"About my sister. She was having trouble with the lesson

124

yesterday. I know because she asked me for help more than once. I think
you may be going about teaching her the wrong way."
Kiyusin put down the utensils he was using to stir the vegetables
and said, "She's not a fast learner like you, Vincent. If she asked you for
help it's probably due more to that fact than my teaching methods."
"Maybe, but if I could offer a suggestion? Don't teach her just
one thing at a time."
"Dear boy, if she had trouble learning just one subject, why
should I even consider teaching her multiple topics at once?" He seemed
to be getting frustrated.
"Because that's how she learns. If you stick to one subject, she'll
get bored. Worse yet, she'll get distracted. You have to jump to other
topics every now and then. Start the day with math, but only for an hour,
then switch to science. She really likes animals, so start with biology or
something. Then, after a while, switch to something else. And every day,
switch the order and length of time you work on a certain subject. It may
take her longer to learn one subject but she'll be learning more than one in
the same timeframe."
Kiyusin was silent for a moment and finally said, "I'll tell you
what. I'll try it your way today. Yesterday wasn't very productive at all, to
be honest with you. I still don't think yesterday's difficulties were due to
my methods, but your idea isn't bad. How did you come up with that
idea?"
"Easy. I just imagined the worst possible way for me to learn
something," I said with a smile.
"I thank you for your advice, Vincent, and I'll keep it in mind."
"Just trying to help," I remarked and went to leave the room.
"Why?" Kiyusin asked as I turned away, causing me to look back.
"Because if she starts to pick things up easier by herself, she won't
bug me as much."
"Good reason," he laughed and waved me away to look for
Valencia.
Searching for my sister was becoming routine for me. In Egypt, I
would swear I spent as much time trying to track down my sister as I did
working on the playhouses. Well, that might be an exaggeration, but it
doesn't mean I didn't have to look for her a lot. My search of the lower
floor turned up no sign of her, so I trudged up the steps to look for her
there. I figured her room would be the most likely place for her to be. I
knocked on the door but got no reply. Thinking I heard movement
inside, I knocked again.
"Go away!" Valencia cried out from behind the closed door.

125

"Valencia, it's time to get up and go to class."
"I'm not going."
"Yes, you are," I argued.
"No, I'm not, now go away."
I took a deep breath to calm myself before continuing. "Can I
come in?"
"No. The door's locked," she replied.
I reached out and grabbed the doorknob. It turned easily in my
hand. I pushed open the door and instantly Valencia began yelling at me.
"I told you to go away! Now! I'm not going to class today!" she
bellowed.
"You also told me that the door was locked. You were wrong
then and you're wrong now."
"I wasn't wrong about the door. I was lying. There's a big
difference."
"Look, I didn't come up here to argue. Kiyusin sent me to find
you so you could get something to eat before classes begin."
"I don't need to eat and I'm not going to class!" she screamed.
I couldn't take it anymore. Her attitude was grating on my nerves.
Acting on impulse, I darted at my sister, scooped her up in my arms, and
ran at blazing speed out of the room and down the stairs. The entire
time, Valencia was shrieking in my ear. The trip didn't last long, just long
enough to make me temporarily lose hearing in my left ear.
When we reached the dining table, I let go of my sister, firmly
planting her feet beside the table. "Now, you are going to sit and eat, and
then you are going to go to class," I informed her with a tone that left no
doubt about my seriousness.
"You can't tell me what to do!"
"But I can," came a voice from the kitchen. The Beholder slowly
walked from the kitchen to where my sister and I stood. The
exasperation on his face made me worry about Valencia's safety for a
quick second. The feeling faded as quickly as it had come. Addressing
my sister, he said, "Valencia, you need to go to class. I just got done
talking with Kiyusin and he said he's going to try something different
today." His voice was composed, showing none of the frustration he
must have been choking back.
"Why do you care?" she shot back sarcastically. She was standing
with her hands on her hips, posing defiantly in front of him.
"Personally, I don't," our father replied, shrugging his shoulders in
an off-hand way. "But since I have business to attend to with the
Granites and won't be here to watch over you, you have to go to class so

126

you aren't left unsupervised."
"So I don't have a choice, is that it?" she spat back.
"Of course you do." The Beholder stood up straight and said
cheerfully, "You can either go to class or stay locked in your room until I
return. I should tell you that I don't think I'll be back for a few days. My
dealings with the Granites haven't been going well lately."
Valencia, realizing that she'd lost this battle, looked away from our
father and back at me. Eyes glowing slightly, she said, "Don't you ever
just pick me up and run like that again without my permission."
"You were being unreasonable," I said, defending my actions.
"Besides, the wind straightened out your hair somewhat. It doesn't look
that bad."
Valencia glanced over at the mirror and gasped. Her hair, though
still moderately on the messy side, had been blown back from her
forehead and was laying nicely across her shoulders and down her back.
She turned back to me and growled, "Never again," before taking her seat
at the table.
Kiyusin came out of the kitchen and started serving the food. I
followed my father into the kitchen to clear up some confusion. As he
was reaching for a piece of meat on the counter, he saw me.
"Father, are you really going to be gone for a couple of days? You
told me earlier you and I would talk this evening about…"
My father raised his hand and cut me off, "Have no worries,
Vincent. I will return in plenty of time to talk with you this evening. In
fact, I'm looking forward to it."
"So you lied to Valencia," I said, not asked.
"You aren't surprised," he observed.
"Should I be?"
The Beholder glared down at me and said, "Listen closely, child.
Do not presume things you do not yet comprehend. I have lied in the
past and I will lie in the future, if it is what I need to do. Tonight, you will
see that not all lies are harmful and the truth does not always set you
free."
With that, my father grabbed his satchel from the counter and left
the kitchen. Without pausing, he exited the house and was gone. With
his words echoing in my head, I joined my sister and Kiyusin at the table
for breakfast and then was off to Sam's house.
Sam was pleased with our pace yesterday and didn't see any reason
to change tactics. We dove into the geometry lesson and soon the first
test was coming my way. Sam had made this test much more difficult

127

than the ones he'd given me before but I still passed with flying colors.
When we were building the playhouses along the river in Egypt, I used a
lot of the concepts I was now being taught. I told Sam of my experiences
with geometry in my time before Atlantia and he wasn’t surprised.
Geometry and architecture went hand in hand according to my teacher
and there was nothing I'd found so far to dispute that notion. It made the
lessons so much easier for me when I thought about things in terms of
architecture. I obtained perfect scores on the first four tests of the day
when Sam decided to break for lunch. I asked Sam if I could join him
and he cheerfully invited me out onto the front porch.
"I didn't expect you to eat today, Vincent, so I'm afraid I don't
have anything prepared for you. You were nose-first in the books all day
yesterday. I assumed you'd be doing the same today," he said.
"That's all right. Kiyusin packed a lunch for me before I left," I
replied and untied my satchel. I pulled out an apple and some dried meat
and arranged my goods on the table next to my chair. "Hopefully
tomorrow I'll have something more substantial. Kiyusin told me he's
going to show me how to cook."
"So my brother's teaching you now, is that it?" he asked jokingly.
"After just one day you're ready to move on."
I laughed as I replied, "Not at all, Sam, but Kiyusin did tell me
about your skills in the kitchen."
"Or lack thereof," he snored as he broke into laughter as well.
"Believe me, it's for the best. I've never been very adept at cooking."
"Let me guess, you take too long making sure everything is
measured out correctly and everything is cut just right."
"You would know better than anyone, I suppose." Sam winked at
me and added, "Now, let's eat so we can get back in and continue your
lessons."
I began to munch on some of the dried meat but I wasn't done
talking yet. Between bites, I asked, "What do you know about the
Ancients?"
Sam was so taken aback by my question that he practically choked
on his food. "The Ancients? You want me to tell you about the
Ancients?"
"Why are you so shocked?" I asked amid my confusion. His
reaction had startled me. "You are my teacher after all."
"Vincent, you are the child of an Ancient. It would be
impertinent of me to tell you things about the Ancients that The Beholder
hasn’t told you himself.”
"Why would you feel that way? I know the Ancients are revered

128

here in Atlantia, so I assume you know quite a lot about them. Am I
right?"
"Yes, but…"
"And you're my teacher, right?" I was starting to enjoy his
discomfort. Easing the chaos in his mind caused by my request felt
wonderful.
"Yes, but…"
"And I did ask in good faith, as a dutiful pupil, correct?"
"Well, yes."
I paused for just a moment before posing my question once more.
"So, what do you know about the Ancients?"
Sam's eyes met mine and I could feel the calmness in his mind.
He relaxed back into his chair and said, "I'm assuming you know who the
Ancients are."
"I only really know the background on them. You know, who
they are, their tasks in creation, that sort of thing. What I really want to
know is how Atlantia fits into it all." I picked up the dried meat and sat
back and ate while Sam talked.
"Very well. When Propheteus told the Will and Power Cosmic
that they would create the universe, it came to pass. In the seconds
afterwards, the three Ancients were standing here in Atlantia. This is why
this planet is filled to overflowing with life. They could've ended up
anywhere in the universe, on any planet or any moon, but they stood here.
Because of this, the Ancients claimed Earth as a sort of headquarters and
made Atlantia their home. It is believed, though I haven't born witness to
it myself, that every thousand years the Ancients meet on Atlantia to
discuss the state of the universe. Since most of the Ancients do not roam
freely on the planet's surface, this is the only time all Ancients are in one
place at the same time. According to legend, the only other way to have
all of the Ancients together is to open Pandora's Box."
"What's that?" I inquired.
"Pandora's Box is sort of a conduit to the Ancients. Some say the
box contains the true essences of the Ancients, others say it contains the
next universe. There are other rumors as to its function, but truth be told
no one really knows."
"How do you open it?"
"Vincent, do you want to know about the Ancients or the box?
We don't really have time to cover both topics."
"I'm sorry. Please, continue with the Ancients."
"Apology accepted," he replied kindly. "Anyway, the only
Ancients that walk the surface are Genepool, who keeps watch over life

129

on Earth, and The Beholder, your father, who watches all activity on the
planet. Your father's counterpart, Each, is also ever-present but his
essence is held on the wind. When events occur that require his attention,
he can assume human-like form. The rest are either in the ethereal or
their essences are trapped in a talisman."
"Trapped? What do you mean by that? The Ancients are held
captive?"
Sam let out a little chuckle and replied, "No, not at all. There are
ten stones, one for each of the Ancients, scattered about the planet. The
stones are usually the talismans that contain the essence of the Ancients.
Sometimes the talisman is something entirely different. Take Zaron for
example. Her essence is held in her egg, which is located miles and miles
beneath Atlantia. Zaron's egg holds tremendous potential for alternative
sources of power generation. The leaders of Atlantia have been trying to
find a way to uncover it and tap into its energy. The problem is getting
the egg to the surface without waking Zaron."
"What would happen if she wakes up?"
"Simple. She'd eat the world."
"What!" I shouted, almost jumping from my seat.
"Vincent, that's her task. Zaron is the World-Eater. Her essence
is held in the egg as a precautionary measure. If Zaron were to be let
loose, the world as we know it would be drastically altered and not for the
better, I'm sure."
I had finished the dried meat Kiyusin had packed and picked up
the apple. "So do you trust the Ancients?"
"Of course. It's a matter of faith, Vincent. I have faith that,
though their methods vary, the Ancients want nothing but good things for
the inhabitants of Earth. Why else would they go through the trouble of
establishing life on this planet time and time again if they only wanted to
see it killed off?"
I took a bite of my apple as I mulled this over. As my teeth sank
in I felt a sharp, piercing pain in my mouth. I dropped the apple to the
porch floor and grabbed my mouth to stifle the yelp of pain trying to
escape.
"Are you okay?" Sam asked with concern.
"My mouth hurts," I mumbled back.
"Let me take a look." I lowered my hand and opened my mouth
wide. Sam took one look and started smiling. "Well, you have one tooth
that's hanging on by a thread and another that seems to be about ready to
drop as well."
"This is all part of being human, isn't it?" I asked as Sam finished

130

his examination.
"You bet it is. I'm sure it must be difficult, being centuries old yet
still a child."
"Actually, I sort of like it. Natural progression and all."
Sam nodded and said, "That makes sense. If you're going to be
here, may as well experience it the right way." He pointed at my mouth
and asked, "You want me to take care of that for you?"
"If you don't mind," I gratefully replied. I opened my mouth wide
once again and Sam carefully plucked the offending tooth from my
mouth. He asked if I wanted the other one out as well and I wasted no
time agreeing to his request. Sam had to wiggle that one a little bit before
it came out but it eventually fell free. I now had two gaping holes where
my teeth used to be.
"That's a little odd. Normally, the first teeth to drop are the very
front ones but they look like adult teeth," Sam remarked, his fingers still
in my mouth. He ran a finger along the gum line where my teeth had
been seconds ago. "Well, I can't explain it. All I will say is that those new
incisors you're getting are going to be sharp." He handed me the teeth as
he walked back over to his seat.
As I watched Sam gather up the remnants of his lunch, I asked,
"What do you mean?" As he answered, I ran my tongue along the gaps
and noticed a sharp point jutting out ever so slightly from my gums. I
drew back, not from pain as much as shock.
"I think you just answered your own question." He waved for me
to stand and said, "Come on. Since I don’t think you'll be finishing that
apple, we should get back to your lessons."
We worked the rest of the day on finishing the Geometry book. I
couldn’t help running my tongue around the gaps in my mouth the entire
time Sam was talking. He caught me doing it a few times and admonished
me to pay attention to the lessons and not my missing teeth. I tried to tell
him that it wasn’t the missing teeth that interested me so much. The teeth
coming in were of much more interest. Needless to say, Sam did not
agree with my logic. I aced every test he threw at me however, proving
my newfound fascination with dentistry wasn’t too much of a distraction.
We completed the geometry book as the purplish tint of the setting sun
was shading the white-capped mountains to the west. A few thin clouds
dotted the horizon, hiding the oncoming stars. Sam bade me farewell and
informed me that tomorrow we’d be starting on trigonometry.
I was welcomed home by Valencia. Maybe welcomed wasn’t the
best word. Valencia met me at the door and she was bouncing around

131

with a huge smile on her face.
“Hello brother!” she joyfully exclaimed as I entered the house.
“How was school today?”
“Good,” I replied warily. “I take it you had a better day today.”
“Much better! What all did you learn today?”
“I finished of the basic geometry book. Tomorrow we start on
trigonometry.”
“That’s all?” she asked, her smile creeping wider.
“Yes, that’s all. Why?”
“I learned math, biology, anatomy and geography. I’m learning
more than you now!”
“Valencia, you’re learning more subjects but I’m completing them
faster.”
She was unfazed by my reasoning. “I can’t see why Sam can’t
teach you more than one thing at once. You’re going to fall behind.”
“No, I’m not.” Her assumption of superiority was aggravating me
now. “Believe me, when it’s all said and done, I’ll be just fine.”
“If you say so. I’m just glad Kiyusin decided to work this way.
It’s so much better,” she said and skipped off to the kitchen.
“You’re welcome,” I muttered. I yelled after Valencia about our
father’s whereabouts and she informed me he wasn’t home yet. I decided
to wait in my room until he arrived.
I wanted to review some of the things I’d read in the book the
night before, just to get the thoughts straightened out in my mind. My
opportunity for review was short as I heard my father arrive downstairs
only after about five minutes. I closed the book and walked out to the
hallway to replace in back on the bookshelf. I didn’t hear my father come
up the stairs and he spotted me in the hallway.
“Don’t do that just yet, Vincent. You may need it for reference.”
He was smiling as he called me back to my room. I followed him in and
he locked the door. I sat on the bed and my father took a seat in the chair
by the window. “So what would you like to talk about first?”
“Why did you lie to them?”
“Good question to start with, but now is not the time to address
that one.”
“Why not?”
“Because it’s important that I answer your other questions first.
This way, the answer to that one will make more sense.”
I was confused but pushed on. “Okay then, tell me about you and
my mother.”
The smile faded from The Beholder’s face with sickening speed.

132

“That is a path you do not want to trod, my son.”
“It’s the path I’ve chosen.”
“Very well,” he said with a sigh. “Your mother, the Aseraphim
Starz, is the very definition of beauty. Only the magnificence of Christi
Lona and the dark splendor of Lillith compare to the beauty that is Starz.
That she will never again be able to hold physical form is my lone regret
in my entire existence. You may think my actions toward Starz were
uncalled for, maybe even a violation of her person, but she and I were
meant to be together. Even now, she watches me from above. She sees
the works I do with you and for you and I believe she is pleased.”
“How can you possible know that?”
“I don’t.”
“And if she didn’t approve?”
“Then nothing would change,” he replied with a stern look on his
face. “All I do, not just now but before the Aseraphim Wars, was for this
moment in time when you would walk the Earth. Your mother and I had
to come together to create you and your siblings. From that moment, I
waited for this time to come. The entire time that cursed demon held me
captive in my mask all that kept me from going mad was the knowledge
of what was to come. Before he killed Az I was able to escape.”
“Escape? I thought he lost the mask?”
“He could not have lost that mask if he wanted to.” He adjusted
the mask on his face a little and continued, “It was secured in his satchel
quite well. When my essence is relegated to this mask, I cannot physically
affect anything. I can only do that in physical form and someone has to
put on the mask for that to happen. I can, however, affect things in other
ways. I am not dormant when the mask goes unworn, just the opposite.
All my energies are concentrated on getting someone to wear the mask
and I can make others nearby feel the impulse to find it and put it on.
This made people lunge for Wraith’s satchel in battle. They also aimed
their weapons in that direction with the hopes of dislodging the satchel
and retrieving the mask. All this jostling loosened the binds that held me
in that bag. During his fight with Loathe, I was finally able to slide free.
Perfect timing, it turns out.”
“You planned it all?”
My father laughed at this, thankfully lightening the mood a bit.
“No, not at all, my dear boy. Where I’m not the biggest fan, chaos has
come in handy for me more than once. Shortly after Wraith was called to
Haven, one of the surviving lycans from the battle found the mask and
put it on. I am that lycan, Vincent. This physical shell was near death and
putting on my mask saved its life.”

133

“Where do I fit in?” I asked.
“After the Aseraphim Wars the population of the planet was
extremely low. This, my son, was part of my plan. After letting
civilization recover for a few centuries, The Ancients met on Atlantia and
I was given the task of guiding you and Valencia on Earth. You were to
be brought into being through me and my physical form.”
“I wanted to talk to you about that. I lost two teeth today and my
next teeth look like they’re going to be pretty sharp.”
“It wouldn’t surprise me in the least if you end up with visceral
fangs.”
“Fangs?” I asked, taken aback. “I’m going to look like an animal?
Or worse, a demon?”
“Calm down, Vincent. Most likely, no one will think twice about
your appearance. You have to remember, because a lycan wore this mask
when you were created, you are technically only one quarter human. The
rest is even parts lycan, Aseraphim and Ancient. You and your sister are
the most unique beings in all of creation. Your fangs, if that is what come
in, will only be a benefit.”
“Will Valencia have fangs too?” I asked, chuckling a bit at the
thought.
“As I said before, she is more attuned to your mother, so I doubt
it. Still, with her anything’s possible.”
I let the cheeriness subside before I asked again, “So why did you
lie to the Aseraphim?”
“Haven’t you figured that out yet? To get to this point and
continue ever forward.”
“I don’t understand.”
“Vincent, I’ve known since your creation, not on this plane but
your initial creation, that you were destined for greatness. I’d heard the
prophecy. I knew it was referring to you. The problem at the time was as
long as the Aseraphim roamed the Earth, there was no way you’d be
brought to bear. I had to get them off the planet. Having them kill each
other was just a way to get it done. It may appear to be quite an unseemly
way to accomplish this but it was effective in more ways than one. The
book you read tells of the battles that the Aseraphim participated in.
There were many more battles around the world. Entire civilizations rose
and fell during the war. Populations were decimated by the bloody battles
raging everywhere. There was no safe place anywhere. When the final
battle took place between the remaining Aseraphim, other battles took as
great of a toll on life. When it was all over, only the strongest and the
smartest survived, and their numbers were few. This was the world I

134

wanted you brought into. With the number of beings on the planet
diminished, order would be much easier for you to attain. I had to wait
longer than I’d anticipated, but civilization hasn’t advanced too far yet,
nor has the population.”
“You had all those people killed just so I could establish order
easier?” He was right. I did find it unseemly.
“That was a side effect. The main reason was to eliminate the
Aseraphim from the Earth. Considering the animosity between them it
may have happened anyway. I just sped events along.” He let this hang
in the air before he asked, “Any other questions for me?”
I shook my head and he quietly stood and left the room. I got up
and locked the door behind him. The Beholder had gone through an
awful lot to secure my success in bringing order to the world. With this
kind of head start, coupled with my inherent abilities and the education I
was currently receiving, I was growing more and more convinced my
father was right.

135

Chapter 9
My studies in Atlantia continued on for many years. Most of
those years passed uneventfully and I was able to concentrate my energies
on gaining an education. Sam eventually had to get other teachers to help
out since there were certain topics I wanted to learn that he was not well
versed in. A few elders even stopped by to give philosophy lectures. I
found the differing opinions and dogmas of these philosophies to be quite
puzzling. My sister and I viewed the world differently from each other.
However, she and I saw the world as we believed it should be, not how it
was. These elders that came to lecture spoke of seeing past and current
events in varying ways. The way I saw it, the past was the past and
written in stone. I defined my view of the world by what I could see and
assessing the facts before me. This was not to say I disliked my
philosophy lessons. It was enlightening to say the least. I just couldn't
understand the reasoning behind their conflicting tenets.
That was why I enjoyed my history classes so much. History was
all facts and that was much more appealing to me than people's views on
those facts. Sam was a bit of a history enthusiast and I deduced he got as
much pleasure from those lessons as I did. We would go in depth into
varying points of history, both world and local. Atlantia was a history
lesson in itself. Sam and I spent many days walking around the city of
Atlantia with my teacher pointing out various temples and landmarks.
Every once in a great while I was able to pry more information about the
Ancients out of him. I tried not to push the topic often due to the
reluctance he’d shown from the first time I’d broached the subject. As
informative as Sam was, the best history lessons came from my father.
Although he didn’t talk about his fellow Ancients at all, I was able to find
out things about Atlantia Sam never knew.
The Beholder taught me not just the history of the city of Atlantia
but of the entire island. While Valencia and I were at school, he was
trying to broker a peace agreement between the Granites and the
Magmites. There was a rebel faction of Granites that had taken up arms
with the Magmites in an effort to wrest control from General Sakoahn,
the leader of the Granites. My father told me it was much more complex
than that, as most of these conflicts are, and that a true peace between the
warring tribes of Atlantia might never be reached. He did take me to
meet General Sakoahn once. I had never seen a Granite before meeting
the General and I wasn’t sure what to expect. He was slightly taller than
my father and was made entirely of stone. I was amazed that anyone
would instigate a war against these beings. Defeating them had to take

136

phenomenal strength. War was exactly what eventually came to pass.
The Beholder abandoned his attempt to broker a peace between the races
and joined General Sakoahn as an advisor.
As for my regular studies, I passed every class with almost perfect
marks. I excelled at everything that had to do with mathematics.
Calculus, physics, engineering, I aced them all. I talked with the master
architect of Atlantia, Minot, and he gave me a tour of the pyramids on the
island. The older ones were basic pyramids with flat sides. As we
traveled south, the pyramids began to show some differences. Some had
steps running up their length, others had intricate carvings engraved in the
sides and statues placed on pedestals at various heights. I had
experimented with pyramids when constructing the roofs of the
playhouses in Egypt. I figured the slanted roofline would allow the rain
and sand to slide off better. Minot complimented me on this when I
mentioned it and I took his praise to heart. He showed me other
buildings that he’d worked on and I was in pure awe of his talents.
My aptitude at science did not go unnoticed either. From the first
time Sam mentioned the Zaron’s egg project, I was keenly interested in
knowing more about it. Once I’d learned more about the sciences
involved in not just raising the egg but tapping its power, I searched out
the ones in charge of the project and offered them my services. Though
skeptical at first, I was technically just an adolescent at the time, they
quickly realized I had a lot to offer in the way of ideas. Within a year of
joining up with the scientists we had begun to dig through the earth in
search of Zaron’s egg. We had designed a system that would allow us to
burrow deeper into the ground than had ever previously been attempted.
It was a daunting task but progress was surprisingly rapid. The struggle
was going to be getting the egg to the surface without disturbing Zaron. I
theorized that the egg wouldn’t have to be brought completely to the
surface. It would, in fact, be safer to let it remain at least partially in the
ground, thereby keeping it more stable. It was the one time I was
outvoted by the other scientists. They claimed that if they were going to
spend years raising the egg then they were going to bring it all the way
out. It was what Genepool had ordered, and my strenuous objections fell
on deaf ears.
Botany became an interest after Kiyusin taught me to cook. I
figured I needed to know which plants were edible and which weren’t, so
I studied up on botany extensively. There wasn’t a plant, weed or herb on
the isle of Atlantia that I couldn’t identify by sight. I wasn’t a bad cook
either. Unlike Sam, I didn’t need to take my time measuring everything
out. I just naturally knew how much of everything to put in. If I needed

137

a cup of sugar, I could pour out exactly one cup to the grain. As for the
problem of cutting everything into similar shapes, that was never a
concern. With my speed and natural proclivity for order, it all just
happened with minimal effort. Genepool joined us for dinner every now
and again, normally when The Beholder was away working on the peace
accord. Personally, I believed my father asked him to keep an eye on
Valencia in particular so she didn’t get into any trouble. Genepool had
taken a liking to Valencia and often had her assist him at the zoo as she
got older. It was an honor to cook for another Ancient and Genepool
always gave my meals high praise.
My father, though pleased with the rapid pace of my education,
was more interested in my physical abilities. The teeth I had lost that day
on the porch with Sam had indeed grown out and become fangs. They
weren't extremely pronounced but there was no denying what they were.
No one on Atlantia thought twice about my appearance. According to
Sam, many of the citizens of Atlantia had seen far more disturbing beings
in their lifetimes. I was hoping my feral teeth would be the only
lycanthropic trait I inherited and my father believed that most likely would
be the case. So far, his assumption had proven accurate. I wasn't sure
about that at first because of my physical strength. I was abnormally
strong from day one but it was nothing compared to how much stronger I
became as I got older. The muscles in my arms were large and toned, my
pectorals hard as a rock and my stomach looked like a washboard. Still,
my legs were by far the strongest part of my body. My father and I would
go out into the farthest reaches of the island and work on increasing my
speed. Our efforts were quite successful to say the least. I could outrun
every living creature on the island, and very possibly the entire planet. I
would run in and out of small villages I'd found scattered around the
island. As I passed through, it appeared that the people were standing
still. My father had told me before that this would happen. I had been on
Atlantia for ten years when I first ran around the world. The Beholder
wanted to see just how fast I could go over long distances. The only
problem was the large bodies of water I'd have to cross. I experimented
on Atlantia and found I ran so fast I could run atop the water. Also,
when I was running at a good speed, if I leapt I could cross great distance
through the air. Landing the first time hurt a lot but I got better at it with
every attempt. So I could jump across smaller bodies of water and run
across the larger ones. This was most fortunate since I didn’t know how
to swim. I ran eastward from Atlantia, through Egypt into Asia, across
the ocean and onward until I reached Atlantia once again. When I pulled
up next to my father, he informed me that it took less than five minutes

138

for me to circle the globe.
I didn’t exactly advertise my abilities on Atlantia. I wanted to live
like a normal person. For the most part, that's precisely what happened.
As I got older, I made friends, played games, helped others with their
studies and so forth. One of my friends convinced me to try my hand at
wrestling. I was a natural, easily winning most bouts. Unlike in Egypt,
where I lost a few races on purpose, my losses in wrestling were earned. I
never once used my speed to gain an advantage. Not only was this
because I wanted to maintain the illusion of me being just a normal
person, but I didn't think it would be fair to my opponent.
The Beholder was pleased with my wrestling accomplishments
and offered to teach me hand-to-hand combat. I eagerly agreed and took
to it like a fish to water. We spent many nights alone working on
technique and fight tactics. The best thing about being taught how to
fight by an Ancient was you never had to pull your punches. I would wail
on my father constantly and he'd just shrug it off. In the latter stages of
my training, when my attacks had gained a little more force behind them,
his attitude changed a bit. It seemed strange at first but he actually
seemed to like the fact that I could hurt him if I really tried. He never
said those words exactly, but it was clear as day. Within a year, I was a
master at several forms of martial arts. By the end of my training, my fists
could fly as fast as my feet. When my father pronounced my training
complete, he presented me with two gifts. First was body armor, done in
the colors of red and gold. Lightweight yet strong, The Beholder assured
me this armor would protect me from all physical attacks. It could be
damaged, even destroyed, but it would take a lot of effort to do it.
Secondly were the gauntlets. From the moment I saw them, I knew they
would be my most prized possession. Golden leather gauntlets were a
beauty to behold without any modifications. These gauntlets were very
modified. When I put them on, The Beholder told me to turn my wrists
slightly. When I did, metallic blades sprung forth. The blades looked like
claws and ran down my fingers. They fit the contours of my hand
perfectly. My father told me the blades were made from metal found only
on Atlantia and would cut straight through almost anything. I didn't need
to worry about them breaking either according to him. This metal was
practically indestructible. I wore them everywhere when I was awake, and
I very seldom slept anymore.
I had been on Atlantia for fifteen years had learned all the great
teachers of the isle had to offer. Sam had eventually passed my lessons on
to others since I yearned for knowledge he could not adequately provide.
Now the majority of my time was spent working with the scientists and

139

engineers on the Zaron’s egg project. Day after day, I watched as the
Ancient's egg drew closer to the surface. I still believed the most prudent
course was to leave it in the ground but my concerns were again ignored.
I kept being overwhelmed by a sense of dread whenever mention was
made of the egg being uncovered. One night, I asked my father what that
ill sensation could mean. He explained I was most likely becoming aware.
Pressed further, he explained I was becoming more aware of all that was
happening on the earth. The feeling I got at the mention of Zaron's egg
being uncovered could mean that something drastic was going to happen.
By drastic, he clarified, he meant something that would upset the natural
order. My awareness was based around order. Whenever an event
radically changed events from orderly to chaotic, I'd instinctively know. I
was astonished that such a thing was possible but my father assured me it
was. Events just a few days later would prove him correct.
I'd been in this same room for almost sixteen years and I had yet
to put up any kind of decoration, I thought as I got ready to greet the day.
Valencia's room had pictures hanging on every wall, all created by artists
she'd met. Most of her paintings were abstract works that gave me a
headache to look at. We hardly ever spoke to each other anymore. For
the most part, I didn't mind. Every once in a while one of us would
attempt to start a conversation. This normally ended in a lot of shouting
and ill will. Needless to say, these conversations had become very
infrequent. Where I had completed my studies, Valencia was still working
on hers. She did once offered to help me with the Zaron's egg project.
My laughter was not seen as a positive response.
I had on my armor and gauntlets and was ready to go. Normally I
left my armaments at home. There was never a need to take them to
work. Something in my mind told me to wear them today, so I heeded
my own advice. As I walked downstairs I was overcome with a sense of
dread. Suddenly I saw, in my mind's eye, people being tortured and killed.
Soldiers were rounding up the citizenry and throwing them into prisons
where the lucky ones died quickly while the unfortunate suffered immense
torment. From the amount of people I pictured in these prisons this
must have been going on for some time. When I saw the playhouses
along the riverbank, I realized I was seeing the village in Egypt I’d lived in
and it was under attack.
It took me a second to get the violent images out of my head.
Once I regained my composure, I continued down the stairs. The bad
feeling didn't depart however. I made a decision right there that I was
going to go back to Egypt. That village was the first place on Earth that

140

came under my influence and I was not going to sit idly by and let it get
destroyed.
I got downstairs and spotted my sister sitting at the dining room
table eating breakfast. She looked up and her expression changed from
her normal cheeriness to quizzical concern. "What's wrong with you?"
she asked.
I didn't want to tell Valencia about what I'd seen. I was going lie
and tell her nothing was wrong and abruptly stopped before a word was
uttered. Valencia was as close to the people there as I was, even closer
with the adults. "Something's wrong in Egypt."
She jumped out of her seat and asked, "Define wrong."
"The village is under attack. I've decided to go back to Egypt to
help them and I'm taking you with me."
"Oh you are, are you?" she sarcastically asked.
"Valencia, I'm in no mood to argue."
"Then don't tell me what to do," she calmly replied.
I sighed as I asked, "Do you want to come along or not?"
She looked at me like I was the dumbest man on the planet, “Of
course I’m going. When do we leave?"
"Now." I motioned for Valencia to come over to where I was
standing.
"Don't even think about it. You aren't doing that super-speed
thing with me."
"It's the fastest way to get there."
"It makes my ears pop," she whined.
"Fine. You can walk to Egypt then." I turned to leave but when I
opened the front door she beckoned for me to return.
"Okay, you win. How are we going to do this?"
Now that we'd grown to full height, our physical differences were
much more pronounced. I was a few inches over six feet tall while my
sister barely broke five feet. I could’ve just picked her up with one arm
and carried her if I wanted too. If I dropped her along the way, I
would’ve had a hard time convincing her it was an accident. I knelt down
in front of her and said, "Hop on my back and hold on."
She took my words too literally and jumped onto my back,
causing me to buckle a little. I figured it would be best not to say
anything and just be on our way. Anything I said would probably just
start another argument. I held onto her legs and told her to hold on tight.
She wrapped her arms around my neck, thankfully taking care not to
choke me. I turned towards the door and was shocked to see The
Beholder standing in the doorway.

141

"Where are the two of you off to together?" he asked.
"Egypt," we replied in unison.
"Back to the village, are you? I thought so. I felt the turmoil
there as well. Are you sure that's wise?"
"That was the first place order was established by my influence.
Yes, I think it's not only wise but necessary," I responded.
"And her?" he asked with contempt dripping from his mouth.
"She is going to help," Valencia replied. "Now, would you mind
getting out of the way? We have to go."
Turning his attention back to me, The Beholder said, "I need your
assistance here, Vincent. The war between the Granites and the Magmites
is intensifying. We could use someone with your gifts in battle."
"When I get back, I'll gladly help. For now, we have to be going."
"This is more important than anything going on in Egypt, my son.
You are needed here."
"And I need to be there," I angrily replied. "You won’t stop me.
I will not see that village come under attack by some evil bastard and just
sit back and let it happen."
Valencia loosened her grip on my neck long enough to slap me in
the back of the head. "Watch your language," she admonished.
"Sorry." I was sincere in my apology and she knew it. I had
picked up a penchant for profanity while working with the construction
workers on the egg project. I found out quickly that my sister couldn't
stand profanity. The first time she admonished me for using a vulgarity,
she said that you shouldn't use that kind of language around a lady.
Noting that she did have a valid point, I tried to limit my profanity around
her. Also, I didn't want to hear her whine and moan about it all the time.
“I see that I’m not going to be able to stop you, so I ask that you
be quick about it,” The Beholder said.
“I can’t make any guarantees on that, father,” I responded. “We’ll
be back as soon as everything is back in order there.”
“Do you mind not using that word?” my sister asked. “And could
you please not constantly remind me that I’m helping you maintain
order?”
“Look at it as helping your friends in times of trouble. It won’t
bother you as much,” I suggested. Turning back to our father, I said,
“We should be going. The sooner we get there, the sooner we can get
back.” The Beholder entered the house, clearing the way for our
departure. As I stepped onto the porch, I asked my sister if she was ready
to go.
She sighed and said, “As ready as I can be. Just don’t drop me.”

142

“Don’t let go,” I said cheerfully and took off. In mere seconds we
were standing in the vast desert just outside of the village.
I let go of Valencia’s legs and she slid off of my back. I turned
around to talk to her and was immediately overcome with a throbbing
headache. Her hair was in shambles from the force of the wind during
our travels. “Could you please do something about your hair?”
“What?” she yelled back.
“I said…”
“Hang on a minute.” She stuck a finger in each ear to try to open
them up again. “I told you traveling like that makes my ears pop.”
“Can you hear me now?” I asked and she nodded in reply.
“Good, now do something about your hair please.”
“What about my hair?”
Before I could respond, a voice cried out. “Halt! Who goes
there?”
Without looking around for the source, Valencia shouted back,
“Who wants to know?”
“I’ll ask the questions, woman,” was the reply. We both spun
around to look at the village and saw a man emerge with a loaded
crossbow in his hand.
“Please forgive her rudeness,” I said. “She often speaks without
thinking first.” This garnered me a nasty look from Valencia.
“Why are you in armor? Are you a warrior?”
“No. It’s just a dangerous world out there. One needs to take
precautions.”
“Are you a follower of Set?” the guard asked.
“Who’s Set?” I inquired.
The guard lowered the crossbow and walked forward. Locking
his gaze to mine, he said, “I don’t know you but your woman looks
vaguely familiar.”
Valencia and I both laughed at his presumption. “She’s not my
woman. She’s my sister.”
“State your names or be on your way. Strangers are not welcome
here.”
“My name is Vincent. This is my sister…”
“Valencia!” the guard shouted. The crossbow dropped from his
hands and he ran over to us. To our surprise, he embraced us and said,
“It’s me, Kalim! Ra be praised, you’ve returned!”
“Who’s Ra?” Valencia asked.
“And who’s Set?” I added.

143

Kalim released his embrace and replied, “There will be time for
that later. Please, follow me. I believe there are others that will be just as
happy to see you as I am.”
“This is all very confusing,” I remarked.
“I know. Isn’t it wonderful?” Valencia replied.
Kalim retrieved his crossbow and led us into the village. The first
thing I noticed was the hut we had lived in was still standing. The same
could not be said for other homes. Several were torn to the ground, piles
of debris marking where they had stood. Instinctively, I began to walk to
the riverside but Kalim drew me away. He said he understood I wanted
to see the finished project but now was not the time. As we walked, he
asked us all sorts of questions about our lives over the past years. We
answered his queries without hesitation, which only caused more
questions. Not once did he tell us about Set or Ra nor hint that there was
any turmoil in the village at all. I found this mildly suspicious considering
the sense of dread I’d experienced earlier and the state of disarray of the
village.
Kalim stopped in front of a large hut in the middle of the village.
“Is this your home?” I asked.
“Not exactly,” he replied. “Please, go inside.”
We did as asked but didn’t get far. The hut was packed with
people. When Valencia and I walked in, a few stood up with weapons
drawn. This stopped us in our tracks. The whole time I’d lived here years
ago, I hadn’t seen one weapon. Kalim had followed us in and told the
occupants to lower their weapons.
“Settle down everyone. These two mean us no harm,” he told
them.
“How can you say that?” one of them answered back. “Look at
the size of him! Look at the way he’s dressed for battle. How do you
know he isn’t an agent of Set?”
The smile on Kalim’s face lit up the room. “Because he’s our old
friend Vincent.”
The hut instantly erupted with voices. The one that had
questioned my intentions ran over and almost tackled me with his
enthusiastic embrace. “Ra be praised!” he cried out. Without unlocking
his embrace, he looked up at me and said, “It’s me, Alipha!” At those
words, I pulled him back into an embrace. I was so glad to see that so
many of my closest friends had survived whatever was happening here.
Alipha finally let go and gave Valencia an equally powerful hug.
She was smiling from ear to ear, enjoying both seeing her friends and the
chaos of the moment. More people came over to welcome us back. It

144

was all very touching. After everyone had gotten a turn, I wondered
aloud about Ihmo. The joyous mood changed at the mention of his
name.
“Ihmo was taken against his will by Set,” Alipha replied.
“Who is this Set person you keep talking about?” I asked.
“There is much that has happened in your absence, my friend. It
will take a while to explain. Afterwards, we may ask for your help.”
“Why do you think we’re here?” Valencia threw in.
“But how did you know your help was needed?”
“Much has happened to us as well,” I said. “Please, tell us
everything.”
Alipha was more than happy to fill us in. Shortly after we’d
departed for Atlantia, a man unlike any they’d ever seen came to the
village. The stranger walked as a man, had the body of a man, yet his
head was that of an eagle. Upon entering the village, he first noticed the
project along the riverside. When he came upon the villagers going about
their daily business in an orderly way, he remarked to some of the adults
that he was pleased to see such a place. His physical appearance made
some people uneasy yet no one refused to answer his questions. After a
few days he began to talk about himself. He said his name was Ra and
claimed to be blessed by an Ancient. Since the villagers had never heard
of the Ancients, Ra proceeded to teach them of the Ancients and their
teachings. Ra told them that the giver of life had blessed him with the
characteristics of both man and animal, hence his unusual form.
Genepool had chosen an eagle to represent the sky and the light that
beams down through. Ra claimed to be a true follower of Tag, the
ultimate good. He preached to all who would listen and people lined up
to hear his words. The village experienced a time of great peace and
tranquility. Unfortunately, it was not to last.
Recently, another being similar to Ra had arrived at the village.
His head resembled a serpent and his name was Set. Ra had warned us
about Set and a band of villagers tried to expel this vile creature from our
land. Alas, they failed. Set was able to convert some weak-minded
villagers to do his bidding and they were able to capture Ra. After that
things got much worse. Anyone found openly worshipping Ra were
either jailed or killed. By all accounts, death was the ideal option. Those
taken prisoner were subject to inhumane torture. Worse, they were
forced to watch as Ra was tortured as well. Many attempts had been
made to kill Set and all had failed. Set turned out to be a powerful majick
user. With his newly formed army and the majicks at his disposal, he had
been able to repel all attacks against him. The biggest problem they’d

145

found was although Set never seemed to carry a weapon, he was always
able to conjure one. Now the villagers lived in fear for their very lives,
never knowing when Set would be coming for them and their loved ones.
“When Set took Ihmo away, I was helpless to stop them. Set took
a great deal of interest in Ihmo when he first arrived in town,” Alipha
said.
“Why is that?” I asked, prodding him onward.
“To be honest, because of what you taught him about
construction. Ihmo has always been good at building things. He used to
stack rocks in little piles and before you knew it there would be a tiny
structure. You helped him realize his dream of building something
substantial. When Ra showed up he had a great influence on my brother.
When he was old enough, Ihmo and several others set out to build him a
temple to honor Ra. It was completed shortly before Set showed up and
now Set wants a pyramid of his own.” He paused and, for the first time
in a while, he smiled. “You should see Ra’s temple, the both of you. I
think you’ll both be thrilled with his creation.”
“There aren’t many things that can make both my sister and me
feel that way. We have much different tastes,” I said casually.
“I know,” he said, his smile widening. Then he did something
that caught me off guard. He winked.
Kalim re-entered the conversation and whispered to Valencia and
me, “We know who you are.”
“Then why are we whispering?” Valencia quietly asked.
“Because the walls have ears.” Valencia started to inspect the
walls of the hut and Kalim added, “Not literally.”
In a soft voice, Alipha continued, “Set’s majicks are all around us.
We have been able to stay hidden thanks to some majicks of our own.
Do you remember Orona?”
“No,” I answered.
“Yes! She’s Aristol’s mother,” Valencia joyfully replied.
“She is also very adept at majick. She has been able to hold a
protection spell over this hut to keep us safe. That’s why there are so
many of us here. Outside of this hut, we are all vulnerable to his evil
deeds. Still, it is best to err on the side of caution and not speak loudly
about our plans for him. You never know who is standing outside to
overhear our conversation.”
“Very prudent,” I told him.
“With the two of you here, I’m sure we’ll finally succeed where all
other attempts have failed.”
"Let us hope so." Raising my voice, I continued, "So where

146

would two newcomers be able to settle down for a day or so?"
Alipha winked again and replied, "There's an abandoned hut at the
edge of the village. It hasn't been occupied in many years. You should
find it to you liking."
Valencia started to chuckle and I could barely contain my own
laughter. "I think that will do just fine. Kalim, would you care to lead the
way?"
"I'd be honored," he replied.
The hut was almost exactly as we'd left it, just with more dust and
sand strewn around. Kalim left us as soon as we got there so we could
get settled in. My sister went directly to her old room while I stayed in the
main room and removed my gauntlets. Sadly, Valencia wasn't gone long.
"It seems much smaller," she remarked upon rejoining me.
"Considering you're bigger, it should."
"That could be it."
"Not much to see here, is there?" I remarked.
"No, not really."
We stared at one another, waiting for the other to speak first. A
full minute passed before I broke the silence. "Do you want to go down
to the river and see it?"
"I thought you'd never ask!" she excitedly replied.
We darted out of the hut and ran to the riverside. I didn't go at
full speed. It was more fun listening to Valencia giggling in anticipation as
we made our way to the project. What we saw stopped us cold. The
playhouses were complete and they were fantastic. Every one of them
were the same dimensions but with individual touches to the exterior.
Some had intricate carvings on the walls. Other playhouses just had the
child's name inscribed above the entrance. A few had more than one
name listed and some of the names looked like they had been added
recently. No one was around to ask, but I assumed the second name was
a child of the first. It made me glad to see the playhouses were being
inherited by future generations. We casually strolled along the front of
the project, taking in all the details. The closer we got to the end Valencia
had been working on all those years ago, the more I began to feel a
throbbing behind my eyes.
“I just realized I never did get a chance to see what you were
working on,” I told her as I rubbed my forehead.
“That’s right. You never did, did you?” she said. When she saw
me trying to massage my headache away, she added, “You probably aren’t
going to like it.”

147

“You didn’t just build a playhouse, did you?”
“Of course not. That would be boring.”
I was going to ask more questions before we got there but her
smile worried me. So I decided against it. We continued along until we
finally reached the far end. My headache was pounding and now I knew
why.
“It’s a maze,” I observed.
“It certainly is. Isn’t it wonderful?” She looked up at me and said
softly, “Well, it looks wonderful to me.”
“It looks well built, I’ll say that much. But why a maze?”
“This is not just a maze, brother. There are four open areas in the
maze, one for each person working on it. To get them to help, and to
give up their section, I had to convince my three helpers that I would put
a place in there for each of them to play. So as you go through then
maze, there are places you can rest or play with your friends. Whatever
you choose to do.”
“Well, it explains my headache.”
“Do you want to go in?” she asked gleefully. I just glared at her.
“Or not,” she added from under my gaze.
“I’m going to go back to my playhouse. I never did get a chance
to enjoy it.”
“Will you still fit in there?”
“I guess we’ll find out.”
I turned and headed back the way we came. The further away
from the maze I got, the more my headache faded. By the time I was
three houses away, I felt fine. I reached my playhouse and had to duck to
enter. Oddly, even though the sun was shining in all its brilliance, the
playhouse was cast in total darkness. Before I could even begin to figure
out why, a voice broke through the shadows.
“Hello Vincent,” was all the voice said, yet it captivated me. The
speaker was female and her voice was seductive yet cold at the same time.
“Who’s there?” I asked. I was beginning to regret leaving my
gauntlets back in the hut.
“Have no fear, child. I’m just here to talk.”
“Show yourself!” I demanded.
“I am.” I saw something move out of the corner of my eye and
whirled around. There was nothing there. Again, something moved and
this time a figure emerged. It was no woman, and I’d be hard pressed to
call it a man. He was huge, with horns sticking out from his head. His
skin was of a blue tint and he looked exceptionally strong. I went to step
towards him but he raised a hand to stop me.

148

“Careful Vincent. You might bump into her,” he cautioned.
“Who are you and how do you know my name?”
The woman answered, “We are family. The creature whose visage
you’re presently trying to wrap your mind around is none other than
Loathe, protectorate of Haedes.”
“So you must be Lillith,” I said.
“Very good.” The shadows moved again and this time I could
faintly see a silhouette in the darkness. The shadowy form of a woman
was vaguely discernable through the gloom. When I concentrated harder,
I could make out her features. Although she was evil and represented all
the wickedness and immorality in the world, she was stunningly beautiful.
I had read the story of when she turned into this current form. Now, I
couldn’t help but wonder what she’d looked like before all of that
happened. “I am indeed Lady Lillith, keeper of the Black Stone of the
Ancients, ruler of Haedes, guide for all who choose the path of evil.”
“What are you doing here?” I asked calmly. I was actually quite
curious as to why she would visit me.
“The same thing that Christi Lona and Cherub are doing with
your sister. I’m here to offer you some friendly advice.”
“Friendly advice,” I said slowly, doubt cascading from every
syllable.
“Yes,” she replied.
“And Christi Lona and Cherub are doing the same with Valencia.”
“Again, yes. You don’t believe me?”
“Well, you are a notorious liar,” I pointed out.
She smiled, and that made me step back. Her beauty was only
enhanced when she smiled yet the accompanying gleam in her eyes made
me nervous. “Apparently my reputation precedes me. You are correct,
Vincent. I am a liar. However, the advice I came here to give you is
sincere. You can take my words to heart or you can ignore them. It’s
your choice.”
To Lillith, Loathe said, “Maybe we should give him some time to
think about it. We seem to have caught him off guard.”
“I’m fine,” I said before Lillith could answer. After the tiniest
pause, I said, “Let’s hear it.”
“You are bound to fight for order on Earth,” she began. “This is
somewhat admirable. Order isn’t exactly my forte. I do know how you
can better establish order though. You have to choose a side and stick
with it.”
“And you think I should choose evil.”
“Of course. It is much easier to establish order if everyone has

149

the same beliefs. You don’t even have to do evil works to accomplish
this. All you have to do is encourage it in others. Evil is ever-present,
child. All you have to do is bring it out in others.”
“Evil is essentially chaotic, isn’t it?” I asked.
“Actually, no, it isn’t. Wars are chaotic but not all wars are started
in the name of evil. Yes, most evil beings are violent, but not all. And
violence itself isn’t always chaotic either. It’s all in how you use it.”
“But I thought you liked wars?”
“I do. Hatred drives men to do awful things to each other. Love
is the same way.”
“But you’d rather have them fight with hatred. It gives you more
souls in Haedes that way.”
Lillith’s smile chilled my body, and her cold, steely gaze did the
same to my soul. “I see you’ve been doing your homework. Yes, I’d
much rather have people fight and die full of hatred. In Haedes, they
serve me. And I can teach them what true hatred is. Don’t let that
dissuade you, Vincent. Though I may seem cold-hearted, I’m just doing
what I’m meant to do. Just as you will.”
I let her words sink in for a moment before replying. “I’ll have to
think about this a while.”
“Please do,” she said as she smiled again. “And don’t be misled
by other advice you’re given. Remember, I am not the only liar in our
family.” As she spoke her last word, she faded into the shadows, taking
Loathe with her.
As soon as she was gone, the room got a little brighter. The
sunlight was coming in from the entranceway and its heat was refreshing.
Lillith’s presence had sucked all the warmth out of the playhouse. To my
surprise, the sunlight slowly began to increase. Soon the entire playhouse
was filled with a light so bright I had to cover my eyes.
“Greetings, dear Vincent,” came a voice from the glow. “Please,
uncover your eyes and look upon me.”
“It’s too bright,” I mentioned.
“It is no longer.” When I removed my hands from my face I saw
that the light had indeed dimmed. In front of me stood another radiant
woman dressed in a long, white robe. It was obvious at first glance that
this was Lillith’s sister. The resemblance was remarkable. The differences
were just as remarkable. Where Lillith was shrouded in darkness, light
beamed from my new visitor. Her hair was long, blonde and luxurious.
One look into her crystal blue eyes and all your worries fell away. I could
only wonder if Lillith had been this beautiful ages before.
“You must be Christi Lona,” I said to her. Turning to her

150

companion, “And you’re Cherub.”
“Indeed we are,” she said. “We have come to impart upon you
some advice to help you on your preordained path.”
“I know. Lillith already told me.”
“I assume she spoke to you about her wishes for you.”
“She did.”
“I must warn you to use all caution with Lillith, Vincent. She only
wants to manipulate you for her own means.”
“And you don’t?”
“I do not manipulate others. I simply tell them what I think they
need to hear to prosper.”
“Prosper according to you,” I pointed out.
“Of course.”
“So what advice do you have for me?” I asked skeptically.
“Do not take my words lightly, Vincent,” she warned. “I have
nothing but the best intentions. I do not doubt that my sister was quite
convincing. Many times, she has made honorable men do horrible things
simply for her own amusement. I will not tell you to ignore what she has
said to you. I only ask that you consider the source of that advice.”
“I will.” Eager to get away and into the open air, I urged her on.
“So what advice do you offer?” I asked politely.
“The same as my sister, yet opposite,” Christi Lona began. “I
believe that if you truly want order on Earth, you must join forces with
the side of Light. Only the forces of goodness and purity can bring about
what you seek. When all inhabitants are living in peace and harmony,
there will be no war, no violence and most importantly, no chaos.”
“So no follower of Light has ever started a war?” I asked.
“No follower of Light has ever started a war against another
follower of Light. We only fight to defend ourselves or to vanquish evil.
If all evil is cast into Haedes where it belongs, there will be no war.”
“Can’t good people be chaotic at the same time?”
“They can, but it is a rarity. If you are able to establish order with
the help of good people, the chaotic ones will be cast aside as well. Order
and Love are meant to work together.”
Her words made sense, more so than Lillith’s. I was having a hard
time working it all out in my head and needed some fresh air. “I thank
you for your words, Christi Lona. I will take your advice to heart.”
She smiled and I almost melted. “That is all I can ask.” In a
brilliant flash of light, Christi Lona and Cherub were gone.
I was alone in the playhouse and couldn’t get out fast enough. As
I stepped into the open air, I saw Valencia staggering towards me from

151

the other end of the project. I could see the blank look on her face even
from this distance and wondered if I had the same expression on mine.
She slowly made her way to me and that empty look remained for the
entire walk.
When she reached me, she simply said, “Let’s go home.” Her
words were clipped and had none of her usual exuberance. I could relate.
“Good idea.” We walked back to the hut silently, lost in our own
thoughts.

152

Chapter 10
My sister and I spent most of the rest of the day alone in our
rooms. We both had a lot to think about. She didn't say anything about
what the Aseraphim had said to her. I likewise remained silent on the
topic. It just seemed strange that they would take such measures. They
talked to both of us, advising both of us on how to reach our goals. At
least, I assumed that was what they’d said to her. If so, I found it odd
they would talk to both of us instead of choosing one. Maybe they were
just trying to be helpful. Maybe they talked to both of us just to play it
safe. It was all very confusing. It was so confusing it left Valencia
speechless and that was a rare event.
I set out into the village to get some food, thinking a good meal
would calm our minds. I saw a few of the people I'd met earlier with
Kalim and asked where I could get some rations. They gladly gave me
some of their supplies and told me if I needed more all I had to do was
ask. I went back to the hut and prepared the food. Valencia had tried to
cook once in Atlantia. To say it didn't go well would be an
understatement. We had to throw out what she'd made as well as a few
pots and pans.
The smell of the food drew Valencia out of her room. "That
smells good. What is it?" she asked.
"I'm not sure. It's some kind of meat. It does smell good though,
doesn't it?"
"Isn't that what I said?"
Ignoring her sarcasm, I finished up and served the food. As we
ate, I decided to broach the topic of Ihmo. "Did Kalim ever say where
they were holding Ihmo?"
"I don't think so," she replied before taking another bite.
"I guess that's the first thing we need to do. We can't exactly
rescue him if we don't know where he is."
"How are we going to do that without arousing suspicion?"
"I'm working on that."
Swallowing another bite of food, she said, "I have an idea."
"And that would be?"
"Why don't we ask someone?"
"I have to assume that if Kalim knew where…"
"I didn't mean Kalim and his gang. I meant one of the guards."
"Valencia, that would definitely arouse suspicion."
"If you did it, maybe."
I was skeptical and it had to be evident on my face. "You think

153

you can get the information by asking a guard. That's your plan?"
"It's not a plan. I don't do plans. It's an idea."
"It's a bad idea."
"It’s also the only one we've got."
I considered her idea more in depth. She was good at getting
people to talk. I often wondered how she did it. On Atlantia, she was
always telling me about things that were happening in town that no one
else seemed to know. I assumed she had talkative friends. I soon realized
she was getting her information by talking to anyone and everyone. Most
resisted for a while, but eventually they’d tell her whatever she wanted to
know. Whether or not they willingly offered up the information or just
did it to get her to be quiet was still up for debate.
"I guess it's worth a shot."
"Great!" she cried out.
"We'll search out a guard tomorrow morning. I want to do it as
early as possible. The less people up and around the better."
"Sounds good. Just make sure to stay out of sight when I'm
talking to the guard. If he sees you, he may think something's going on."
We finished our meal and departed for our rooms once again. I
tried to sleep for the first time in a long time but couldn't seem to get
comfortable. Valencia was right about one thing. The room did look a
lot smaller.
At daybreak, I was still awake. I ventured over to Valencia's room
and saw her on the floor sound asleep. With all due stealth, I snuck into
her room and tapped her on the shoulder to awaken her. When I did, she
flailed her arms and punched me in the face. I jumped back as she leapt
to her feet.
"Sorry Vincent!" she quickly exclaimed, placing her hand over her
mouth to stifle her laughter. "I didn't know it was you."
"You hit me!" I admonished.
"I know. I said I'm sorry."
Rubbing my chin, I smiled and said, "You hit harder than you
used to."
She smiled back and asked, "How long has it been?"
"Since the last time you hit me? A few years, I guess. I think I
was picking on you about your math assignments one time and you got
mad at me."
"That's right. You deserved that one."
Changing the topic to more pressing issues, I asked, "Are you
ready to do this?"

154

She stretched a bit and replied, "As ready as I'll ever be."
We left the hut and made our way to the village proper. There
was no one in sight. No one was out tending to their flocks. Not one
person was preparing to open their shop for the day. It was perfect. We
got to the far end of town without seeing one single sign of life. There we
saw something that was not here before. A large building had been
erected and there was a guard at the entrance. This looked to be the
prison. I ducked behind a hut within earshot of the guard and sent
Valencia on her way. I was still a little worried about her doing going in
alone. If the guard got any hint of trouble he might lash out at her. I had
to hope for the best.
I watched as Valencia casually strolled up to the guard. She acted
as if he wasn’t there and tried to walk right past him.
"Halt!" he screamed at her. Thankfully, she obeyed. "What is
your purpose here, woman?"
"Who me?" she asked innocently.
"Yes, you. What do you want?" he growled.
"I'm just here to visit an old friend of mine."
He looked her up and down and said, "You don’t live here, do
you?"
"Not exactly."
"What do you mean by that?"
"Never mind. It's not important. I'm just here to see my friend."
"And this friend would be…?"
"Ihmo."
"The architect?" he asked, an expression of unease lining his face.
"I guess. He wasn't an architect when I was here before."
"So you lived here before?"
"Not exactly."
He sighed and asked, "Where did you come from?"
"Atlantia," she replied.
"So do you call Atlantia home?"
"Not exactly."
The guard started to rub his forehead. I began to wonder if I
looked like that when she talked to me. "Listen, if I don't know who you
are, I cannot let you see the architect."
"Oh, I'm sorry." She stuck out her hand and cheerfully said, "I'm
Valencia. Glad to meet you." Utterly confused, the guard did not accept
her greeting in kind so she lowered her arm. "You know, it's very rude to
not shake a person's hand when offered, especially a lady’s."
"You think I'm rude?"

155

"Not exactly. What you did was rude. That doesn’t necessarily
make you a rude person."
"So why do you want to see the architect?" the guard asked, trying
to regain control of the conversation.
"I told you. He's an old friend. I happened to be in the area and
figured I'd visit."
"So you live near here?"
"Not exactly," they said in unison.
The guard, obviously fed up with the conversation, begged, "If I
tell you where he is, will you please go away?"
"That's all I wanted in the first place."
"He's in the Labyrinth underneath the pyramid."
"Great! Thank you so much." She turned to leave and hesitated.
"Which pyramid? The completed one or the one being built?"
"The completed one."
"Thanks again!" She skipped away from the guard, who was still
trying to massage away the pain in his head. She turned the corner and
saw me standing there. My smile was all she needed to see.
"Do I look like that when you're talking to me?"
"Not exactly," she merrily replied. "Come on. We're off to the
pyramid. Ihmo's in the Labyrinth."
"Good job," I said sincerely as we headed off.
"So that's what Alipha meant when he said we'd both like it. A
pyramid for you and a maze for me." She glanced over at me and saw the
look of disgust on my face. "Not to worry, brother. I'll get us through
it."
"I'm just concerned about guards."
"That guy didn't say anything about other guards."
"Valencia, as difficult as it was to get the information from
him…"
"It's wasn't that tough, really," she interjected.
"…it probably means he is being guarded. I'll handle any guards
we encounter. You handle the Labyrinth. Sound like a plan?"
"Unfortunately, yes, it does," she said with distaste. I knew she
wasn't criticizing the plan itself, just the fact that we had one.
We exited the far end of town and made our way to the temple.
As we approached the pyramid, I couldn’t help but be more than pleased
with Ihmo’s effort. I had seen the pyramid at a distance while in town but
it simply did not compare to standing at its base. It was elegant in its
simplicity. All four sides were perfectly smooth, with odd yet intriguing
etchings several feet high encircling the base of the structure. It was

156

without a doubt one of the grandest sights I’d ever seen, easily rivaling the
pyramids on Atlantia.
As I had suspected, there were guards stationed outside the
entrance to the pyramid. One or two guards would’ve been fine, but
there were five of them. We continued onward as I tried to formulate a
plan. My concentration was broken by one of the guards.
“Halt!” he bellowed. This guard was dressed differently than the
others so I assumed he was in charge. The other guards were dressed in
green with white turbans. The leader had a purple turban and a black and
purple sash running across his chest. The most important difference was
that, though they all carried a bow with a quill full of arrows, he also
carried a spear. I stopped but Valencia did not. When she got near, he
pointed his spear at her chest and commanded her to stop once again.
She swatted the spear away and shouted, “Don’t point that thing
at me! Just who do you think you are?”
For a split second, he didn’t know how to react. “I am Scarab,
principal guard of the pyramid and devoted servant of Set.” He thrust the
spear at her again and she jumped back to avoid his weapon. “Now step
back.”
This time she obeyed. She took up position to my left a few steps
away, giving me plenty of room. “We are here to see Ihmo,” I said to
Scarab.
He laughed and said, “No one sees the architect without Set’s
approval and I don’t believe you have it.”
“True, we don’t. But you are going to let us pass nonetheless.”
My voice was calm and my gaze steady.
“On whose orders?”
“Mine.”
That got all of the guards laughing. “Do you think you are the
worst beings we’ve encountered? You are insignificant in our eyes.”
“Careful,” Valencia warned, “Or you may not have eyes left when
it’s all said and done.”
“And you may want to shut your woman’s mouth before she gets
hurt.”
“First off, she is not my woman. She’s my sister. Secondly, I
don’t think you or your guards could lay a hand on her.”
“Is that so?”
“It is,” I said with confidence. In a weird way, I was beginning to
enjoy myself.
“And why is that?”
“Because I’d stop you.”

157

The guards laughed again. Valencia and I stood silently, staring
holes through them all. “Men!” Scarab shouted. “Kill this insolent man.
The woman we’ll save for later.”
His four guards drew their bows, loaded up arrows and fired. To
my eyes, the arrows traveled as if the air were made of sand. With
minimal effort, I caught two arrows as they got close. The other two I
swiped at in midair and sliced them to pieces with the blades of my
gauntlets. I was still staring at Scarab as I snapped the arrows in my hands
and threw them to the ground. I smiled at the dumbfounded expressions
on their faces.
“That was impressive,” Valencia whispered to me.
“That was nothing,” I whispered back. Turning my attention back
to Scarab, “Since my sister is here and she prefers to give people a choice,
I’ll give you one.” Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Valencia beaming
wildly. Speaking slowly and deliberately, I said, “You either have five
seconds to let us pass or you have ten seconds to live. Choose wisely.”
Scarab and his guards still hadn’t fully recovered from my
exhibition and reacted sluggishly. I was counting slowly in my head when
I heard Valencia quietly say, “Five” just as I thought the word. They
made the wrong choice. I ran at them and they stood still. At least, it
appeared to me that they didn’t move. I was moving so fast that time
itself seemed to stop. I went after the guard closest to me first and drove
my bladed right hand into his chest and out his back, piercing his heart in
the process. I pulled my hand from his body as I swung my left toward
another guard. This one I sliced across the face with the back of the
hand, digging my blades into his eyes, severing an ear and ripping his
mouth open wider. My blades sliced open his neck and left his jaw
hanging from his skull like a spider from its web. Turning my attention to
the other two, I jabbed the blades of my right hand into the left side of
one victim's skull. Doing the same with my left hand to the right side of
the other’s guard’s head, I brought my hands together and watched their
heads explode from the impact. This left only Scarab. I darted to the
front of my last adversary and rammed my blades into his gut. There I
stopped.
All four of Scarab’s minions fell to the ground as one in a bloody
heap. Their crimson lifeblood poured from their bodies, staining the sand
in dark pools. Scarab at first did not realize I had attacked. He tried to
raise his spear but he was about four seconds too late. He was too
weakened by the blow to his stomach to lift his weapons an inch.
“When you meet Styx,” I told him, “Remember that I gave you a
choice. Pray she shows you mercy.” I thrust my free hand up through his

158

chin and out the top of his head. “For I have none for you.” I withdrew
my blades from his bowels and turned to Valencia. Not surprisingly, she
was bounding with excitement.
“That was great!” she screamed as she examined the fallen guards.
“You were just a blur. I swear! I could barely follow you. You were just
a streak of yellow and red! That was fantastic!”
“Valencia,” I calmly said.
“I mean, yes, they deserved it, but still…”
“Valencia,” I said with force this time.
“The sheer brutality, it was amazing! I’m serious…”
“Val!” I yelled.
“What?” she yelled back as she finally made eye contact. When
she did, she stepped back a pace in shock. “Vincent, your eyes are
glowing. Gold, not green like mine, but they are indeed glowing.” A
curious look crossed her face and she added, “And did you just call me
Val?”
I made a snap decision that it would be best to just let her words
pass by. “Come on. We have work to do.”
“Right! Let’s go get Ihmo.”
“First, help me carry the bodies into the pyramid.”
“Why?”
“So no one inadvertently stumbles across them. It wouldn’t do
well for us if someone noticed five dead guards in front of the pyramid.”
We tried to carry the bodies in but Valencia was so small that she
was having marked difficulty lifting one and moving it. She didn’t lack the
strength. The bodies were just so much bigger than her that she couldn’t
figure out a good way to carry them. While I transported the bodies out
of sight of passersby, Valencia covered up the bloody sand. To my
astonishment, she came up with that idea without my prodding.
We stashed the bodies in an anteroom just inside the entrance.
Before us was a long hallway leading into the heart of the pyramid.
Valencia and I walked in silence lest we encountered more guards. I
didn’t think any would be in the pyramid itself but I wasn’t going to take
any chances. After walking for a good five minutes we came to a fourway intersection. I looked left and saw Valencia looking down the hallway
as well. As she turned to look right I followed suit. Turning our gaze
straight ahead again, I asked, “Any ideas?”
“Only one. Take a harder look down each hallway.”
I stared down each corridor for a full minute, not knowing what I
was supposed to see. “Now what?”
“Which way makes your head hurt?”

159

I smiled and said, “Straight ahead.”
“Then straight ahead it is.”
We continued forward until we came to another intersection.
This time, the passage left made my head ache. We ventured deeper into
the pyramid by this method until we reached an opening with the words
“Labyrinth of Chaos” engraved over it.
“This must be the place,” Valencia surmised.
“It’d better be. I feel like my brain is going to push my eyes out
of their sockets.”
“It’ll only get worse from here. Shall we go in?”
“Are you sure you can find your way?”
“Trust me,” she said with a wicked smile. Noticing the pained
look on my face, she grabbed my hand. “Close your eyes and hold on.
Maybe if you don’t have to see it, it won’t hurt as much.”
I took her advice as she led us into the Labyrinth. After a minute,
I let go and opened my eyes. Her theory didn’t pan out. At least she
tried. Considering we hadn't said a kind word to each other in months
before coming to Egypt, it was nice of her to show such concern. Just
because there was nothing between us that remotely resembled the love
most siblings possessed didn't mean we didn't still care about each other.
We weaved down the corridors of the Labyrinth, Valencia never
showing any doubt as to where to turn. I would never get to Ihmo by
myself down here. Maybe if I went full speed I could find him in a few
hours. More likely, I'd get extremely lost. After several twists and turns,
we entered an open area of the maze. There sat Ihmo, nose first in a
book. He was so enraptured with his reading that he didn't hear us
approach. When he finally looked up, he fell out of his chair in alarm.
"Who are you and what do you want?" he demanded from the
floor.
"We're here to rescue you," Valencia told him.
Ihmo seemed unconvinced. "Who are you?" he asked again as he
regained his composure and stood up.
"Ihmo, I'm Vincent. Do you remember me?"
His mood changed in the blink of an eye. "Vincent! Ra be
praised!" Turning to my sister, he said, "You're Valencia, aren't you?"
"You got it, sweetie," she replied.
"I never thought I’d see the two of you down here."
"Well, we heard you were in trouble, like most of the rest of the
town," I explained. "And we're here to help."
"How did you find me?"
"There will be time for that later. Right now, we need to get

160

going."

"Are we in danger?"
"Probably. If not now, we will be as soon as Set figures out that
his guards are dead."
"Then let's go!" he joyfully decreed, and not a moment too soon.
My head was about to explode. As we began retracing our steps, we
heard a strange rumbling sound emanating from beneath us.
"What's that noise?" Valencia asked.
"Don't move!" Ihmo commanded. We quickly halted our
progress. "Set's majicks are at play down here. The walls move. If you
get surrounded by them, you could be stuck here for months or worse."
"Worse?" I asked.
"You could get crushed between walls."
"That's worse, all right," my sister commented.
We stood stone still and watched the walls around us start to
move. The entire complexion of the maze was changing, making escape
more difficult. Well, it would’ve been more difficult if the bringer of
chaos weren't with us. Valencia just smiled as the walls settled into their
new arrangement.
"Come on, we have to backtrack a little," she said once the walls
were done moving.
"Are you sure?" Ihmo asked.
"Trust me," she implored. "I know what I'm doing." We walked
back the way we came for a few yards until Valencia took a left. We were
on the march for about twenty minutes when I asked how much longer
we had to go. Valencia smiled and said, "We're here." One more turn
and we were at the entrance of the Labyrinth.
I felt so much better when we left the Labyrinth behind us. My
headache faded more and more as we made our way out of the pyramid.
I remembered the path we'd taken and was able to lead for the remainder
of the journey. One final turn and a long straight stretch greeted us.
Valencia had been filling Ihmo in on all the details while we searched for
the exit. He was so glad to see us he didn't question anything we told
him. When we saw the light at the end of the hallway, we were overjoyed.
Our euphoria was fleeting however, for once we stepped outside we were
greeted by Set and a full compliment of guards.
“Where do you think you’re going with my architect?” he asked.
“Just back to the village,” Valencia replied casually. Her
demeanor changed, and her tone, as she added sharply, “Where he
belongs.”
“Really? And what makes you think I’ll allow that to happen?”

161

“You don’t have a choice,” I informed him.
“There’s always a choice. Isn’t that right Valencia?” I was
surprised to hear Set call my sister by name. She was stunned into silence.
Realizing no answer was forthcoming, he continued, “Yes, I know who
the two of you are. Personally, I’m glad. The villagers aren’t much of a
challenge to my rule but there are still elements that seek to dispose of
me. Killing the two of you will send a clear message to those that still
oppose me.”
I detected a green glow coming from where Valencia stood and
took charge before she could say a word. “Set, you have no idea what
you’re getting into. You will let us pass. If you do, we may show mercy
on you.”
Laughter issued forth from his serpentine head. “It is you that
will be asking for mercy.”
Before I could respond, I saw an arrow fly through the air. The
arrow struck the guard next to Set in the back of the head and swiftly
exited via his left eye. As the guard fell limply to the ground, the arrow
continued its flight and came right at me. I caught it easily and smiled. I
snapped it like a twig as I stared at my enemy. Set frantically turned
around and saw an army of villagers approaching, weapons raised for
battle. He ordered his minions to attack and they charged at the
approaching army.
“Valencia, get back in the pyramid!” I shouted over the din.
“You’ve got to be kidding!” she yelled back.
“Do it!” I roared. That had the desired effect. She grabbed Ihmo
and ran back to the pyramid. Set had turned away from me and was
issuing commands to his guards. I spread out my arms and ran into the
melee, slicing several guards to ribbons. I found Kalim at the rear of his
band of soldiers. I told him to go and join the fight. I was taking control
of the situation. Kalim agreed and entered the fray. I saw Set raise his
hands and speak but was too far away to hear his words. When he
lowered his hands, all of his fallen soldiers rose from the ground, alive
once again. I’d never seen a necromancer before but I’d heard of them.
This made the fight all that much more complicated.
Valencia didn’t stay in the pyramid, not that I really expected her
to. She ran around the edge of the battlefield with Ihmo close behind. In
her hands were Scarab’s spear and a bow. A quiver of arrows was slung
over her shoulder. Ihmo likewise had picked up two bows and some
arrows. Ihmo handed me a bow and a compliment of arrows while I sent
a portion of the villagers around to the left flank. I wanted to try and
force Set’s minions back to the pyramid and hopefully pin them there.

162

Ihmo led the villagers I’d sent to the left, firing arrows with
precision. I shouted out orders and the villagers willingly complied. It
came so naturally to me that I didn’t even need to think about what to do
next. The battle plan was working perfectly and Set’s men fell one by one.
The necromancer couldn’t revive them fast enough. The only problem
was Valencia. She was firing arrows as well but her arrows didn’t fly
straight. Every time she aimed and fired the arrow would initially sail
straight but would soon swerve erratically. It wasn't that she was a bad
shot. The forces of chaos just made the arrows she used act strangely. I
begged her to stop and she eventually came to the same conclusion I’d
reached. She picked up the spear and started to head off into battle. I
grabbed her and roughly threw her to the ground. There was no way I
was going to let her join in the fray. She wouldn’t last a minute.
The remainder of Set’s guards were falling like rain in a downpour.
One by one their numbers decreased. I marched forward as the troops
advanced on Set, who was now standing with his back to the pyramid. As
he raised his hands to cast a spell, I fired an arrow and caught him square
in the chest. With his dying breath, he chanted one last spell. To my
amazement, another Set appeared. This was no illusion, for this new
version of Set picked up a sword and began to defend himself from his
attackers. The villagers finished off the rest of the guards and were trying
to kill Set, but to no avail. Finally, Alipha stepped forward and drove his
sword into Set’s stomach. As Set grabbed the sword and withdrew the
blood soaked weapon from his body, he chanted the spell he’d done
before and another Set appeared.
“You cannot kill me! I am one of many! I am forever!” he raged.
I sprinted at Set who, like Scarab and his guards, looked as if he
was standing still. I swung my bladed hands at his neck and decapitated
him. When I stopped, his eyes shone with the recognition of his demise.
His head was still on his shoulders but was slowly sliding from his body.
The serpentine head fell to the ground, followed closely by the rest of
him. Blood gushed forth from his remains as his heart beat its last.
“You are done talking,” I informed the corpse.
With Set dead, as well as the vast majority of his guards, the battle
was essentially over. The villagers rejoiced and thanked me profusely for
disposing of this vile creature, all except Valencia of course. She was
screaming at me for treating her so roughly. I tried to explain to her that I
did it for her own safety. She didn’t care. She was fuming and there was
nothing I was going to able to say to calm her down. So I did the next
best thing. I ignored her. I searched out Kalim and began to question
him about something that had me confused.

163

“How did he do that?” I asked.
“You mean bring forth another Set? It’s called reality
manipulation. It’s like an illusion but your mind makes it real. Once your
mind makes it real, it is real.”
“That’s a neat trick,” I commented.
“It’s no trick. According to Orona, it’s one of the most powerful
spells in creation. It’s also very rare. Only the most accomplished
spellcasters can master it. Reality manipulation requires more
concentration than most mortals can muster.”
“Well, I guess I don’t have to worry about my sister learning it.”
“Why is that? Is she a spellcaster?”
“Maybe someday. I don’t think she’ll be a great warrior, do you?”
“Probably not,” Kalim said with a laugh. “But why do you think
she wouldn’t be able to cast that spell?”
“Because she can’t concentrate on anything.” I couldn’t hide my
own smile any longer. “Now, I think there’s one mission left for you and
your forces.”
“Rescue Ra.”
“Exactly. Now be on your way and free your leader.”
Kalim left to gather a rescue party and I looked around for
Valencia. She was talking with Ihmo as I approached.
“Ihmo tells me that there’s going to be a celebration tonight. We
are going to stick around, right? I’d hate to miss the party.”
Not a minute ago she was ready to rip my head from my body
with her bare hands for not letting her fight. Now she was jovial and
chipper at the thought of a party. Her mood swings could drive a person
insane. Now that she was in a better mood, however, I planned to keep it
that way. “I think we can stay a little longer.”
“I’m going to head back to the village and get everything ready,”
Ihmo told us. “First, I have to tell the families of our fallen brethren that
their loved ones won’t be coming home tonight.”
“They died valiantly, Ihmo. Never forget that,” I said.
“I know,” he said sadly. “But I doubt that will be much
consolation to their families.”
Ihmo left and I was alone with Valencia. I was about to ask her if
she wanted to head back as well when she said, “After the party, we need
to talk.”
“Look, if this is about me not letting you fight…”
“It’s not,” she said somberly. “It’s something much more
important than that.” She turned and slowly walked in the direction of
the village, leaving me by myself. I looked around at the carnage and

164

decided to leave too. There was too much death here for my liking.
The party that evening was a pleasant change from the earlier
events of the day. Everyone was having a good time. Drinks were passed
around freely and there was enough food to feed an army and still have
food left over. I met Ra, who turned out to be a very soft-spoken
individual. He thanked my sister and me for helping to free the village
from Set’s tyranny. It pleased him to no end that two children of the
Aseraphim would take such an interest in this place. I explained to him
that this was the first place we’d encountered on this realm and it had a
special place in both our hearts. I spent most of the night chatting with
Ra about his origins and those like him. It was quite enlightening.
I didn’t stay at the party long after Ra and I were done talking. It
was a bit too chaotic, as most parties tended to be. I found myself
walking to the spot along the riverside that Valencia and I used to visit
when we wanted to be alone. The log we used to sit on was still there,
much to my surprise. I sat down and stared out at the flowing river. As I
expected, I wasn’t there long before Valencia showed up.
“How did I know I’d find you here?” she asked.
“How did I know you’d follow me?”
“I didn’t follow you. I just knew you’d be here.”
“Is the party winding down?”
“Not at all!” she exclaimed. “In fact, it’s really starting to heat
up.”
“Then why did you leave?”
“I needed to talk to you.”
“Yes, you’ve said. What do you want to talk about?”
Valencia sat down on the log next to me. She didn’t say anything
right away, but when she did, her words caught me off guard. “I’m not
going back to Atlantia.”
I turned to look at her and I could tell right away that she was
serious. “Why not?”
“Why should I?”
“To continue your education for one thing.”
“I can do that here. Ra’s already told me he’d be honored to be
my new teacher. Orona said she’d lend a hand as well.”
“You want to stay here?”
“I don’t want to go back to Atlantia.”
“Didn’t you like it there?”
“I loved it there. But I think it would be best if I stayed here and
kept an eye on things. This may be the first place you established order

165

but it’s also special to me.” She paused and looked out over the river
before continuing. “When I saw the words above the Labyrinth, I knew
then that I should be here. Order may be strong here, but chaos has its
place too.” She gave me a mischievous wink and added, “I told you one
can’t exist without the other.”
“Where will you stay?”
“Well, tonight I’m kind of hoping to find an occupied bed to sleep
in,” she said with an impish grin. “After that, I figure I’ll stay in the
Labyrinth. I think I can learn better surrounded by chaos, don’t you?”
“It’s a theory. What should I tell our father?”
“Tell him whatever you want. I doubt he’ll care.”
I couldn’t argue with her on that point. “I’ll think of something.”
I wanted to be alone now and told her so. “I’m heading back in the
morning. You should get back to the party.”
“I will, but I have a favor to ask.”
“And what’s that?”
“Don’t come to me asking for my help. You and I have different
goals and I just don’t think we’ll be able to work as well together in the
future as we did today. Before we came here we hardly said two words to
each other. This was nice, but I think we'll both be better off alone."
"You may be right."
"Do this for me and I’ll do you a favor in return.”
“And that would be?”
“I won’t leave Egypt. This way, you’ll have time to try to
accomplish your goals and fulfill the prophecy. If that’s what is meant be,
of course.”
I smiled and told her that she had a deal. What she did next
stunned me. She gave me a big hug. “You take care of yourself.”
“You too,” I replied, returning her embrace in kind. It was the
first time I could ever remember the two of us sharing such a tender
moment. Then again, maybe it was just one last attempt at confusion on
her part. Personally, I sensed the gesture was sincere, but with her you
could never be entirely sure. Without another word, she released her
embrace and went back to the party, leaving me alone with my thoughts.

166

Chapter 11
My last night in Egypt was spent alone in the hut. I rejoined the
party for a brief moment to say a final farewell to my friends on the way
back from the riverside. There were a lot of emotions flowing and where
I cared deeply for these people, I didn’t have the sentimental attachment
my sister possessed. First and foremost for me, it was all about
maintaining order. Now that Valencia had decided to stay here I felt a
little betrayed. She knew my reasons for defending this town and now she
was going to stay here and change everything. Granted, she did have a
valid point when she said that chaos had its place here as well. At least I
knew she’d keep a vigilant watch over these people, as they would over
her I was sure. Considering the last glimpse I got of my sister was of her
walking arm in arm with a young man and a young lady, I knew she'd be
fine. I wondered if they owned the occupied bed she was looking for. I
also had to wonder which one was going to be sharing the bed with her.
Knowing my sister’s proclivities, it was probably both.
I left for Atlantia the next morning, arriving on the island in a
flash of yellow and red. My father wasn’t home when I arrived so I went
to check on the progress at the Zaron’s egg project. The engineers were
still bringing the egg to the surface inch by inch. The progress was
painfully slow. I kept getting a sick feeling in the pit of my stomach
whenever I got near to the actual site where they hoped to store the egg.
There was no sense in restating my objections either. The lead engineer
told me the egg was still several miles underground. The ground was
getting softer now and they were making better time than originally
calculated. They estimated the egg breaking the surface in only a few
months. I tried to feel good about this news, but my sense of dread
would not allow it.
I didn’t get back to the house until late in the afternoon. My
father was waiting for me this time and had plenty of questions about the
events in Egypt. I told him all that had happened and he was pleased to
see I was able to defeat Set. Not surprisingly, he never once asked about
Valencia.
Of all that I had to tell him, he was most delighted to see that I
was capable of leading men in battle. My father told me more about the
war going on between the Granites and the Magmites. After filling me in
on all the details, I concluded this was merely a political disagreement and
should be handled diplomatically. My father explained that years of talks,
which he himself mediated, yielded no positive results. I asked if I could
try and he grew angry with me, saying that if he could not bring the two

167

sides together then I would stand no chance and would just be wasting
time. His reaction was a tad over the top but in the end I had to admit he
was right. After a lengthy discussion, I agreed to help my father lead
General Sakoahn’s armies.
We traveled together to Granatia, the home of the Granites.
General Sakoahn was in the war room of his palace with his second-incommand, Titus. The general was a large specimen of the Granite people
but he was a pebble compared to Titus. When I’d first met these two
months ago, I wondered to myself why Titus wasn’t in charge. He was
clearly the strongest of their race. When he spoke, it all became clear. To
say Titus was less than intelligent was like saying water’s a little wet.
When you’re almost eight feet tall and made of rock, with jagged rock
spikes jutting out from your shoulders and down your arms and back, you
don’t really have to say much anyway. Titus was about a foot taller than
Sakoahn, so Titus was seated while the general paced the room. When
my father and I entered, General Sakoahn stopped pacing and sharply
called us over.
“Gentlemen, we have a problem,” he began as I sat down next to
Titus. “The Magmites have been able to persuade some of the spawn to
help them. It’s that damn portal!”
“I believe it’s more likely that Terran recruited the spawn. The
dark creatures haven’t gotten along well with the Magmites since the
Aseraphim wars,” my father commented. He was standing next to the
table, calmly watching Sakoahn have a nervous breakdown.
“Does it really matter?” he angrily replied.
“Actually, yes it does. You don’t have to fight the Magmites, you
have to fight Terran. And therein lies the problem,” my father concluded.
“The Magmites are protecting Terran and Terran is commanding
the Magmites. As long as they protect him, the spawn will obey.” The
general resumed his pacing, looking at the floor in deep thought. “So
how do we get to Terran?”
“From the inside,” I threw in timidly.
The general stopped and rounded on me. I was ready for him to
scream at me for breaking his concentration with such a ridiculous idea.
Instead, he just said flatly, “Go on.”
“Well, in warfare, chaos is key. The best way to combat the
inherent nature of it all is to try and control what you can and know every
minute detail about what you cannot,” I began. “So let’s look at the
obvious. This is war with an enemy that is comprised of some of your
own people, correct?”
“It is,” he replied, again showing neither approval nor scorn.

168

“Well, if you had someone on the inside they could take out
Terran. Clearly, the problem is getting someone inside and having him
gain their trust. Loyalties change in battle. It’s simply a fact. Another
fact is, more than likely, they have someone on the inside here. It would
only make sense. We’ll have to look into that.”
“Make it a priority,” Sakoahn said sharply. “Continue.”
“Do you have anyone on the inside?” I asked.
“We did,” Titus replied, speaking for the first time. His deep,
gravely voice echoed throughout the room for a few seconds before
fading away. “He was supposed to take control of the portal but he
failed.”
“What about this portal? What is it?” I posed.
“It’s not important right now,” my father replied. “Keep going
son.”
“How can it not be important if controlling it is a primary
objective?” I asked in return. “I need to know what it is and what’s
coming through it.”
“Not now!” he bellowed.
I stood up and got face to face with my father. I was now a tad
taller than him but I was in much better physical condition. I stared a
hole through him and said, “If you want my help, I need to know
everything.”
Oddly, he smiled and said with a laugh, “Do you think my own
son intimidates me?”
“No father, I don’t,” I replied sternly. “But I think you badly
need my help.” I lowered my voice to a whisper and continued, “I just
got back from fighting Set and his minions. It was the first time I ever
killed someone. I even tried to avoid it. I gave them a choice, father.
They made the wrong one. However, I did learn two things from the
experience. I learned that I don’t like to kill. I think it’s unnecessary, not
to mention messy. Secondly, I learned that I’m pretty damn good at it.”
My voice was barely a breath on the wind when I finished but he heard
every word. My fists were clenched and the muscles in my arms and neck
were taut and throbbing.
The smile that had been on his face evaporated and I saw a brief
flash of concern in those eyes behind the mask. He stepped back and
said, “Very well.” He started pacing around the room as he spoke. “The
portal is a doorway to the realm of Haedes. During the Aseraphim wars,
it was the main gateway to Earth for various demons, imps, beasts and
other monstrosities fighting with Lillith and Loathe. The Magmites struck
an accord with Lillith to allow the portal to remain open and its

169

passengers would leave Atlantia unmolested. The Granites saw this as
choosing sides on an otherwise bastion of neutrality. Isn’t that correct,
General Sakoahn?”
“Indeed it is,” he replied. Picking up the story, the general
continued, “We were upset with the Magmites for making the deal and
asked their leaders to rescind their offer to Lady Lillith. They refused,
thereby breaking with the tradition of all races on Atlantia. They broke
from neutrality and order.
“After the Aseraphim wars were finished, the Magmites no longer
allowed Lillith’s followers free passage to Earth. They could use the
portal at will. There was nothing the Magmites could do to stop them,
really. However, now when the spawn arrives, they are no longer
welcome and are killed as quickly as possible. If they are helping the
Magmites now, Terran must’ve struck an incredible deal.”
I sat back down and tried to think everything out. No one spoke
for several minutes, amplifying even the smallest sound. I could hear the
stone grinding as Titus shifted in his seat. He must’ve heard it as well
since he soon sat completely motionless. It looked like I was sitting next
to a small mountain. Finally, after careful consideration, I only had bad
news. “I’m sorry, but I can’t think of a viable plan to get to Terran
without compromising too many men.”
“That’s not a problem,” General Sakoahn informed me.
“It is for me. I don’t think you should worry about the portal
either. Go for the minions already here. Make them your primary target.
If Lillith’s minions keep dying in great numbers, sooner or later she’ll
grow tired of the deal and call back her forces. This isn’t her fight and
she’s not going to invest too much time and energy into it.”
“How do you know this?” the general asked.
“I don’t. I’m just going on what I know of Lillith and her
negotiating tactics. She’s the queen of the loophole. I wouldn’t be at all
surprised if Loathe is the one that drafted the contract. If so, I almost feel
bad for Terran.”
“You and Sam talked about your family more than I thought,” my
father told me.
“I read more books too.” I was going to mention meeting the
Aseraphim while in Egypt but decided against it. “Getting back to the
topic at hand, you need to alter your plans to weigh it more toward killing
the spawn and make killing the Magmites and renegade Granites
secondary. If there’s ever going to be a chance at peace, it’ll be better this
way. If you show that you’re more inclined to kill the spawn and leave
them alone, you may even convert some of the renegades back to your

170

side.”

“You’re preaching mercy for our enemies?” the general roared, his
deep, hollow voice echoing off the walls.
“No, I'm talking about peace. You tried for years to reach a
peaceful agreement, didn't you?”
“That was then, Vincent. Times have changed.” General
Sakoahn was stomping around the room now, his stone feet kicking up
dust with every step. “First, they break from the neutrality we all enjoyed
as races of Atlantia by making a deal with Lillith. Then, when they try to
shut the portal down, they fail miserably. They kill many of the creatures
that come out of that portal but not all. They’ve somehow been able to
convince Terran, once a great man and a credit to his race, to turn his
back on his own. Now they get him to make a deal allowing them control
over the minions of Haedes crossing over to this realm. There will never
be peace with the Magmites. They cannot be trusted.”
I let his ranting fade away before I replied. “I understand your
feelings about the Magmites, but since you asked for my help, you’ll
follow my lead. Now, where are your current plans, maps, intelligence
information, and data on force numbers, heavy hitters, anyone with
special abilities. I’ll also want a list of spies working for us and a list of
suspects in our own ranks.”
“Why don’t I just have Slade bring everything?” the general asked,
a smile now on his face.
“Who’s Slade?”
“My military adviser. As much as I appreciate what Titus can do,
I also appreciate what he cannot. I’ll send him in and let you two get
acquainted.” Speaking to everyone else, “Shall we be going?”
The mountain next to me unfurled and stood up into Titus once
again. He led the way, followed closely by the general and my father in
quiet conversation.
Slade wasn’t the smallest Granite I’d seen but he was close. He
was an inch or two shorter than me and was comprised entirely of sleek,
black stone. His voice wasn’t as coarse as your normal Granite’s either,
which made the proceedings much easier. Slade and I went over the
current plans and I pointed out the changes I wanted to make as we went
along. He was hesitant at first with some of my ideas. Once we got more
in depth with the specifics he came around to my way of thinking. We
got along quite well and spent many hours refining our plans.
After formulating a viable plan of attack, we took the information
to General Sakoahn for his endorsement. Without a word to us, he called

171

for The Beholder to join our meeting. After some lengthy and often
contentious discussion, I convinced my father and the general that this
plan would work. General Sakoahn called on Titus to put the plan into
action.
I excused myself from the meeting and asked where I would be
staying. My father led me to a lavish bedroom located in the main section
of the castle. I’d never been in the sleeping quarters of a Granite’s home.
I was ready for the mattress to be made of stone. Thankfully, it wasn’t. I
settled into the room, glad to see that they’d prepared it for my arrival.
My father went back to talk with General Sakoahn and I was alone for the
first time since I left the city of Atlantia.
I relaxed on the bed, thinking about the plans Slade and I had
drawn up. It was so simple, once you assembled all the facts, to design a
plan of attack. What bothered me was how easily I looked at force
numbers without thinking about the people tied to those numbers.
Granites and Magmites alike were going to die in the coming days. I
could predict how many of each it would be if I really wanted to. I might
not hit the exact number but I knew I wouldn't be far off. The thought
that any life would be lost bothered me. I couldn't help it. I had killed
those guards in Egypt and felt nothing. It was all in the line of duty. I
believed that feeling nothing had to be worse than feeling guilty. The
emptiness I felt at their deaths was as vast and hollow as the Void itself. I
gave them a choice, not only to pacify Valencia, but because I didn't want
to have to kill them. They were just doing their jobs and died in the line
of duty. For me, it was simply something that had to be done. I
understood that the soldiers that were going to die in the battles I
designed would die valiantly. The point was, they'd be dead and I would
have been responsible for sealing their fates.
The next two days were reserved for final preparations. Titus
introduced me to some of his lieutenants and we picked over the finer
details of the plan. The most important detail had to be taken care of
before the soldiers could even think about leaving. All weapons were
being coated with silver. If you were going to send an army off to fight
against creatures from Haedes, silver was a must-have item. I got to meet
most of the soldiers that would be going into battle. I had to wonder how
many would come back. I pushed that thought aside and threw my
energies into making sure the plan was perfect. General Sakoahn liked my
ideas more and more. His enthusiasm was contagious and soon his
troops were not just ready but eager to fight. The general was going to
command the troops on the front lines and asked if I wanted to join him.
Part of me wanted to, hoping that maybe if I witnessed the actual fighting

172

it might make me realize that death was just a natural part of war. The
prevailing part of my mind didn't want to watch men die for any reason. I
chose to stay. The Beholder mentioned that he was going to stay as well.
My father and I watched from the balcony of the castle as the Granite
army marched off to battle.
It was three days before we heard any word from the front lines.
When news finally did arrive, it was worth waiting for. All went according
to plan, as General Sakoahn and his men were able to slay a huge number
of spawn. The Magmites stayed in the rear, directing the spawn from a
safe distance. When the slaughter started, The Magmites weren't able to
control the spawn and were forced to retreat. Only two Magmites died in
the fight and the Granites only lost one. This made my plans a total
success. The entire battle plan had been drawn up around the concept of
minimal casualties. Taking out the forces from Haedes was to be our
main concern. With the silver weapons in hand, the spawn had no
chance.
There was much celebrating after the victory but Slade and I took
no part in it. We were busy refining the plans for the next assault. If the
Magmites were smart they wouldn't use the same tactics the next time.
Our plans had to reflect any changes they might make. For days, Slade
and I locked ourselves in a room and hashed out a revised version of the
battle plan. Our only visitor was Opal, a female Granite and Slade's
personal assistant. It wasn’t always easy to tell the females from the males
of this species. Opal was the exception to the rule. Other Granites found
her quite attractive. I didn't entirely understand but I didn't disagree
either. All that being said, she was definitely not my type.
General Sakoahn didn't voice a word of dissent about our
isolation. His only act was to see the plan implemented. Another battle
brought another victory, but this time with more casualties. It still pained
me that soldiers were dying.
Slade and I were always working on new ideas for battles and
most of them worked splendidly. After a few skirmishes our ideas
became more recognizable to our enemy and they were able to put up
more resistance. We still weren't losing battles, just more men. I noticed
Slade’s unease when Sakoahn would rant about our losses. It wasn’t his
fault we were losing more soldiers. The Magmites were adjusting faster
than expected. Even our best-laid plans were revealed to have serious
flaws. The only other explanation would be that Slade was the traitor. He
was the only person other than the general, my father and I that knew
every detail of the plans. Since I hadn’t seen him discussing our strategy
with anyone, I pushed my suspicions aside. The thought kept nagging me

173

though.

I had been working with Slade for three months when something
happened to make my suspicions grow into concern. I entered the war
room one day and overheard the tail end of a conversation between Slade
and Opal. I couldn't be certain but I suspected he was giving her details
of our plans. Though Opal was extremely helpful when it came to
gathering information for us, she wasn't really involved in writing up the
plans. I didn't really know much about her except that she was an
assistant to the former ruler of Granatia. When I did press for her story,
she was evasive and cryptic. She never spoke of her family, her friends or
her life outside the castle walls.
I quickly came up with a way to find out once and for all if Slade
was the traitor. As I approached Opal and Slade, their conversation
immediately ceased. "Slade, I need to talk to you. Privately," I said with
authority.
Opal dismissed herself and left the room. Once behind closed
doors, Slade asked, "What can I do for you, Vincent?" A nervous gleam
in his eye told me my suspicions had merit.
"I wanted to talk to you about the march around Mount Pak
tomorrow. There's been a modest change of plans."
"What have you come up with this time?" he asked, his
nervousness gone. He sauntered over to the table and leaned on it,
relaxed and composed.
"What happens if a Magmite gets wet?" I asked.
"Well, they don't like it very much, I can tell you that," he said
cheerfully. "In fact, it can be fatal in large enough doses."
"Go on," I urged.
"If you throw a Magmite in the ocean, it's done for."
"How much damage could we do with the water from the river?"
I asked.
"Without a way to pump the water out, not much. If you could
get them into the river, they could conceivably get stuck."
"Stuck?"
"They cool. Their lava hardens, immobilizing them. Getting a
Magmite into the river isn't as easy as it sounds. They avoid water at all
costs. That's why we think they'll be stationed around the base of the
mountain."
"Right, but instead of staying on land, if we marched up the
riverbed they couldn't touch us. Their only option would be ranged
attacks and we've already seen their skills with projectiles."
"They couldn't hit a cave wall from the inside!"

174

"My estimation exactly. So we take the troops up the river."
"Great plan once again, my friend," he said as he came over to pat
me on the back.
"Let's just hope it works. Then can we say if it was really a good
plan or not."
I dismissed him and Slade took off for another part of the castle.
I wanted to follow him and see if he spoke to Opal, but as I got into the
hallway Sakoahn and several guards stopped me.
General Sakoahn asked me to join him on the front lines and
evaluate the situation first hand tomorrow. I still wasn’t sure I wanted to
watch men die in battle. I finally decided that I owed the ones that had
died some consideration. If I could fix the problems in our plans, maybe
fewer soldiers would perish. This also gave me an opportunity to test my
theory about Slade and Opal. The Beholder was eager join us as well. He
said he wanted to see his son in action. My father was incredibly proud of
all I had done for the Granites. In fact, it was all he talked about.
The battle was to take place at the bottom of Mount Pak,
Atlantian home of the lycan race. The lycans generally stayed out of the
battles. They were no match for either Magmites or Granites. The
Magmites, having lost most of their spawn allies, had attacked the
Granites as they were rounding the pass at the base of the mountain,
thereby cutting off access to the river. Unfortunately, this confirmed my
doubts about Slade and Opal.
The fighting was fierce and many men on both sides were dying.
The general, my father and I watched from a cliff away from the fighting.
When I asked why we were so far away, the general said something that
made my blood boil. He said it was so we'd be safe from harm. Here we
stood, a good distance away from where men were dying by our orders
and for our cause, hoping that our best laid plans were sufficient to repel
our enemy. I never felt a more profound emptiness and hollowness
inside in my entire existence. For my own mental well-being, I had to
leave our perch on the cliff. I wanted to inspect the battle from the front
lines. I also wanted to help. The Granites were caught in a bottleneck as
they rounded the base of Mount Pak. On the plus side, the Magmites
couldn't break through the bottleneck either. The fighting was contained
in a small area with many soldiers in reserve.
The Beholder stopped me and told me it was not my place to
interfere. "They will break their lines eventually."
"And how many will die in that time?" I demanded.
"Does that still bother you?" he asked sadly.

175

"It always will." Before he could object again, I was gone. I ran
down the side of the mountain in a flash and joined the fray. The
combatants were engaged in fierce fighting. Granites and Magmites alike,
moving as sap down a tree to my eye, fought and died before me. I
looked upon the battle and realized the futility of their efforts, no matter
how great and valiant. I had a job to do, however, and that was to fight
with the Granites. I helped as I could, sometimes striking down
Magmites by my own hand and other times by placing the Granites in
more advantageous positions. Since I was so fast, the Granites didn't
even know they had attacked before they were looking down at their
fallen enemy.
The Magmites weren't very easy for me to kill. They were similar
to Granites but instead of stone their bodies were composed of large
deposits of lava. I could attack but would invariably come back slightly
singed every time. I needed to find a new approach. I saw a small hole in
the Magmites defenses and darted for it. The heat emanating from the
Magmites as I weaved my way between them was intense. I made it to the
river behind them and instead of leaping over it, I ran on top of it. I was
moving so fast the water seemed as solid as stone under my feet. I saw
the wake trailing behind me and let it build up. Once a good portion of
the river was sucked into the wake I'd created, I darted toward the
Magmites. Water cascaded over them, sending great plumes of steam into
the chilly morning air. The Magmites were now motionless, not just to
my eye but to everyone. The cooling effect of the water petrified our
enemy's molten bodies, encrusting them in pumice. I was now able to get
close enough to do some real damage. I dashed around, slicing every
standing Magmite to shreds. Chips of stone flew from every strike of my
blades as they shattered into pieces. The hot, oozing blood of the
Magmites flowed freely from their massive bodies and spilled to the
ground, burning a path in the weeds.
There were no Magmites left standing after my assault and
instantly the remaining Granites started to celebrate. I whirled around
and stared at them, putting an end to their revelry. I sensed the golden
glow coming from my eyes though I couldn't see it. I was peering directly
through it as if it was normal sunlight. The Beholder instantly appeared,
transporting himself and the general down from their perch on the cliff.
"Take the men back to Granatia," I ordered the general. I thought
for a brief moment he was going to object to my giving him an order. He
wisely thought better of it.
I surveyed the scene, taking in the carnage while trying to figure
out where it all went wrong. The one conclusion I settled upon bothered

176

me even though I had suspected as much. I knew who the traitor was. I
was about to make my suspicions known when my father said, "That was
quite impressive, my son. You are indeed a remarkable warrior."
I wheeled around and saw him smiling, pleased with his son's
works. "I shouldn't have had to do it."
"But you did and did it well. You should've joined in the fighting
much earlier. I was disappointed that you refused so many times before."
"It bothers me," I replied vacantly.
"I know. The chaos of it can be upsetting. But know that it is for
the betterment of order."
"It's not that." I began pacing around the battlefield, stepping
over and around all the fallen soldiers. "Why does it have to be this way?
Killing isn't orderly. War isn't orderly. Is the outcome more important
than the methods?"
"That depends on the outcome. In this instance, the outcome is
the most important thing. Methods be damned, the proper outcome must
occur."
"And what is the proper outcome, father? The elimination of
every Magmite? Control of the portal? What?" My voice grew angrier
with every question until I was shouting at my father.
His calm veneer never wavered. "Order, my dear Vincent, is what
we are trying to achieve," he said evenly, in an attempt to calm me down.
My temper wasn't placated at all. His cool demeanor only fueled
my rage. "This is not order!" I screamed. "This is mass chaos! I come up
with plans, using my penchant for order to help reign down chaos. My
plans fail, thanks to Slade, and more chaos occurs."
"Wait," my father interjected, holding up a hand. "Slade is a spy."
"No, Slade is a traitor. His assistant, Opal, is a spy. He's been
feeding her information and she's been passing it along to the Magmites,
or Terran more likely."
"How do you know this? Did you see him?"
"No, I didn't. But it's the only explanation that fits. I suspected
him a few weeks ago after the first battle that went sour. This time, I told
him of one aspect of the plan that only he would know. Looking around
after the fact, I think it was the information I gave him that caused the
overall plan to fail."
"You knew the plan would fail and gave it to Sakoahn anyway?"
The Beholder's voice was shaking with anger.
"I had to find out if I was correct. It meant sacrificing more men
than I wanted to, but it had to be done. That's why I joined in the battle,
father. I felt I owed it to them."

177

My father was pacing the battlefield now, never once stepping out
of the way of the dead bodies strewn about. He drove his boots into and
through the small boulders that marked the final resting spot of many a
Granite. "Are you trying to lose this war?" he shouted. "This isn't about
spies, Vincent. It's about conquering your enemies. Even with Slade
giving information to the other side, we were still winning. Now you're
making plans to satisfy your own curiosity?"
"And what exactly are your plans in all of this, father?" I replied
forcefully. "Am I supposed to help you exterminate the Magmites? To
what ends? What have they really done that warrants their extinction?
They left the minions of Haedes alone during the Aseraphim wars. Tell
me, father, what were the Granites doing at the time? Were they out
trying to kill the demons or did they stay home and complain about it?"
My father had stopped pacing and was glaring at me with fire in his eyes.
"Choose your words with care, Vincent. You do not want to
cross me."
I laughed. I shut it off as soon as I did it, but not before he saw it
for what it was. "I'm sure I don't," I tried to say without sounding
sarcastic. I failed. "But you didn't answer my question. I understand that
you were, shall we say, indisposed during that time, but now that you're
no longer in Wraith's hip pocket, I'm sure you know the full story. Why
don't you enlighten me?" I couldn't believe I was being so brazenly cocky
with my father. As I antagonized him, the emptiness inside that I'd been
feeling since I signed on for this war faded away.
"All of that is none of your concern. It's history. You need to
think about the present and the future. There can be no future for us if
we do not defeat the Magmites!"
Suddenly, I was calm. Even after I took control of the
conversation, I was still tense. My fists, which were clinched so tight just
a second ago, relaxed and dangled at my sides. A smile sprouted on my
lips, exposing my feral teeth. Personally, I think they added a nice touch
of danger to an otherwise pleasant smile.
"Us?" I asked.
"Of course," he replied, walking towards me. "You are to achieve
order on Earth and hold dominion over its glory. I will be by your side,
your trusted and loyal advisor."
"Yet you want war? You desire chaos to achieve order. That's
not what I want."
"But it is!" The Beholder said excitedly. He stood before me and
placed his hand on my shoulder. "You need the trappings of war to bring
about peace. With peace comes order. First you have to eliminate the

178

undesirables. All of the weaker races, once disposed of, will leave only the
strongest and the fittest members of the planet for you to rule over. The
best of the best, as it were. Seeing as how you are the strongest and the
fittest, they will bow to your superiority. This is why I wanted you here
on Earth at this juncture in time. There is mass chaos everywhere.
Leaders come and go in every society around the world. Civilizations rise
and fall in the blink of an eye. The Aseraphim wars helped to bring down
many kingdoms around the globe. Thousands, possibly millions of
people died, leaving the population of the planet severely depleted. With
a low number of inhabitants on the planet, the leaderless societies and
mass chaos, it's the perfect scenario for you. You can bring order while
weeding out the weaker beings. You will be worshiped."
I didn't take long to utterly reject that notion. "Absolutely not," I
responded, looking him dead in the eye.
"It is prophesied, Vincent, and it will come to pass. I have
worked many centuries for this time and it shall come to be. You will
lead, with me by your side. I can lead your armies if you prefer. This way,
your dislike of war will not hinder your judgment."
"Stop it!" I cried. "You're already talking like I'm king of the
world."
"You will be," he said bluntly.
I shook his hand from my shoulder and said, "If I am, it won't be
this way." I spread my arms out, making him look at the death
surrounding us. "By killing all that are deemed weaker, I will proclaim to
be the most dominant being on the planet? That will inspire fear, not
order. If I do eventually rule over the Earth, I want to rule with true
order, not fear."
"Fear is a useful tool in maintaining order, my son. You should
not brush it aside so quickly," he advised.
"It is not what I want." I had been staring into my father's eyes
for so long that the rest of the world gradually disappeared. "Fear is not
order. Fear is hatred. I will define what order is and your definition, in
my opinion, is dead wrong."
The Beholder again placed his hand on my shoulder as he stepped
forward. "I'm very sorry to hear that, Vincent. I truly believe that this is
the path of the prophecy that you are meant to follow. All I've ever done
has been for you."
"I understand, father. But I will not establish dominance and
dominion by making the masses fear me. Where I see merit in the
strongest and fittest surviving on, I believe it should occur naturally.
Those that cannot survive will wither and die eventually."

179

"Eventually is not soon enough," he said.
"It will have to be." I stepped back and began walking away from
the battlefield. "This war is over," I declared. "I'm starting peace talks
tomorrow with the Magmites. I haven't figured out how I'm going to
contact them to reopen negotiations so I'll need your help with that." I
was yelling over my shoulder to my father but he didn't respond. I
stopped and looked back. He was gone. Without a word, The Beholder
had teleported out. I was now resigned to walk back alone and turned to
resume the trek. As I turned, I felt a sharp pain in my chest. I looked
down to see a long sword entering my side from slightly behind. The
weapon was driven through my ribcage and out the front of my chest.
Blood and tissue fell from the blade as I instinctively continued coming
around. There stood my father, blood on his hands.
"This is the way is has to be, Vincent," he declared as he withdrew
the sword. "If you shall not help me, I will wait for the next one." I
could feel the blood gushing from my chest. I looked down and saw my
blood was the color of polished gold. Tiny beams of light reflected off
my lifeblood causing a brilliant display. If I wasn't dying, I'm sure I
would've enjoyed it more.
As I felt the last gasp of life escape from my body, I heard The
Beholder say, "You will not be back." My last vision was of my father,
sword in hand, preparing to cut out my heart.
I awoke a short time later to the sound of birds chirping. I
opened my eyes and saw the bluest sky. The clouds, what few there were,
lazily moved across the sky. One of the larger clouds broke apart and the
pieces floated off in various directions. I’d never seen that happen before.
More and more clouds passed by from every possible direction as I lay
prone on the ground. I was lost in what I was seeing until I heard
footsteps approaching. I tried to stand but was too weak. The footsteps
grew nearer, sounding almost delicate on the harsh ground beneath me. I
tilted my head in the direction of the sound but found no one. I couldn't
even hear the footfalls anymore. I looked back to the sky but my view
was obstructed by the grinning face of the one of the most beautiful
women in the universe.
"Hello again, Vincent," Styx said as she stood over me, "and
welcome to Limbo."

180

Chapter 12
The clouds continued to swirl as I gazed upwards at Styx. Her
long, luxurious black hair slipped from her shoulders and stopped mere
inches from my face. I tried to speak but still had not found my voice. I
wasn’t sure if it was because I was currently dead or because her beauty
captivated me. I had only seen Styx in a dream once as a child. At the
time, I didn't fully comprehend many of the feelings she provoked.
Having matured, I understood them completely now.
"Please, rise and come with me," she said. "We don't have all day,
you know?"
Styx smiled and I watched the daylight fade rapidly and night
overtake the sky. She was more accurate that I could’ve imagined. I tried
to stand but was still too weak. "I'm hurt," I whispered.
"No, you're not. You only think you are. But then again, you
probably still think you have a body."
"What?" I asked, a little stronger now.
"You are in Limbo, Vincent. Your body's still on Earth." She
offered me her hand and I found I could easily raise my arm to take it. I
stood up with her help and had to admit that I did indeed feel fine.
"I'm dead," I stated.
"You most certainly are, but only momentarily."
I looked down at my body, hoping to see my limbs intact. What
my eyes saw was not a body at all. I still had the shape of a man, but my
body now consisted of lines of gold, black and silver. My features were
still apparent, making me still partially recognizable, but was now shaded
somewhat by new appearance. “What’s going on?” I urgently asked the
Ancient.
Styx chuckled at my astonishment. “I’m not surprised you don’t
remember. What you see is your aura. The gold represents goodness
inside you, the black is the evil, and the silver is your humanity. All three
are represented in you, in equal parts. This is what you look like when
you’re no longer alive on Earth.”
The floodgates of my mind opened at the mention of my death
and panic set in. "The Beholder!" I cried. "He's going to kill me
permanently! The last thing I remember was his telling me I wouldn't be
coming back."
Styx, still holding my hand, squeezed gently and said in the most
melodious voice, "It's all taken care of, child. Don't worry."
"How?" I begged.
"There will be time for that later, once we get where we're going."

181

She winked and said, "Speaking of going, shall we?" She held out her arm
and I readily escorted her on our way.
We walked in silence for a while as I took in the sights and sounds
of Limbo. There was mass chaos all around yet I didn't get a headache
from it. There were essences milling around all over the place. Their
silver auras shone all along the horizon. Styx informed me that a human
soul cannot die. Once someone was killed on Earth, their essence would
come to her for judgment and spend the rest of eternity in whatever realm
she deemed appropriate. In any of the realms of death, the humanity of
the mortal soul remained strong and could not be brought down. I
remarked to Styx that I could still see the person the souls used to be. She
explained to me that what I was seeing was the remnants of their mortal
life. I did not truly see a person. I saw the memory that essence held and
projected to others. Styx said it was necessary to be able to tell them
apart. Otherwise, since they all had silver auras it would be impossible to
distinguish one from another.
As we walked, I found when I concentrated on something chaotic,
such as the clouds tracing random paths in the sky, my influence would
make it more orderly. The flowers along the path would organize
themselves by type. To my amazement and overwhelming enjoyment, I
noticed the flowers were also divided by color and size. It was
astonishing. Styx noticed the expression of sheer bliss on my face and
began to explain.
"This is Limbo, where order and chaos prevail. Your influence is
strong, dear Vincent. All you have to do is think hard and things change
at your whim. It sure is a lot different than the last time we met when I
had to rearrange the flowers for you."
"I remember. I also remember you saying that we would meet
again."
"Was I wrong?" Styx said slyly.
"No, but you did say that you weren't sure if it would be good or
bad."
"Actually, what I said was that a decision you would make would
determine whether or not we met again under favorable or unfavorable
circumstances." Her smiled grew brighter as she added, "I remember
things quite well. Just so you know, these are the favorable circumstances
I mentioned."
"I got killed and that's the favorable option?" I asked. "What
would've been unfavorable?"
Styx grimaced at the thought and replied, "Do you really want to
know?" I answered with a simple nod. "Very well. If you had decided to

182

listen to your father's words and follow his version of order, you
eventually would've died a dishonorable death. Had that happened, I
would’ve had to relegate you to Haedes. To get back to Earth from
Haedes, you’d have to pass through Limbo and be judged again. If I
thought you weren’t ready to go back, I would not have let you pass until
I believed you had redeemed yourself."
"So my father was wrong about what order really is," I stated,
hoping to quickly change the topic.
"Imperialism," she snorted. It was the first word she'd spoken
that had one iota of anger behind it. "Survival of the fittest. Who is he to
judge whose fit and who isn't?"
"I agree. He's not the best person to judge someone's character.
But he does have a point. Why shouldn't the strongest survive?"
Styx released my arm and faced me as we walked. "How do you
define strong? Are we talking about just physically or are you including
mental, emotional, majickal and intellectual as well? You see Vincent,
everyone is strong in his or her own way. Is General Sakoahn the
strongest Granite?"
"No, Titus is."
"Correct. Is Titus in charge?"
"No."
"Right again. Titus, though physically stronger than Sakoahn, isn't
nearly as intelligent. He would be a dismal failure as a leader. Is Sakoahn
the smartest? That would depend on whom you ask. Personally, I'd vote
for Slade."
"The traitor?" I asked.
"Absolutely. He was smart enough to help you draw up the plan,
tell the necessary information to Opal and make sure she was able to
deliver it to Terran. He kept you in the dark for a while as well, so I
would think you would be in agreement with me."
I shrugged, speechless at having been so easily fooled. "If all you
say is true, then I'd have to admit he is indeed quite clever."
"Oh, it's true. Above all else, I will not lie to you." The caring,
compassionate look in her eyes reinforced that statement and erased all
doubt from my mind. "Knowing that, I'll tell you exactly why The
Beholder's vision of an ideal world is flawed. You see, he believes that
only the strongest should be allowed to survive. The flaw in his logic is
that he isn't the strongest. You are, in almost every sense of the word.
He thought he could control you, thereby giving him reign over Earth by
your deeds. Sooner or later, and I'm glad to see it was sooner, the
argument you got into with The Beholder was going to happen. Since it

183

happened sooner you were not yet under his sway. If it had happened
later, after you'd made strides in your quest to fulfill the prophecy, you
would've been acting not out of order, but out of self-interest. Granted,
technically it would be The Beholder's self-interest but yours would be
irrevocably tied to his. Self-interest in nothing but greed for one's own
purposes and that would condemn your spirit to Haedes."
"So I'm the strongest person on the planet?" I asked, amazed yet
confident in her words. "There's no one that can defeat me?"
"Oh, there are many beings on Earth and elsewhere that can easily
defeat you. It all depends on what you're fighting about and how. Now,
had you asked if there was anyone on Earth that you couldn't defeat, that
would've been more appropriate."
I took a second to reply, hoping in vain that she would answer the
question without my prodding. "Is there someone I can't defeat?"
"Only one on Earth that I can think of. That would be the
Ancient Each, he who rests on the wind and travels on the cool breeze."
She spoke of her fellow Ancient with reverence and admiration. "As long
as there is air, Each will exist."
"I've heard of him. He's a watcher like my father, right?" I asked.
"A watcher, yes. Like your father, most definitely not."
"How so?"
"Vincent, I don't have time to answer every question you have."
She pointed over the horizon to a large castle in the distance. "That's
where we're going and I'd like to get there sooner rather than later."
"We have plenty of time. That castle is a ways off yet."
Styx chuckled and replied, "My dear boy, you keep forgetting
where you are. Distance isn't the same in Limbo as it is on Earth. It's
much more flexible here."
"Flexible? What do you mean by that?"
"You'll see," was her cryptic reply.
"Do you know if I'll ever meet him?" I asked after a brief pause in
the conversation.
"Each? I have no doubt. When he's ready to impart his advice to
you, or more likely when you are ready to receive it, he will make his
presence known."
I looked toward the castle and saw it was now much closer than it
had been. We were making good time as far as I could tell. "That's
something that's been bothering me as well. When I was in Egypt, Lillith
and Loathe came to me, telling me what they wanted me to do to create
an orderly world. Shortly thereafter, Christi Lona and Cherub showed up
and did the same thing. The Beholder killed me because I didn't agree

184

with his version of order. Why is everyone trying to tell me their
particular variety of order?"
"Because you need the help," she replied.
"Why would you think that? I haven't been around long and
already I've made strides in certain areas. The town in Egypt is orderly,
although I don't know how long that will last with my sister hanging
around. I helped with the Zaron's egg project in Atlantia, using my skills
to design a way to raise the egg to the surface. I've done lots of things to
give order a foothold on Earth."
"Yes, you have. But order, by definition, is hard to define."
"Are you going to tell me how you define order too?"
"Of course I am," Styx said cheerfully.
Again I paused, waiting patiently for her to continue. When she
remained silent and continued walking, I simply assumed she wasn’t ready
to tell me her version of order just yet. I glanced up at the castle and
noticed it was now farther away than it had been when I'd last looked.
Now I could see what she meant by distance being flexible.
"Aren't you going to tell me what you think order is?" I finally
asked.
"Personally, I don't think you want to know."
"Is it that bad?"
Styx laughed heartily and said, "That's not what I meant. I don't
think you'll overtly reject my ideals. I just don't think you want anyone
else telling you how to do your job."
Her accurate description of my feelings caught me off guard.
"How did you know that?"
"It's what I do," she humbly replied. "I judge people by their
words and actions. Yours tell me that you want to define order on your
own. Maybe that's for the best, maybe it's not. Either way, the choice is
yours. I'd be more than happy to tell you what I think you should do but
if you don't want to hear it, I understand. You should know Vincent, I
think you're doing a wonderful job so far. Your methods for establishing
order are very similar to mine."
"So what are your ways?"
"Judging. You should judge all that come before you. Not as
good or bad, but if they are orderly or not. Let me worry about where
they belong in the afterlife. In life, it is your place to decide if they should
stay or go. So far, you've done a pretty good job at judging people. You
haven't killed many of them, and you have been misled into killing some
that should not have perished, but overall you're doing quiet well."
I smiled and replied, "I believe that's part of what I need to do but

185

not the only thing. There's more to it than that."
"I'm sure there is. But you must maintain the belief that you are
the one to judge mankind. Sometimes you will be forced to dispose of
people who want nothing but good to prevail. It will be distressing but
necessary. If you only have good people, the moment someone speaks up
against them they would need to be eliminated. That removes free will
and choice from the equation. Free will is antithetical to order most of
the time. However, given the opportunity, most people would take an
orderly life over a good one. If you give them the choice and let them be
orderly on their own, be they good or bad, you will be able to preserve
order more efficiently. If they choose disorder, then you can judge them
as either redeemable, and give them another chance, or not. In cases of
the latter, you send them to me."
I was afraid to look for the castle, fearing it would be beyond my
field of vision. I turned as saw it was only a few yards away and breathed
a sigh of relief. Styx's speech struck a chord with me as fairly realistic. I
had essentially judged Set and his followers. I judged Ra's followers as
well. Set and his men were chaotic and had to be eliminated. Ra's
disciples were orderly and now ruled unimpeded. It wasn't just that Set
was evil. It never mattered to me. He was simply someone trying to
upset the balance of order. I put things back they way I believed they
should be.
As we neared the gate of the grand castle, I turned to Styx with
one last question. The war between the Granites and the Magmites
started with the portal. I asked Styx if she knew anything about them.
She let the full radiance of her smile wash over me before she replied.
"Vincent, I created the portals. They are gateways to and from the
various realms."
"Can anyone travel through them?"
"If they know what they're doing they can, and if they can find
them. Their locations aren't exactly common knowledge. If everybody in
all the realms knew where the portals were and how to use them…” Styx
exhaled theatrically and shook her head as if the thought caused her pain.
"So I guess the answer to that question is no.
"There are seven portals each in Haven, Haedes and on Earth.
The ones on Earth are quite discreetly hidden. Centuries from now,
people will marvel at these artifacts, never knowing the power they hold."
She smiled at me again and added, "Amusing, isn't it?"
I matched her grin and nodded. "What about Limbo?"
"That's why I'm so glad the portals are hidden. There are twentyone total. All of the portals in all the other realms connect to Limbo."

186

"What do the portals look like here?" I asked as I scanned the area
around the castle.
Styx gently took my hand and said, "They aren't anywhere near
here, Vincent. Besides, you could see the portals and never even know it.
Now, are you ready to go through all this again?"
"What do you mean by that?"
"Welcome to the castle of Propheteus. He'd like a moment of
your time, if you don't mind." Styx waved her hand at the gate and I
watched the stone become apple blossoms. The wall of fragrant flowers
tumbled to the ground as the air was filled with their magnificent scent.
"Please, go in. He's waiting for you."
I missed the touch of her skin a second after I let go of her hand.
It was the first time I realized I could still feel even though I was dead.
Having no body, that puzzled me to no end. I turned back to ask Styx
about it but she was gone. I'd have to remember to ask Propheteus when
I found him. With that in mind, I began my search for the Ancient
prophet.
The great castle was a sight to behold. With enormous cathedral
ceilings made of polished gray marble, the hallways echoed with every
step. Even the stealthiest creature in all creation would hear their
movements reverberating throughout the castle. Hung on the walls were
paintings depicting various scenes, none of them seemingly related to any
others. The first painting I examined was of a grisly battle. There was a
demon, or what looked to be a demon, standing atop a pile of rotting
corpses. At the foot of this mound of death ran a river of blood. The
stream of blood emptied into a small pool near the edge of the painting.
There was a man dressed in blue with an axe in his back lying face down
in the pool of blood. The imagery was gruesome but the power of the
artwork could not be denied. The next painting had a party scene. I only
glanced over that one and moved on. There were depictions of a village
under siege, a man and his son camping in the woods, a team of
apparently identical lycans tearing a man apart with their teeth, a tree
surrounded by fog, a woman being attacked by a gang and many more. I
could've spent all day examining the artistry involved in creating such
magnificent work. Unfortunately, I had other plans.
As I wandered the corridors of the castle, I could only imagine
how many people had sought the Ancient prophet out and walked these
halls before me in search of their true calling. By all accounts, and all that
was told to me by Sam and The Beholder, Propheteus was very reclusive.
Knowing he specifically wanted to see me was an honor beyond

187

description. I knew being a child of the Aseraphim meant I was
drastically different from everyone else on Earth, with moderate
exceptions of course. I never fully grasped the weight of the
responsibility until now. Ancients were going out of their way to try and
define order for me.
There was an extra spring in my step as I reveled in my own
importance. I wasn't sure, but I was willing to bet my sister wasn't getting
any special visits. I was so lost in my thoughts that it took me by surprise
when I heard other footsteps in the halls. I stopped and the other
footfalls continued. I spun around to find the source of the sound.
There stood a man a few inches shorter than my sister, dressed in a white
robe. The sash over his robe was intricately woven and contained several
designs I didn’t recognize. As I stared silently at him, three others joined
him. All four stood stone still and mute. In unison, the four of them
pulled a parchment from their satchels and began writing furiously. They
resumed their trek down the hall, never ceasing their scribbling for a
second. One of them did pause long enough to waggle his head at me as
they passed. I took that to mean I was to follow them. When that same
man looked back over his shoulder and beckoned to me with a wave of
his hand, my suspicions were confirmed.
I easily caught up to the four diminutive men and tried to engage
them in some light conversation. Every time I said something to them, all
they did was listen intently and then proceed to write down every word
verbatim. I quickly gave up. I wasn’t sure I wanted everything I said
recorded for posterity. The five of us wove down the winding corridors
until we reached an elaborately adorned wooden door. My companions
had remained silent the entire trip and showed no signs of changing now.
Instead of speaking, all four of them pointed at the door.
The door swung open easily and I entered a grand chamber.
Bookshelves lined the walls from floor to ceiling twenty feet overhead.
Shelves of books were set up in parallel rows, filling the entire room.
Dust covered most of the tomes and I had to wonder how many of these
had actually been read. There was no mistaking where I was. This was
Propheteus's library. I slowly walked inside and headed down one of the
aisles, examining the books as I passed by. There were no titles along the
spines to identify the books so I didn't really know what I was looking at.
I was lost in thought as I rounded another corner. I looked up from the
books to see a large open area. The floor was made of polished marble,
creating an interwoven sea of black and white. There were no tables and
no chairs, other than the large throne at the far end. It sat alone on a
raised platform away from the ocean of books. I walked over to examine

188

the throne closer and was in awe of its beauty. The throne was immense,
cast in gold with dark red cloth covering the cushions. Atop the throne
was a large, golden eye. Its iris was a ruby a shade of red so dark it was
almost violet. The light reflected off the jewel and glittered wildly. I was
staring intently when a voice spoke up from behind me.
"Do not look into the eye for too long, Vincent," the voice said.
"You will not like the results."
I turned to see the Ancient Propheteus before me. Appearing to
be much older than Styx, Propheteus looked as ancient as his title
professed. We were of equal height, but that was where our likeness
ended. His long, white hair hung down over his shoulders, his eyes a
bright amber. In his right hand he held a golden staff, with the same eye
resting on top. Without realizing I was doing it, I bowed slightly at his
presence.
"There is no need for that, Vincent," he pointed out graciously. I
stood up straight and faced him. His face bore no emotion, no
expression whatsoever. "Come with me. We have much to do."
"And time is short, I know," I added, remembering what Styx had
said.
"Time is not an issue for us."
"But Styx said we didn't have much time to talk," I commented.
"That is because she is extremely busy. Styx's work is never
ending."
"How long have I been dead?" I asked as we walked away from
the throne.
"That would depend on how you're viewing time and from where.
If you mean to ask how long you've been in Limbo, I would say about an
hour. If you're asking how long you've been dead on Earth, it is but mere
seconds. Time is flexible in Limbo, Vincent."
"Styx said the same thing about distance."
"And she is correct as well. Things run differently in the realms of
Limbo, Haven and Haedes. A day spent in any of these realms could be a
year on Earth, just as a day on Earth could be a year here. It is different
for every person that arrives. Mortals are given the gift of life as the
leaders of those realms see fit. With you and your siblings, it is not the
same. In Limbo, you are only here as long as you are needed. In Haedes,
it is until you are healthy enough to return to your body. In Haven, they
can keep you as long as they like if they see a need for you to stay.
Because of your heritage, you and your siblings are well regarded in all
realms. For now, at least."
"For now?"

189

"There will be one that is charged with ruling Haedes. This one
will not be allowed the freedom of Haven and all it offers. He has not
been brought to bear upon the Earth as of yet."
"Hate," I stated.
"That is correct. His essence is too dark for the denizens of
Haven."
I couldn't help but feel badly for my yet to be born brother. Part
of his fate had already been decided for him. Changing the topic, I asked,
"Who were those little guys that led me here?"
"Those are my clerics," he replied. "They were tasked by Wraith
ages ago to transcribe all events on Earth."
"Then why did you say they're your clerics?"
"Because they are. I am the one that gave the task to Wraith. I'm
sure you've seen clerics on Earth, correct?" I nodded in the affirmative.
"It is the same here. When a cleric dies, his soul is sent to one of the
three realms of the afterlife. If they go to Haedes, they become Dark
Clerics and transcribe events in Haedes as well as on Earth. The same
goes for Haven. They become Light Clerics there and write down all the
workings of Haven and Earth. Those that come to Limbo are either
reborn to continue their works on Earth or they stay here and work
directly for me. The ones I command are the most highly regarded clerics
of all."
"They don't say much," I observed.
For the first time since we'd met, Propheteus laughed. It sounded
quite unnatural. "They speak when they are needed to. When they do,
pay attention, especially on Earth."
We wandered around in silence for a moment. I glanced around
to get my bearings and found we were deep into the rows of books in his
library. Walking silently behind us was a cleric. His hand was moving at
blazing speed as he wrote down our conversation. "Shoo! Go away!" I
ordered of the cleric. "This is a private matter."
"That will accomplish nothing, Vincent," Propheteus said.
"Nothing I say stays private forever."
"Are they always so short?" I joked.
Propheteus stopped abruptly and turned around. A smile graced
his lips as he said, "Usually, no. Clerics come in all shapes and sizes, just
like your average mortal. For some reason, however, the ones that I
employ all seem to be short of stature. Personally, I think Styx has
something to do with it." He waved for me to continue on without any
further explanation.
"You didn't ask me here to tell me about the clerics, did you?" I

190

asked as we resumed walking.
"Of course not. But you already knew that."
"You want to tell me about your definition of order."
"Correct again. However, now is not the time. If you don't mind
waiting for just a little while longer, we're almost to our destination."
Our destination turned out to be what could only be called a
reading room. Ten large, cushioned chairs were scattered about the room.
Every seat was elegantly designed. Some were made of dark wood with
etchings of various animals. Others were made of stone and pictured the
vast cosmos engraved within. Propheteus beckoned for me to sit down
and I chose a light colored, wooden chair. The cushions of the chair were
gold in color and the chair itself depicted crossed swords. I sat down and
instantly relaxed. Its elegance was only surpassed by its comfort.
Propheteus sat in one of the dark wooden chairs. This one was
engraved with an eye. It dawned on me that there was a chair here for
every Ancient. Noticing my revelation, Propheteus said, "You're
wondering whose seat you've chosen?"
"As a matter of fact, I am."
"That is the seat of Gilmore, the Traveler, the consumer of souls.
You'll be meeting him eventually."
"Am I going to hear from all of the Ancients? And why is
everyone so interested in telling me what they think order is anyway?"
"One question at a time, if you don't mind," he chided. "To
answer the first, no, will not hear from all the Ancients. Zaron sleeps and
the Will and Power Cosmic do not deem you worthy enough."
"What?" I barked. "What do you mean 'not worthy'?"
"Vincent, please settle down. You misunderstand me. The Will
and Power Cosmic created the home we call the universe. Our actions
are insignificant to them. This is but one world in an infinite universe.
They observe all that happens, but they see no need to take a vested
interest in the majority of our dealing on Earth and elsewhere. It's
nothing personal." He could see I wasn't satisfied with his explanation, so
he added, "If it's any consolation, they are very concerned with your
survival and the survival of your siblings."
I was feeling calmer, remembering what I'd read about the Will
and Power Cosmic, along with Wraith, watching over us in the ethereal. I
decided to get to the heart of the matter so I could hopefully get back to
my body. "So what's your position on order?" I asked.
"Vincent, I have no words for you. Order is already established,
as far as I'm concerned."
This was not what I'd expected. "How so?"

191

Propheteus picked up a book from beside his chair and opened it.
"The tomes you've seen here in my library contain not only my
prophecies but the writings of the clerics as well. All of them are capable
of being read from a single tome. If it is in here," he said as he waved his
arm towards the rows of book. He then patted the book on his lap and
concluded, "It is in here. All that has been and all that is to come. I can
open this book and tell you exactly where you will be five years from now
or five thousand."
"I've often wondered," I said, cutting him off, "how is it that you
can know all that is to be? That would mean we don't have freewill and
that everything is already decided for us."
"You do have freewill, Vincent. What I could read to you today
about your life in five years time could be different tomorrow. But there
is a difference between telling someone their future and prophesy. Your
future changes because you have freedom of choice. Prophecies are not
choices. By the time a prophecy comes to pass, the necessary choices
have already been made."
"So the future isn't written in stone?"
"Not all of it," he replied.
"So you don't have anything to tell me about order?" I asked
again.
"Only this. You have met with the Aseraphim and the Fallen.
They told you their conflicting views and you brushed their words aside.
The Beholder, brazen as he is, spoke his words to you and you rejected
his opinion out of hand. This led to your demise. I'm sure Styx told you
her ideas, as will Genepool, Gilmore, The Hunger and Each eventually.
Do not listen to them with a closed mind, as you have with the others.
The Ancients aren't making the effort to guide you in your quest to fulfill
my prophecy. They are doing this to try and help you become who you
need to be."
His rebuke stung like no knife could. I didn't believe I
offhandedly ignored what I'd been told by the Aseraphim and the Fallen.
The Beholder's opinion I did summarily reject. That much I freely
admitted. I felt it was justified. "So what am I to become?" I asked.
"I cannot tell you that. It is written in prophecy."
"If the prophecy is about me, I should know about it," I surmised.
"Perhaps. But I think it would be best to let the natural course of
events play out. Knowing too much about your own future can be
detrimental as well as beneficial."
"So, you don't have anything to tell me about what you consider
order. You won't tell me the prophecy about my future. Is there anything

192

you will tell me?" I asked testily.
"There is." Propheteus looked down at the open book and began
to read aloud, "For as it is foretold, the Ancients shall have dominion over
Atlantia but not over the will of its people. To raise the civilization that is
Atlantia to greater heights, the citizens of Atlantia will commence a search
for the ultimate source of energy and power. Atlantians will search for
Power and succeed, and this success shall be its undoing. It shall be
decided that the egg of the Ancient Zaron contains the energy and power
sought by these peoples. A delegation shall be created to bring the egg to
the surface in an attempt to harness its power, and shall fail. For once the
Power is brought to the surface, the waters that surround Atlantia shall
swallow it. Atlantia shall survive, forever changed by its quest for ultimate
Power. Its citizenry shall live on, adapted to their new environment, but
shall never see the light of day from this point forward."
I knew most of what he'd read, having seen The Beholder's scroll
with this prophecy. The scroll I'd read excluded some vital information
and that surprised me. "I'd seen that prophesy before, but not that
version."
"You saw what I wanted you to see. The Beholder was given
those scrolls to help educate you. Instead, he kept them to himself,
hoping to keep you in the dark on many important matters. Any writing
that leaves this realm, any prophesy spoken, is approved by me and me
alone. I do not always disclose the full prophecy, for sometimes it is
better if certain details are omitted. Would you have helped on the
Zaron's egg project if you'd known the full prophesy?"
"Probably not," I replied.
"Of course. You don’t want to see anything bad happen to
Atlantia. Nor do I. But it will happen and your help was needed to make
it succeed."
"You mean I'm responsible for the destruction of Atlantia?" I was
appalled at the very idea.
"Not at all. But your contrary position as it pertains to how far
the egg should be raised was needed to counterbalance the other
scientists."
"But they didn't listen to me," I remarked.
"No, they did not. That is their shortcoming, not yours. Work
has been slower than the leaders of Atlantia would like, mostly because
some of the workers believe what you have to say. They are skeptical
about uncovering the egg. Had you not influenced them, the egg might
already be on the surface and Atlantia would have succumbed to its fate."
"What if I stop them?"

193

Propheteus flashed his grandfatherly smile and said, "You can try,
but you will fail. This is going to happen, Vincent. I apologize if it upsets
you, but you must understand one very important thing. This has to
happen."
I wasn't going to question why it had to happen for fear he
wouldn't answer. I got the feeling Propheteus told you what he wanted to
and no more. I watched him close the book and place it back on the
floor. "Are we leaving?"
"Soon. I sense you have a few more questions for me."
"Actually, I have two. First, why can I feel things here? Aren't I
dead?"
Propheteus laughed and replied, "No, Vincent. Your body is
dead. You are not." The puzzled look on my face caused him to explain
in more detail. "You are not that shell you walk around in on Earth. You
are the essence you see here. You can feel, touch, taste, hear and smell
because you are in your true form. A soul in the afterlife can affect
another soul. When you touched Styx's arm or sat in that chair, you
thought about how it would feel. Therefore, that was what you felt. In
Limbo, as it was for you in the ethereal, it is all about thoughts. If you
can think it, it can be." He paused to let me digest his wisdom before
asking, "Now, what is your last question?"
"When can I go back?"
"That is what I was expecting you to ask. You will go back
shortly. First, would you like to know what has happened while you've
been away?"
"Sure. I have to assume that The Beholder wasn't able to put me
down for good."
"No, he most definitely was not." Propheteus called over the
cleric, who had been waiting silently in the corner, and asked him to tell
me what I wanted to know. "Know this, Vincent," he said, turning his
attention back to me, "Once the cleric has finished, you will be reborn to
your body. I understand you aren't quite sure what to make of our talk
but I hope you take my words to heart. Listen to what they Ancients have
to say. You will find it important." He rose from the chair and walked
over to me. The cleric was standing in front of me, preparing to begin his
story. Propheteus put his hand on my shoulder and wished me well
before telling the cleric to begin.
The diminutive cleric opened his mouth and began. I couldn't
hear any words coming from the cleric's mouth. What happened was
much more fascinating. His mouth remained open but his form was
fading away and Limbo followed suit. Before me I could see my fallen

194

body lying on the ground. It was like I was looking at a picture through
someone else's eyes. My golden blood was pooled around me. I could
see The Beholder with sword in hand. He had his arms raised and was
poised to plunge his weapon into my chest as he stood over my prone
form. Nothing moved as the scene was painted for me. Once everything
was in place, the picture came to life.
The Beholder was standing over my dead body, about to deliver
the blow that would mark the beginning of the end. Before he could
strike, the shadow around my body began to grow and envelope his legs.
Soon a bright light, originating from behind The Beholder, started to
overtake the upper half of his body. When The Beholder noticed this, he
dropped his sword and tried to step away but wasn't able. The shadow
continued to grow until it reached his waistline. The light grew as well
until the entire top half of his body was bathed in it. Only The Beholder's
head was now visible among the light and shadow. Sparks flew from his
body where the light and the shadow came together. The Beholder
struggled to break free from his bonds but failed. He blinked out, trying
to teleport away, but instantly reappeared in the same place. He was
completely trapped.
Lillith emerged from out of the shadows surrounding The
Beholder's lower half. Her dark beauty was twisted by the rage directed at
her captive. The light behind him brought forth Christi Lona, sadness
apparent on her lovely face. The sisters kept their hold on The Beholder
as they stood to either side of him.
"Ancient one," Christi Lona began, "You have committed a grave
error in judgment."
"We should kill you where you stand," Lillith remarked, her voice
colder than frozen steel.
"But we shall spare you."
"This time."
The Beholder tried to respond but could not. The grip Christi
Lona had on his upper half closed off his throat, seizing every one of his
words and trapping them inside. The only sounds to escape his lips were
grunts of pain and agony. The sisters began to circle their captive as they
continued speaking.
"You were warned not to harm any of the children of the
Aseraphim," Christi Lona continued. "Wraith himself came to you to
deliver this warning. You have chosen to ignore his words."
"Now you have to pay," Lillith wickedly taunted.
"Ancient, your deeds on Earth have once again proven to us, as

195

well as the other Ancients, that you cannot be trusted. You were given
another chance. You used it for your own selfish wants and desires. For
this you must be punished," Christi Lona informed him.
"As well as your selfishness, you have deemed yourself superior to
all creatures," Lillith said. "You, who are no more than a mask and a
shell, deem yourself the future ruler of Earth, knowing full well that one
of the four siblings is heir to that throne."
"By the power of the Ancients, we have been given the means to
destroy you. Your crime is not just poor judgment but of actions
detrimental to the survival of the many species of this planet. We have
been sent here by your fellow Ancients to fulfill their request." Christi
Lona looked even more depressed now.
"My sister," Lillith spat out, "has decided that, even though we can
vanquish you, we won't. You should thank her." Lillith leaned close to
The Beholder and whispered, "Personally, I wanted to torture you for a
few millennia. You know, just until I got bored with you. Then I'd kill
you. Lucky for you, I can't do it alone." She leaned back up and resumed
circling her hostage.
"You will not be allowed to succeed, Ancient," Christi Lona
informed him. "We are here to see to that as well as mete out your
punishment." Lillith and Christi Lona were now standing in front of The
Beholder, facing him as he struggled in vain to escape. Christi Lona
glanced at her sister and asked, "Are you ready?"
"Very much so," the queen of darkness replied.
The shadow covering The Beholder’s lower half began to climb
upwards. The light was pushed up to his head and encircled his mask. As
the shadow inched closer to his shoulders, the light grew brighter around
his head. The Beholder was thrashing, furiously trying to break their
grasp. Lillith was smiling wildly at his feeble attempt at escaping and
began to laugh. Christi Lona looked on disapprovingly as she raised her
hand to her prisoner. She began reciting an enchantment and The
Beholder’s mask started to vibrate. Slowly, the mask detached itself from
the lycan’s body underneath. A pulsating light emanated from Christi
Lona’s extended arm, drawing the mask to her. Lillith had to move to the
side to avoid being caught in the beam and circled around behind her
prey. The Beholder was writhing violently now. The lycan’s body was
changing too. It was bulging in places it shouldn’t have been able. Its
chest cavity collapsed and quickly returned to normal. I couldn’t figure
out why the lycan was in so much pain until the flames started.
The shadow now covered The Beholder’s body up to his neck.
The light around his neck and head was so bright I almost wanted to turn

196

away. In the midst of the lycan’s trauma, the Beholder’s mask was inching
farther away from the body. Christi Lona was concentrating on the mask,
never removing her steely gaze. Suddenly, bright orange flames shot from
the eyes of the lycan to the retreating mask. This pillar of flame was
blocked from reaching its target by the shield of light surrounding the
mask. The fire grew in intensity as it ricocheted off Christi Lona's
protective barrier and shot upwards to the sky. The mask continued its
voyage to Christi Lona unabated. The flames turned to green and burned
brighter. The lycan began to scream, only it wasn’t the lycan. It was The
Beholder. As the flames bursting from his body changed to violet, his
screams echoed throughout the canyon. His cries caused boulders to
tumble down the mountainside. Several large rocks, following in the wake
of the boulders, crashed to the ground all around them. The three of
them, four if you included my corpse, went untouched by the shower of
stones. The mountains shook as The Beholder roared in pain once again.
The flames were bright blue now and the mask was halfway to Christi
Lona’ hand.
“How does it feel, Ancient?” Lillith teased. “We could keep that
corrupted essence of yours trapped in that lycan forever if we wanted to,
you know. I don’t think that sack of flesh could hold it, do you? You’d
be a free floating essence, like Pak, always searching for someone strong
enough to hold your sick, pompous, conceited self. Wouldn’t that be
wonderful? You without a talisman or a body, therefore without power?
It’s what you deserve. Actually, you deserve death, but we’ll work with
what we’ve got. So how does it feel being ripped away from your
precious mask? Hurts, doesn’t it? I damn well hope so. Could you even
survive without it? I doubt it.”
“Lillith, please stop,” Christi Lona pleaded.
The Beholder emitted another agonizing scream. The flames flew
higher and higher into the sky, rapidly shifting through every color of the
spectrum. The mask was just inches from Christi Lona’s hand and it was
quaking ferociously. Finally, Lillith’s shadow went as dark as the void in
one last depraved squeeze and disappeared. At the same time, Christi
Lona’s light quickly faded. The flames from the lycan shot into the mask
and it fell to the ground at Christi Lona’s feet. The lycan, now free of The
Beholder, dropped to the ground in a heap of smoldering flesh.
The lady of the Light bent down and carefully picked up the mask.
She looked upon it with sorrow, moderately ashamed at their actions. “It
is done,” she stated. She held out the mask to her sister.
“You want me to have it?” she asked skeptically.
“I trust you to do what you think is wise,” Christi replied. “I

197

would not, however, recommend giving it to Wraith again. He spends too
much time on Earth anymore and we don’t want him losing it again.”
“I’ll give it to Loathe. He’ll make damn sure no one gets to it.”
Lillith examined her sister’s face. She saw a tear running down Christi
Lona’s cheek and laughed. “You actually feel bad about what we did,
don’t you?”
“Of course I do.”
“Christi, he deserved it. That’s what you never understood.
Sometimes, they deserve it.”
“Did he?” Christi asked, pointing to my dead body.
“He made his own choices,” she said casually. “Besides, he’ll be
fine.”
“Yes, as soon as you leave. He can’t heal with you here.”
“Always blaming me,” Lillith sarcastically sighed.
“To be honest, and I know you won’t believe me, it was good to
see you again. I mean without one of us trying to kill the other, that is.”
Christi Lona was actually smiling at her sister. “It felt good to work
together for once.”
Her admission made Lillith cringe. “Save the soft and fluffy talk
for your followers, okay?” Even with that said, I thought I detected a
tiny, warm smile on Lillith’s dark visage before she faded into the
shadows.
The lycan was not just dead; it was obliterated. The trauma from
the episode had decimated his body. His chest had exploded, blood
poured from his eyes and ears, and his face was burned away. Lesions
covered his body from where it had distorted during the torture. Christi
Lona looked upon this corpse sadly and mournfully walked past. She
came over to my prone body and knelt down beside me.
Picking my head up in her hands, she said softly, “Dear Vincent, I
cannot stay long. I am not allowed to be here without a presence from
Haedes to maintain a balance. Lillith has not yet departed for Haedes but
she soon shall. Know that only your physical wounds will heal from my
light. Other wounds you must heal yourself. Be well.” The light
surrounding her pulsed down her arms and encircled my body. With one
final burst of light, she was gone.
I was getting sleepy as the story went on, which surprised me. I
could barely keep my eyes open. I watched the picture before me for as
long as I could. The last event visible to me before I fell asleep was a
Granite, followed by several others. They were coming around the
mountain and did not look happy.

198

Chapter 13
The first thing I noticed upon regaining consciousness was the
smell of burning flesh. I craned my head towards the lycan lying on the
ground near me. It looked exactly like I'd seen during the cleric's
recitation in Limbo. The lycan's head was still smoldering and small puffs
of smoke drifted skyward, sending its foul odor into the air. I could hear
the approaching steps of the Granites but hadn't yet mustered the
strength to open my eyes. My chest still burned in agony from where The
Beholder stabbed me. To my mind he was no longer my father, just The
Beholder. My only regret was I wasn't the one to deliver his well-deserved
punishment.
I slowly opened my eyes and saw that the Granites had arrived.
The one in the lead was carrying a large maul. His weapon looked like it
had been carved from one solid piece of stone. Delivering a blow to
someone with that maul, especially someone who was in too much pain to
properly defend themselves, would crush a person's bones to dust. I tried
to open my mouth to talk my way out of my current predicament, but
nothing escaped my lips but incoherent groans.
"Stay down. We aren't going to hurt you," the leader said. His
slate gray eyes were sunk into a craggy face of orange stone. He was as
tall as Sakoahn and looked about as dangerous. His voice showed no
compassion for my well-being. Oddly, I noted a faint bewilderment
instead.
"Staying down isn't a problem," I weakly replied.
"I'm told I should take you with me to our encampment, though
I'm not sure why."
"Who told you this?" I asked, getting some of my strength back.
"I'll explain that later. Now we must be going. I want to leave in
case Sakoahn orders another assault."
"You won't need to worry about that."
"What makes you think that?" he asked skeptically.
I got slowly to my feet and stood before the Granite. My balance
hadn't fully returned and I could feel myself swaying as I spoke. "Because
I'm the one that makes their war plans."
The four Granites standing behind their leader all took a step
forward. The leader raised his hand without looking at them and they all
came to an immediate halt. "And I'm supposed to take you with us," he
said, mainly to himself.
"Am I a prisoner?" I asked.
"Only if you want to be." He turned around to his subordinates

199

and ordered them to depart. Turning his attention back to me, he said,
"Come with me. I'll explain what I know on the way. Maybe you can fill
in the blanks in the story for me. Then we can both know what's going
on." The Granite smiled uneasily.
"Can I ask one question before we go?" I asked.
"Be quick about it," he urged.
"If we are going to be discussing why you didn't smash me into
powder with that maul of yours, I'd at least like to know your name."
His smile grew more confident as he replied, "My name is Terran,
true leader of the Granites and heir to the throne of Granatia."
"I'm Vincent. It's a pleasure to not get killed by you," I said
jokingly, trying to lighten the mood.
"I know who you are, sort of. As for the last part, the day is still
young." Terran left and started off in the direction his underlings had
gone. I followed along and our conversation commenced without delay.
Terran did not explain his rational for not striking me down right
away. His story's beginning was actually much more informative.
Terran's father, Granus, was the leader of the Granites before Sakoahn.
Granus was one of the very first Granites in existence and had the
privilege of sharing council with Zaron. A few years ago, The Beholder
came to Granus with a proposal. If he would help him defeat the
Magmites and take control of the portal, The Beholder would offer his
personal protection to his race. Granus questioned why his people would
need protection and The Beholder explained that there would be a great
transformation of society on Earth, where only the strongest of races
would survive. The Beholder had selected the Granites as the most
deserving on the isle of Atlantia and wanted to put them in charge when
his forces came to power. Terran's father refused, saying that the
Magmites were entitled to control the output of the portal on their own.
The Granites had no qualm with the Magmites letting the denizens of
Haedes have free reign during the Aseraphim Wars, contrary to what The
Beholder had said. In fact, Granus agreed with the Magmites that it was
the right thing to do. There was rumored to be a portal that connected
only to Haven somewhere on the planet. Supposedly, the portal on
Atlantia worked the same way for Haedes. Granus agreed with the
Magmites that since Haven had unfettered access at some point on the
globe the forces of Haedes shouldn't be denied the same right. In the
name of balance and order, the leadership of the Granites and the
Magmites agreed to keep it open.
There were some Granites that did not share these feeling. A
group of Granites believed if the portal was going to be open, both races

200

should have control over it. Sakoahn was the leader of the rebels. He
preached in the town square about how the Magmites were making
decisions for Granites under Granus's leadership. People began to take
him more seriously after a while. His supporters soon became his army
and a coup ensued. Sakoahn himself killed Granus after stealing the
Earthen Blade from him. The Earthen Blade contained the orange Stone
of the Ancients. Created by Zaron herself, it denotes rulership over all
earthen races, Granites and Magmites included. Though members of the
earthen races can live for centuries, Terran explained, one of the more
spectacular gifts the stone granted was immortality. Terran watched
Sakoahn kill his father with his own blade. After that, he vowed to
destroy Sakoahn and claim his rightful place on the throne or die trying.
Fearing Sakoahn would target him next, Terran fled Granatia and
went into exile to regroup. He was able to secure the allegiance of the
Magmites, who still viewed him as the true leader of the Granites and heir
to the Earthen Blade. A few small battles took place before The Beholder
appeared and tried to hammer out a peace agreement. His terms,
however, left much to be desired. The Beholder asked Terran to give up
the throne and give Sakoahn command of the portal and Terran would be
named leader of Sakoahn's army. The lives of the Magmites would be
spared according to the arrangement. Terran didn't trust The Beholder to
keep his word about the Magmites and swore to never give up his rightful
place on the throne. Negotiations failed time and time again. The
Beholder wasn't impartial at all, constantly asking for concessions from
Terran and offering none from Sakoahn. When the talks finally broke
down, The Beholder joined up with Sakoahn. The general had promised
to give The Beholder control of the portal once the Magmites were
eliminated, thereby giving Sakoahn rule over Atlantia.
"This is where it gets weird," Terran commented.
"How so?" I asked.
"For the most part, Magmites are more pacifistic than Granites.
Getting them to attack instead of just defend themselves from attack was
a major undertaking. We were able to recruit a few willing soldiers to join
us but we needed greater numbers. I was struggling with the Magmites to
go on the offensive again when I received a visitor."
"Let me guess. Lillith."
"Indeed it was. She offered me the limited services of some lesser
minions of Haedes in exchange for a favor."
"Terran, making a deal with Lillith isn't the wisest move in the
world. Letting her dictate the terms is worse."
"Would you say the same thing if the favor she asked of me saved

201

your life?"
I flashed a nervous smile and replied, "My opinion stands. Let me
say, however, that I'm glad you made the deal."
"All she asked me to do was not harm you when I found you.
Lillith also told me to take you back to our encampment. She didn't
explain why. She just said it would be beneficial for all involved. I
wonder if that meant her as well."
"Probably. Would Lillith make a deal that didn't benefit her in
some way?"
"I doubt it. Anyway, as we were making our way to the battlefield
today, Lillith again appeared before me. She told me I would find you
around the base of the mountain and reminded me not to harm you. She
said that you were not the one she was looking for and thanked me for
my cooperation. She even told me she would keep me in mind if she had
any other favors she needed done on Earth. The smile on her face told
me I'd probably want to turn her down in the future."
"If she lets you," I cautioned.
"Of course. Next thing I know, she falls into a shadow and is
gone. We continue on and find you unconscious."
"I wouldn't say unconscious. Half dead would be a more accurate
description."
"Either way, I intended then as now to honor my agreement with
Lillith. Whether or not you're the person she's searching for, I don't think
it would be wise to go back on my word to her."
"Smart assumption."
Terran looked at me with a smile on his jagged face and asked,
"So who are you anyway? Lillith seems to think you're someone
important. I have to say, I'm a little beyond confused about it all."
"I thought you said you had an idea who I am?"
"I have an idea of your importance, not your identity. If Lillith is
keeping an eye on you, you must be someone of value to her."
"I'd like to think I am," I said confidently.
"So who are you?" Terran asked again.
"My name is Vincent, child of the Aseraphim."
Terran stopped dead in his tracks. "You?" he blurted out.
"You're a child of the Aseraphim? I've heard rumor that you were on
Atlantia. Actually, I heard there were two of you."
"The other one is in Egypt now," I informed him.
Terran resumed his pace, shaking his head in disbelief. "No
wonder Lillith wanted you alive."
"Do you have any idea why she said I wasn't the one she was

202

looking for?"
"No idea. I didn't press her for details."
"That was almost certainly a good move. I think I know why she
wanted me to come back with you."
"And why is that?" Terran asked.
"To help you win." I locked my gaze with Terran's and added,
"And we will."
Terran just smiled and said, "We're almost there. We'll talk more
about it later."
"Terran, I don't want to waste time. If we launch a counterattack
as soon as possible, Sakoahn and his men will be caught off guard. They
always celebrate after a victory. You can catch them completely
unaware."
I could hear the rocks that made up his body grind against each
other as Terran's smile grew wider. "I'll round up my advisors and we'll
see what we can do."
Our conversation turned to my background as we entered the
encampment. I filled him in on the pertinent information, skimming over
things I deemed trivial. Terran led me to a small stone house in the center
of the camp. This was his headquarters, he explained. He was going to
gather his lieutenants and meet me back here to discuss our next step. I
sat down and looked at the maps and plans in the main room. There were
old plans scattered among the newer ones. I was drawn to the old plans,
wanting to see how well I had guessed at their maneuvers. Nearly every
time, I had presumed correctly.
An hour had passed before Terran returned with his command
staff. By that time I had looked over every plan in the house and was
ready for our meeting. After everyone had arrived, I laid out my plan.
Terran and his associates listened intently to what I had to say but the
skepticism never left their eyes. When I finished, the questions began.
"Do you really think a frontal assault will work?" a large Granite
called Boulder asked. He was my height and made of a solid slab of gray
rock.
"I think with Terran and me leading the assault that yes, it will
work," I replied.
"We'll lose an awful lot of people," another Granite commented.
This smaller Granite was named Pherris and was in charge of intelligence
gathering. A nervous little creature of rust-colored stone, Pherris shook
so much that little pebbles fell from his brow constantly.
"Not as many as you might think. Terran and I will be taking the
lead. We'll finish off most of them before the second wave advances."

203

"You seem pretty confident," Boulder said.
"I am." Turning to Terran, I asked, "They do know who I am,
right?"

"I told them but I'm not sure they fully believe me."
I glanced over at the other three Granites in the room. They were
all staring at me with doubt clear as crystal in their gaze. "You don't
believe Terran about who I am?" I asked them.
"Frankly, I don't," replied Jag, the third Granite. Terran explained
while introducing them to me that Jag was their fiercest fighter and proud
of it. Sharp points of crystal white stone jutted out in every direction on
his ash-colored body. I could see why he was so successful as a warrior.
Terran also informed me that he was the least trusting Granite in history.
"If Lillith was so interested in you, how are we supposed to believe
anything other than that you're a denizen of Haedes?"
"Lillith is family, Jag. She was looking out for me for that reason."
"Are you sure?"
"Actually, no. No one can ever be sure what Lillith's true
motivations are."
"So you could just be saying you're a child of the Aseraphim when
you're really just another lying piece of garbage from Haedes?"
I smiled warmly at my accuser and replied, "Jag, if I were what you
say I am, Lillith would've taken matters into her own hands and stopped
everything that happened to me by herself. I believe the reason she didn't
is because she wanted me to die."
"Why would she want that?" Terran asked.
"I'm not sure. Something you said earlier has been bothering me.
Lillith told you I wasn't the one she was looking for, correct?"
"Correct."
"I didn't understand that before, but I've had time to reflect on it.
I think she's looking for the one who will fulfill a certain prophecy and
thought it might be me. Apparently, I'm not the right one according to
her. Whether or not she's right remains to be seen."
"You know the prophecies?" Pherris asked.
"Only a few. Propheteus was kind enough to fill in some blank
spots in the readings I'd done."
"You know Propheteus?" Pherris blurted out excitedly.
"We've met. Look, we're getting off the topic here. Can we get
back to the planning?"
“No, not until you answer some questions,” Jag replied defiantly.
“I’m still not convinced you are who you say you are.”
“Look, Jag. You’re just going to have to believe me. We don’t

204

have time…”
“Make time,” he interrupted.
I could feel the rage building inside. I lowered my head and tried
to compose myself. The more I dwelt on Jag’s insolence, the more my
anger grew. I snapped my head back up and glared at Jag. The look in
my eye caused him to fall out of his seat and crash to the floor. Small
crystals flew from his body on impact. The fingers of my hands were
splayed open and I had extended the retractable blades. Flashes of light
reflected off my metal claws, darting around the room in a wild display. I
was staring at Jag as he sat on the floor shocked into paralysis.
“Jag, we don’t have time for this right now,” I growled. I snarled
at him, exposing my feral fangs. “If you want this to be over, if you want
to win, you will sit there and listen to what I have to say. Are we clear?”
“Crystal,” Jag weakly replied. He had made no attempt to rise
from the floor.
“Good. Now sit down.”
Jag was deceptively fast. He was back in his seat so fast I found
myself honestly impressed with his speed. I flashed back to something
The Beholder had said right before he drove his sword into my chest.
Fear is a useful tool in maintaining order. His being right sickened me.
Terran slid over to me and whispered, “How did you make your
eyes glow like that?”
“Later,” I snarled. He quickly stepped away.
Now that I had their full attention, I proceeded to lay out my plan.
Sometimes, the most orderly thing to do was keep things simple. I laid
out a full frontal assault to be led by Terran and myself. Jag would lead
the second wave once Terran and I had taken care of the first line of
defenses. The only major issue was when I mentioned that Terran and I
would not be taking any others with us. Pherris didn’t think this was a
good idea but I assured him it would be fine. I think it was the wicked
grin on my face that convinced him more than anything I may have said.
Once everyone was in agreement on the plan, I told Jag and
Boulder to gather every Granite and Magmite and have them all assemble
in the center of camp. I wanted to address the masses.
It took another hour or so to bring everyone together. I was in
the small house going over the last details of the plan when Boulder came
in and told me they were ready. I followed Terran outside and was in awe
of what stood before me. There were hundreds of flaming Magmites
gathered together with a large band of Granites, standing and patiently
awaiting my arrival. They were all informed of the basics of the plan as
they were rounded up so they knew what was to come. I steeled myself

205

and stepped up onto large stone platform.
“Earthen race, hear my words!” I shouted. I didn’t need to
bother. Silence blanketed the crowd as they stood at rapt attention. “The
Beholder is dead.” With these words, the silence was shattered with the
sounds of cheering. A deep rumbling rippled through the masses.
I let the celebration continue for a few seconds before continuing.
“This is not the end you seek. General Sakoahn still holds the Earthen
Blade. As long as he does, there will never be peace between you. He is
not the one that deserves the throne. Terran, as we all know, is the
rightful heir to the throne.” More shouting erupted at the mention of
Terran and I held up a hand to silence them. “I have heard Sakoahn say
he will never accept peace with you as long as you retain control of the
portal. That was his master’s goal. That was what The Beholder wanted.
The Beholder is gone. Now its time for Sakoahn to join him.”
A low rumble came over the crowd again. “Terran and his loyal
lieutenants have entrusted me with devising a plan to end this once and
for all. I believe I have done just that. Some of you will not return from
this battle. To you I say, you fought not only for what was right but also
for what was necessary. Order will be restored to the isle of Atlantia and
you will have given your lives to make it happen. I do not wish for any
more deaths. However, it is inevitable in war. Tomorrow, this war will be
over and the death and loss can finally end.
“Granites, you are a proud race. Skilled fighters with exceptional
strength, you are truly gifted in the art of war. Today, you will use those
gifts to rain down destruction upon your fellow Granites. Do not feel
grief or sorrow for these victims. They made their choices and they must
live and die by the consequences. Today, the true leader of your race will
once again be in command. Today, order is restored to your race.
“Magmites, you are a peaceful race. Strong as well as skilled, you
have made guarding the portal you mission and have performed
admirably. Today, your task becomes easier. With Sakoahn’s defeat, you
will no longer need to fear him and his own evil designs. Today, your
struggle ends. To see this to fruition, you must go against your pacifistic
nature and fight alongside your kin, the Granites. You must take matters
into your own hands to secure your future. Today, order will return to
your race as well.”
I looked over the assembled crowd and saw that all eyes were
attentively locked on me. Confidence filled my spirit as I continued. “All
of you will be an integral part of our attack. We need to show solidarity
between the races so that those that choose to live will understand that
the two races will coexist peacefully for all eternity. Those that choose to

206

defy us shall perish. Terran and I will take the lead in this final battle. We
will lead the march to Granatia and once there Terran and I alone shall
commence the first wave of the assault. We will show those that oppose
us no mercy. Where you once sat back and waited for Sakoahn’s army to
attack, today you shall take the fight to him. You will be the aggressor.
You will redefine true aggression for all that stand in your way. You will
charge forward at whatever cost. You will be aggressive. Follow my lead,
earthen races, for I am aggression; pure, unadulterated, absolute
aggression. Follow me and you shall be victorious!” My voice had risen
and I found myself shouting to the crowd.
My words did their job. A thunderous roar erupted from the
crowd as they readied themselves for battle. Balls of flame shot into the
sky and exploded, creating a dazzling fireworks display. Terran led me
back into the house as Jag and Boulder began calming down the crowd
and dividing them into battalions.
Once inside, away from prying eyes and ears, Terran said, “You’re
absolutely sure this will work?”
“As someone I know is fond of saying, trust me.”
Terran and I talked for a few more minutes, more to reassure him
than to rehash the plan. When we exited the house and saw the forces
split into battalions and ready to do battle, his confidence grew noticeably.
I left Terran’s side and walked over to Jag to ask if he had explained the
plan to the soldiers. He assured me they were ready and willing to go.
Knowing they were ready was good. Being told they were willing made
me smile. Jag took a step back when I smiled because I inadvertently
flashed my fangs. I couldn’t stifle my laughter and let out a tiny chuckle.
When he realized I was smiling in a good way, he joined in, albeit a bit
nervously. Jag was going to be leading the second wave and I told him I
had the utmost confidence in his abilities. He smiled and snapped to
attention. I went back over to Terran and asked if he was ready. When
he locked eyes with me and responded positively, I knew we were going
to succeed. The hatred and determination in his gaze was all I needed to
see.
The journey to Granatia from the encampment would take at least
two hours, so we departed the encampment as soon as everything was in
order. Terran and I walked alone as the entire Magmites population, as
well as the band of rebel Granites, marched on a few hundred yards
behind us. I was positive we wouldn’t see any of Sakoahn’s soldiers along
the way. When there was a celebration at the palace after a battle it was
attended by almost everyone. The only ones that didn’t get to go were the
guards at the gate. Normally, there would be between ten and fifteen of

207

them. I didn’t care if they had a thousand guards stationed out front. I
was getting inside.
We were nearing the castle as the sun began to set over the
mountains. Terran tapped me on the shoulder and told me to turn
around. I saw a small Magmite running up to us. Sensing trouble, I
stepped toward the small walking fireball.
“How can I assist you, little one?” I asked politely.
“Sir Aggression, Jag would like to know where you want us to
position the soldiers.”
“Just stay back for now. You’ll be out of sight of the castle where
you are now.” The Magmite smiled and went to leave when I asked,
“Excuse me. Did you call me Aggression?”
The Magmite seemed confused. “You said that was your name,”
he replied softly.
I thought back to my speech. I never did mention my name while
I was riling up the troops. I did, however, say that I was aggression. I
think the little Magmite took me too literally. I looked down at the
Magmite and guessed his age to be fairly young. I smiled and said, “Yes,
child, I did. I guess that means it’s my name, doesn’t it?” The young
Magmite was grinning excitedly. “How would you like to play a role in
our victory?”
The tiny Magmite was glowing at being asked to help. He
excitedly nodded and I told him his role. He quickly ran back to Jag,
yelling to us that he would be back.
Terran looked at me and hesitantly asked, “Aggression?”
“Yes?” I answered, still smiling.
“So you’re no longer going by Vincent?”
“If the name fits, may as well use it.”
“Does it?”
I gave Terran a steely gaze and replied, “You have no idea.”
I saw the young Magmite running back to us and I asked if Jag
had any problems. The Magmite informed me everyone was ready to go.
He was elated at being asked to be my messenger. I asked for his name
and he told me he was named Molt but everyone called him Sparky. As
we continued the final approach, I asked Molt how he got his nickname.
He said it came from when he found out he could steal another Magmites
flames and make them his own. Apparently, when Magmites got angry or
stressed they became engulfed in flame. Molt said he could corral their
flames to boost his own. Whenever he did this, sparks flew from his body
as he tried to control the extra fire. Molt was overjoyed to see I was
curious about him. I didn’t really know a lot about Magmites. The

208

Beholder only went over the generalities of their race with me.
We rounded a corner on the path and the castle came into view. I
could see about ten guards posted outside the gate. Thankfully, there
were none in the towers. I didn’t expect there to be. We were still a fair
distance away so I ordered Sparky and Terran into the woods bordering
the path. The three of us inched closer to the castle by way of the woods.
I had to keep Sparky away from the trees as much as possible. I didn’t
want a forest fire to give away our position. Thankfully, he was able to
quell most of the fire radiating from him.
When the guards came fully into view, I saw there were actually
eleven of them stationed on patrol outside. I started to head out from the
woods when I saw that Terran and Sparky were following me.
“No. The two of you stay here,” I ordered.
“You are not going into battle without me,” Terran objected.
“Yes, I am. I need to do this myself.”
“Then why did you ask me to accompany you?”
“Because I knew you wouldn’t let me go without you.” I stared at
Terran and he could see the fury in my eyes. I hoped they weren’t
glowing. It would give away our location. Terran nodded, coming to the
conclusion that he wasn’t going to win the argument.
“When you get the signal, join me. Sparky, when he comes to me,
run back to Jag and tell him to advance.”
“What’s the signal?” Terran asked.
“You’ll know it when you see it,” I replied as I left the woods.
I stepped out onto the path and continued on to the main gate of
the castle. As I neared, one of the guards noticed me.
“Hail, Vincent! How are you doing today?” he asked as I
approached him.
“Better,” I said smiling wickedly.
“Better?”
“Better than you.” The smile never left my face as I extended my
metal claws and cut his stone head from his body. Before his head hit the
ground, I was moving.
The other guards had witnessed my deeds and moved to counter
my attack. Their efforts were in vain as none of them were fast enough to
catch me. I drove my claws into the chest of the nearest Granite. This
guard was the largest of the contingent, almost as big as Titus. Mustering
all my strength, I lifted the Granite into the air and swung at the other
guards. I connected with three smaller guards and they exploded into a
cloud of rock dust. I brought my arms up forcefully and retracted my
claws momentarily, sending the impaled Granite skyward with amazing

209

velocity. Before the guard I’d thrown came crashing back to earth, I ran
at full speed and decimated the remaining guards. They were no match
for my agility and power. When I reached the last guard still standing, I
drove my claws into him as I had done with his airborne companion. I
glanced skyward and saw the Granite on his way back down. I tossed the
Granite I had control of into the air. The two collided in midair and
exploded. A cloud of dust and shards of stone rained down from the sky,
blanketing me in grit. The whole attack had taken less than a minute.
The first wave was complete.
I looked back down the path and saw Terran approaching. Molt
was running in the opposite direction to pass word along to Jag. When
Terran reached the site of the slaughter, I was still brushing off the dust
and rock that had fallen on me.
Terran picked a small stone from my hair. He wore a tentative
smile as he said, “That was quite a signal.”
“Thank you,” I replied without emotion.
“You really are Aggression, aren’t you?”
“Now and forever more.”
“I thought you told me before you didn’t really care for violence?”
“I don’t. I just recognize the need for it.” I finished cleaning
myself off and added, “And I’m damn good at it.”
“You’ll get no argument from me.”
It only took a few minutes for Jag and the army to assemble
around the gate. I explained that I was going inside to survey the scene.
Jag wasn’t sure about this subtle change in the plan but I was able to allay
his doubts.
I went into the castle and searched out the party. As expected, I
could hear sounds of celebration coming from the main hall. As I walked
in that direction I ran into Slade.
“Hello there, Slade,” I said cheerfully.
“Welcome back!” he replied earnestly. “Is all well?”
I leaned in and whispered, “If you want to live past today, leave.
There’s an army awaiting my orders just outside the castle gate. Now, I
know you’re a traitor to Sakoahn and there was a time when I wanted to
kill you for it. But today’s your lucky day. You see, I was killed and now
my priorities have changed a tad. Terran knows you’re on his side. If you
leave now, you can join us if you choose and truly fight Sakoahn. If not,
you will never see another sunrise.”
I leaned backup and saw abject fear in his coal black eyes. “What
about Opal?” he asked nervously.
“Find her and take her with you,” I replied.

210

“She’s at the party.”
“Then I guess I’m going to have to get her. Leave Slade, and tell
Terran and Jag to give me three minutes. After that, storm the castle. I’m
going to a party,” I said with no joy in my eyes.
I strolled down the corridor towards the sounds of celebration
and revelry. I encountered no other Granites along the way and was glad
to see they were all going to be in the same place. It would make the
battle so much easier if we could contain it to one area instead of having
to chase our prey throughout the castle. As soon as I entered, Sakoahn
spotted me and made his way over.
“Vincent, it is so good to see you. Your actions today have earned
my utmost respect.”
“Why thank you, Sakoahn. That means almost nothing to me,” I
gladly replied.
My response caught Sakoahn unaware. “What did you mean by
that? And where’s your father?”
“My father,” I spat out, “is indisposed. You won’t be enjoying the
pleasure of his lies anymore. We had an enlightening chat after you left,
Sakoahn. Because of it, circumstances have changed drastically.”
“How so?”
“I know who the traitor is. Or should I say traitors?”
“There’s more than one? Who are they?” he demanded.
“Well, Slade is one, but he’s gone. The other is none of your
concern. I’m taking care of that problem.” Faintly, in the background
noise of the party, I heard the marching of heavy footsteps coming down
the hallway. “As well as several others.” I sneered at Sakoahn and
watched as the revelation finally settled in.
“Guards! To arms!” he shouted over the din of the celebration.
Without warning, he swung his arms at me. He caught me square in the
chest, knocking me to the ground. I jumped back up quickly but he was
gone.
Terran’s army stormed the party and the battle commenced. The
rebel Granites, led by Terran himself, attacked with a fury. Their enemies
fell one by one in rapid succession. Many of Sakoahn’s men were unable
to get to their weapons in time. It was like sending sheep to the slaughter.
The Magmites were setting Sakoahn’s men aflame. To my amazement,
this did not kill the Granites. Instead, they stayed burning and became
new Magmites. The new Magmites willingly fought with their new
brethren and attacked Sakoahn’s men. Not all of the Granites were
flammable and those that remained fought fiercely. I saw Molt at the

211

edge of the scrum as he soaked up the dying flames of a fallen Magmite.
One of Sakoahn’s men came near him and Molt burst into flame. A
column of orange fire rose from his body, torching his would-be attacker.
I looked around at the madness and couldn’t see Sakoahn
anywhere. I did spot Opal though. She was trying to get away from the
fighting. Mauls were swung and breezed past her head. Swords lunged at
her but she was able to sidestep the blades. Knowing she wouldn’t last
much longer, I ran into the fray. I scooped her up and ran back to the
entrance of the main hall. When I put her down, she was shocked to see
it was me that had rescued her. I told her to find a safe place to hide out
until it was all over. Her response was a scream of terror. I wasn’t sure
why she did this until I felt the blow to my back. I flew into Opal and we
tumbled to the floor. I was up in a flash and saw Titus. I had assumed
someone hit me with a maul while my back was turned. In actuality, Titus
had hit me with his fist. When you’re as massive as he was you didn’t
really need a weapon.
I leapt to my feet, picking Opal up off the floor as I did. She
didn’t hesitate for a second before running off. I extended my blades and
charged at my adversary. I ran at him and sunk my blades into his
immense body. This did not have the desired effect as my blades got
stuck in his gut. His body looked like solid stone but apparently it wasn’t.
Titus grabbed me by the throat before I could get away and launched me
upwards. My blades gave me no assistance and slipped out his body with
ease, succumbing to his immense strength. My back slammed into the
ceiling. Shooting pain coursed through my body briefly as I descended to
the floor. There was no way for me to land safely so I let nature take its
course. I hit the floor and rolled, keeping a safe distance from Titus for
the time being. I shook off the soreness and glared at my enemy. My
rage intensified and I could sense the glow coming from my eyes. The
look on Titus’s face changed drastically when he saw the golden light
emanating from me. Where satisfaction had resided on his face, doubt
and fear now made it their home.
I peeked at my gauntlets briefly and saw they were covered in
thick, dark mud. I had assumed Titus was like the other Granites and
composed completely of stone. My assumption proved inaccurate. His
outer shell was hard rock but underneath he was composed of a viscous
sludge. I quickly came up with an alternate plan to defeat him. Charging
at him again, I drove my blades into his chest. Once the blades broke the
surface, I turned the blades so they pointed upwards. I fell backwards and
rolled onto my back, all the while keeping my blades inside. He fell
towards me so I lifted my legs, planted my feet into his gut and flipped

212

him over me. He hit the wall halfway up and slid down. The act of
throwing him this way ripped a sizeable hole in his chest. The mud
underneath his rocky exterior was now exposed to the open air. I
retracted my claws and rapidly redeployed them, effectively cleaning the
mud from the metal. I lunged forward and began to strike at the gaping
hole. I sliced at the opening repeatedly, widening the hole and spraying
mud everywhere. Titus was in obvious pain but still very much alive. A
black, oily substance had begun to seep out of the mud. It took me a
moment to recognize it as blood. I had so severely decimated every
Granite I'd encountered in battle that I'd never seen one bleed before. I
stood back and watched as Titus tried to rise to his feet.
I examined the fight still raging in the main hall. In a stroke of
luck, Molt was still where I'd last seen him. "Sparky! Come here! Quick!"
I bellowed.
The young Magmite heard me yelling for him and ran right over.
Titus was still struggling to regain his senses. His enormous mass
slumped against the wall, black blood slowly dripping down his body.
Molt stared at Titus for a second before addressing me. "How can I help
you, Sir Aggression?"
"How's your aim?" I asked.
"I'm the best in my class!" he proudly replied.
I pointed at the exposed mud straining to remain in his body.
"Hit him with a flame right there."
Panic gripped Titus and he tried to crawl away. Molt had his arm
extended and shot a column of flame at him. The fire found its mark and
Molt held the flame there for as long as he could. As small as he was, I
didn't think he'd last nearly as long as he did.
Titus had stopped trying to escape. He had not given up
voluntarily. The effect of Molt's flame had hardened the mud inside his
body. I slowly walked over and delivered the fatal blow. The giant Titus
disintegrated into nothing more that a pile of dirt and stone.
I turned to Molt and was going to tell him to rejoin the fight but
he was already gone. That was one courageous tyke. I rejoined the battle
as I looked for Terran. I found him as he was swinging his maul and
obliterating another foe. When I reached him I told him to come with
me. His objection was noted and quickly dismissed. It wasn't until I told
him we were going to hunt down Sakoahn that his protestations ceased.
The two of us ran down the corridor, looking around every corner
for our prey. I mentioned to Terran that he could be in either the war
room or his quarters. Terran volunteered to check the war room as I ran
off for the living quarters.

213

I reached Sakoahn's chamber in seconds. My timing was perfect.
Sakoahn was just leaving. As he exited into the hallway, I swung my arms
out and connected with his face. His head snapped back as he staggered
back into the room.
"You'll notice that I'm brave enough to stick around after
assaulting someone," I told him when I entered.
"Call it cowardice if you like, child. I call it intelligence," he
crossly replied.
"I never doubted your capacity for either, Sakoahn." I was slowly
walking towards him as he backed away.
Sakoahn withdrew his sword from its sheath and held it out
defensively. "Do you know what this is?"
"Something that doesn't belong to you," I firmly replied.
"So you know of the Earthen Blade. I'm impressed. Whether or
not it belongs to me, I have it and I will never relinquish it!" he shouted
defiantly.
I sprinted at Sakoahn and wrested the sword from his hands. I
returned to my previous place and began to wave the sword around at the
general. "Never say never, Sakoahn," I advised condescendingly as I
resumed stalking him slowly around the room.
Fear crossed his face as he knew his time was short. "If you think
you have it in you to kill me, child, then get on with it."
"I have no intention of killing you, Sakoahn," I replied calmly.
"It's not my place. This was never my fight, never my war. The Beholder
asked for my assistance and I provided it. I didn't know I was being asked
to help under false pretenses. That upsets me." I was inching ever closer
to Sakoahn as we circled the room. I kept waiting for him to run for the
door but he never did. He was getting closer to it now. I glanced at the
door and smiled.
"You will learn that everyone lies, child, sooner or later."
"Stop calling me child!" I screamed. "My name is Aggression.
Remember that as your dying breath escapes you."
"So you are going to kill me after all," he said.
"No. He is," I replied as I jerked my thumb towards the door.
The moment Sakoahn looked to the doorway he got hit with
Terran's maul. I yelled to Terran to get his attention before Sakoahn
could recover. I tossed the Earthen Blade to him and he caught it easily
with one large hand, skillfully swinging it around as soon as hilt met hand.
The blade seemed to meld to his stony hand and he wielded the sword
like it was a part of him. Sakoahn tried to run but Terran was blocking his
escape.

214

"Now, traitor, turncoat, murderer, you shall meet your end,"
Terran cried out as he attacked Sakoahn.
I had no doubt Sakoahn was an extremely capable fighter. This
time he was simply outmatched. Terran let out all his pent up anger and
rage on the man that killed his father. Sakoahn was able to retrieve
Terran's maul and mount a counterattack. Terran was simply more
determined. Instead of knocking the maul from Sakoahn's grip, Terran
cut off his whole arm. Piece by piece, Terran cut Sakoahn apart. When it
was all said and done, General Sakoahn was dead, the final blow coming
when Terran decapitated his prone body. The general's head rolled to the
corner where it came to rest.
The brutality of his actions didn't bother me at all. After all the
lies, the deceit and bloodshed, it all came down to two people deciding the
victor. All the chaos reduced to a one on one confrontation. Order was
finally being established. Not only did I believe killing Sakoahn was
necessary for order to be restored but Terran's state of mind needed to be
settled also. I could've killed Sakoahn five times over before Terran
arrived. It would have accomplished nothing. This was the outcome that
needed to happen.
Terran slowly made his way to me as I sat at the far end of the
room. Their skirmish never neared me so I had an unobstructed view of
the proceedings. As the new leader of the earthen races neared I could
see large chunks of his stony exterior had been knocked away. Sakoahn's
counterattack was more effective than I'd originally believed. I stood to
offer Terran a hand but he waved me away.
"I'm fine, Aggression," he said past his exhaustion. "Truth be
told, I've never felt better."
"You're injured," I remarked.
"Nothing that won't heal, now that I have this." He held up the
Earthen Blade. The light from the candles in the room flickered off the
blade. The low flame of the candle caught the orange stone cast into the
handle of the sword and sent beams of colored light in all directions.
Terran walked over to the remains of General Sakoahn and
removed the sheath from his corpse. He strapped it on and slid the
Earthen Blade in effortlessly. With a knowing nod, the two of us left the
sleeping quarters of the late General Sakoahn and raced back to the main
hall. I kept pace with Terran instead of going full speed so we could
formulate a plan. Terran said he knew what needed to be done. All I had
to do was watch.
The battle was still going but there were many fewer soldiers left
standing. The carnage was beyond belief. Piles of rock, some still

215

steaming, littered the hall where a party had been taking place less than an
hour ago. I was shocked to see Molt still alive. Maybe his diminutive size
made him a harder target.
Terran withdrew the Earthen Blade and roared, "Earthen races!
Hear me now!" Everyone ceased moving before his words had finished
echoing throughout the chamber. "General Sakoahn is dead by my hand.
The Earthen Blade has been returned to its rightful heir. I am Terran, son
of Granus, and I hold dominion over our races. I say to all of you, let us
end this war now. This is not a battle between Granites and Magmites.
This is a war about good and evil. That evil has been eliminated. With
Sakoahn disposed of, we can once again have peace and harmony
between us. So I say, lay down your weapons. Let there be no more
death today. Those that chose to side with Sakoahn can be forgiven, in
time.
"Let anyone who challenges my authority or my words step forth
and we shall decide it honorably. Challenge me later and it shall be
decided with your death."
To me, it looked like a room filled with statues. No one moved as
Terran spoke. As his words faded, a small rumbling started and formed
into full-fledged cheers. Even some of the soldiers that had been fighting
for Sakoahn joined in.
As the two earthen races rejoiced, Terran turned to me and said,
"Thank you, Aggression, for all you've done."
"It was for your benefit as well as mine, Terran." I grinned
appreciatively and jokingly added, "All I ask is that you rule in an orderly
fashion. Remember, I held the Earthen Blade for a few seconds.
Technically, you took the throne from me. Don't make me reclaim it."
Terran laughed, knowing something said in jest when he heard it.
"You have a deal, my friend. So what's next for you?"
"I need to rest. Since sunrise, I've been killed, talked to not one
but two Ancients about my future, watched another Ancient get tortured
and imprisoned, formulated a plan to kill Sakoahn and helped implement
that plan. I've had a busy day. In the morning, I'm going back to the city
of Atlantia. There's something else I have to do. It sure feels like my
duties are endless as of late. Worse, I have a feeling this is just the
beginning."
"It has been a glorious beginning, Aggression. Do not forget that.
It has been my honor to stand beside you in battle."
"The honor truly is mine, Terran." I shook his outstretched hand
and grimaced as I felt a twinge of pain shoot up my arm, an injury caused
from my skirmish with Titus no doubt.

216

"If you need anything, the earthen races will be there for you. All
you need to do is ask."
"I appreciate that. For now, I think all I need is some time alone."
"Do you know where you'll be bunking down? It would be my
honor to have you stay here in the castle."
"Actually, I already have quarters here. And it’s deep enough in
the castle to give me the solitude I desire."
"Then be on your way, my friend, and rest. My people will take
care of clearing away the vestiges of battle."
I shook his hand again and departed for my quarters. My wrist
was throbbing slightly, causing me to replay my fight with Titus in my
mind. I remembered every move I’d made and couldn't figure out how
I’d hurt myself. I examined my wrist closer and saw a tiny patch of my
skin had turned to stone. I carefully peeled away the rock as I wandered
the corridors of the castle. Apparently, the Earthen Blade wasn't meant
for humans to possess. I only held it for a few seconds and it tried to turn
me into stone. As improbable as it sounded, it was the only logical
conclusion I could draw.
Once the stone pieces were removed, a small trickle of blood
seeped from the wound. I licked up the golden droplets and laughed
quietly to myself. I must’ve looked like a cat cleaning itself, which made
me think once again about The Beholder. He had taken over a feline
lycan and now I had to wonder if this was another trait I inherited from
him. My laughter grew and turned slightly manic as I realized I would
never be able to ask him. I re-examined my wrist when the blood was
gone and saw the wound already beginning to heal. No more blood was
seeping through, which I found oddly disappointing. My blood had tasted
sweet and refreshing.
I made it back to my room and headed directly for the bed. I
removed my gauntlets and placed them on the table next to me. I lay
down to sleep, but would find no solace this night. The vision of the
day’s carnage constantly replayed in my mind.

217

Chapter 14
The remains of the battle had not been fully disposed of by the
next morning. When I entered the main hall I was astounded by the
amount of debris littering the room. Mounds of rock were scattered
about, marking where soldiers had fallen during the conflict. I felt no
sorrow for these men no matter how much I tried. I had made up my
mind to come here as I lay awake in bed last night. I couldn't get the
sights and sounds of combat out of my mind. I didn't enjoy it but I
couldn't say I felt remorseful either. What struck me as strange was that I
didn't feel anything at all. I mulled over everything that had happened
during the day, from agreeing to join Sakoahn on the field of battle to
bringing the battle back to him. All of it felt calculated, set out before me
like a weather-beaten path. Yet I couldn't get over the feeling there were
traps hidden all along its length.
Bloodshed was never the most effective way to settle a dispute.
Sometimes it was the only way. You did what you must to maintain an
acceptable level of order. Propheteus said I was doing a good job so far
and I had to wonder if he knew the outcome of the war before it started.
I could only assume he did. If I was the one the prophecy was about, as
The Beholder once believed, then my fate was sealed and everything I did
was another step along that path. No matter how long I thought about it,
I refused to believe my life was planned out. That went against the
concept of free will, against choice, and that was the trap.
I thought about free will as I surveyed the main hall. Every
individual that died in this final battle chose to fight. Granted, I may have
helped motivate the Magmites and thereby contributed to their deaths.
Ultimately the choice rested with each and every one of them. No one
was forced. No one was told that those who chose to stay behind would
be punished. Everyone signed on knowing they might not return. Free
will decided their legacies, not fate. As far as I was concerned, their lives
were sacrificed for the greater good, for they fought with valor and
without fear. They chose aggression to achieve peace, and their efforts
succeeded.
Somehow Terran was able to enter the room without my hearing
him. I was so focused on resolving my minor inner turmoil that I didn't
hear the massive stone man arrive. He broke my concentration when he
cleared his throat. The sound of gravel shifting around got my attention.
"Good morning Aggression," he said. "Sleep well?"
"Not at all, actually," I replied.
"Me neither. I kept reliving the battle over and over again in my

218

head."

"Same here. I wish it didn't have to turn out this way, Terran."
"It was bound to happen," he regretfully sighed.
"As are many other things." I placed my hand on his rocky
shoulder and said, "I have to go back to the city of Atlantia. There's
something that needs to be stopped that I helped start. I've been told it
has to come to pass, but I simply refuse to accept that."
Terran carefully placed his hand on my shoulder and responded,
"Aggression, your name shall forever be revered among the earthen races.
You have united us as we have never been before. I promise you now,
here in the great hall of Castle Granatia, that I will rule fairly and justly.
Order shall prevail under my reign."
I removed my hand as he removed his. My smile was my only
reply. I turned and walked out of the main hall and towards the castle
gate. Several Granites wished me well as I passed by. Opal saw me and
ran over to repeatedly thank me for saving her. Her effusive praise was
almost embarrassing, for her as well as me. It wasn't until Slade showed
up that I was able to break away. He also thanked me for my help, and
for not turning him in to Sakoahn.
I left the castle to appreciative cheers. It felt good to know they
would not need my help any time soon. The harmony and unity evident
as I departed the castle told me all I needed to know. Order won the day
in Granatia and order would hold sway for a long time. That thought
warmed me as I casually strolled to the edge of the clearing in front of the
castle.
What bothered me now was the Zaron's egg project. I felt a need
to stop it even though Propheteus said it must happen. I could not accept
that. Atlantia was the home of the greatest civilization on Earth. The
knowledge that could be imparted to the rest of the world was boundless.
Thinking about Zaron's egg being uncovered tied my stomach in knots.
Alarm shrouded my thinking as I tried to consider the ramifications of
our dealings. I had no doubt there was endless power to be withdrawn
from Zaron's egg, but if something went wrong it would be disastrous.
My dread grew until I felt the urge to sprint to Atlantia right then. I didn't
want the Granites and remaining Magmites in the castle to sense my panic
however. I managed to stay calm until I neared the mountain. Once I
had rounded the path around the base of the mountain and was finally out
of view of the castle, I started running full tilt for Atlantia.
I arrived in downtown Atlantia a few seconds later. I wanted to
see the progress on the Zaron's egg project first but was afraid I might

219

find out I was too late to stop it. Instead, I settled on talking to
Genepool. As the most revered figure on Atlantia he would know what
needed to be done. I briskly walked to his temple in hopes of finding him
there. The sooner I could track him down the better.
Upon entering his temple I heard the sounds of people talking.
At the foot of his throne were the engineers and scientists from the
project, along with some men in green robes. I quietly made my way
towards them, hoping to catch some of the conversation. What I heard
troubled me greatly. Apparently, the egg had reached the surface and was
now almost half uncovered. Genepool and the workers were going over
ideas on how best to utilize its power. Genepool instructed them to see
that something called the Shield was taken care of first. The ones wearing
the green robes fielded that question and informed him progress on the
Shield was almost complete. Genepool spotted me out of the corner of
his eye as I drew closer, and promptly dismissed the others. He called me
over and asked how I was doing.
"I've been better," I replied from the base of the steps leading to
his throne. "I need to talk to you about something very important."
"I'm sure you do," Genepool responded, smiling brightly.
"I can't help but think there's something wrong with the Zaron's
egg project."
"Why would you say that?" he asked. His smile never faded and
oddly I found it worrisome.
"I've spoken with Propheteus and he told me of a prophecy
foretelling the destruction of Atlantia."
"That is where you're wrong, Vincent. Or should I call you
Aggression now?"
"How did you know I was called that?" I asked, surprised to learn
he'd heard of my pseudonym.
"Not much happens on this island that I don't know about. Take
the prophecy you spoke of. It doesn't say that Atlantia will be destroyed,
quite the opposite in fact. What it says is that the sea will swallow up
Atlantia. That is what will happen. Atlantia will continue to exist, albeit
in quite an altered state."
I was stunned at his relaxed manner. It was as if the pending
doom slated for the island pleased him. "You don't seem concerned. I
have to admit that surprises me. Don't you value their lives?"
Genepool laughed heartily at my question. The sound of his
laughter reverberated throughout the room. "Vincent, dear boy, I want
the prophecy to come to pass because I value their lives as much as I do."
My head hadn’t hurt this much since I’d left Valencia back in

220

Egypt. Genepool’s words made no sense. “You want the prophecy to
come to pass? I’m confused.”
“Vincent, the people of Atlantia will be adapted to their new
environment. What will transpire will be a transformation of the
Atlantian society. Let me explain what I do in detail, if I may. Every
species of plant life on the planet is here thanks to me. I created each and
every one of them. You know almost as much as anyone on Earth about
the different types of plants. By the way, once Atlantia is gone, you really
should pass along your knowledge to others. Some of those plants can
kill a mortal man.” His voice was relaxed, making what he was saying
harder to listen to. His cavalier attitude grated on my nerves. “Intelligent
life on this planet is due to both my experiments and Zaron’s creations.
You know Zaron as the devourer of worlds, and this is both accurate and
inaccurate. Let me tell you why.
“Zaron and I are both deeply concerned about life on this planet.
We want nothing more that the continuation of life but we differ on the
means to those ends. Zaron devours worlds to give birth to new life from
the old. Instead of allowing time and nature to run its course, when she
sees a failed civilization, she erases it and starts anew. I do not believe this
should be the case with Earth. I believe the varying races and species on
this planet can adapt to new environments. Every creature has adapted
naturally in one way or another. For example, some mammals grow thick
fur to protect themselves from harsh weather. These animals, where they
were created with a rudimentary fur coat, grew longer and thicker hair
over time as conditions warranted. Adaptation and evolution, Vincent.
That’s all I believe in. Occasionally, evolution moves too slowly for my
liking. That’s why things like the removal of Atlantia from the planet’s
surface must occur.
“The people of Atlantia have great knowledge to impart to the
rest of the world. The problem is, the rest of the world isn’t ready for it.
If evolution is pushed too fast, entire civilizations and races invariably
perish. This normally calls forth Zaron, and we don’t want that to
happen, do we? I do not foresee any major strides occurring anytime
soon, so I am forced to take these drastic measures.”
A revelation hit me and I blurted out, “You planned it all.”
“Of course I did,” he readily admitted. “I need to continue with
some experiments I’ve been working on, not to mention a few new ones,
and I need somewhere private. If Atlantia stays on the surface much
longer, other civilizations will discover it. That would lead down a
dangerous path. Those who are not ready for what Atlantia holds can
only find misfortune. I knew only one thing that could bring about a shift

221

in the very structure of the Earth drastic enough to sink Atlantia. Zaron’s
egg. Once her power is tapped, she will feel its loss. Most likely, she will
merely stir within the egg. That will be enough. The force of her egg
shifting will cause earthquakes strong enough to topple mountains.
Tsunamis like solid walls of water will travel the ocean and crash over the
island.
“Once underwater, the people of Atlantia will be adapted at a
basic genetic level. They will be given the ability to breathe underwater,
though it will only be a necessity if they choose to leave the safety of the
island. Being amphibious, they will be able to survive at sea as effortlessly
as on land.”
“How is the island supposed to survive underwater? The people
will drown before you can make any changes to them,” I angrily
remarked.
“I’m sure you overheard my conversation just now. The Shield
you heard about is a majickal protection. That is another reason I needed
Zaron’s egg brought to the surface and not kept belowground. We
could’ve easily gotten the egg to move underground, but to tap its power
to create the Shield we needed it on the surface. We’ll be able to generate
enough majickal energy to power the Shield forever in the few seconds
we’ll have available to us.”
“Were the people of Atlantia given a choice in this?” I demanded.
“Don’t raise your tone with me, child,” he irately replied as he
rose from his throne. As he descended the steps, vines shot up from the
floor and laced into a lush green carpet for him to walk on. Small golden
flowers sprouted from the vines in perfect rows, creating a decorative
border. The living carpet ended at the bottom step, just inches from my
feet. I took a few steps back, deeming it wise to give Genepool some
space. He stopped at the bottom step and continued his diatribe, “The
people of Atlantia should be grateful I chose them. Races and
civilizations around the world would kill for the opportunity to come
before me and be granted a new existence. New races get created every
day, and they all come from my works. Evolution is inevitable, and the
people of Atlantia will be thankful, if not honored, that I chose them.
Their lives will be legend, their teachings passed along forever. They will
become myth as memory among mankind fades but the people of Atlantia
will outlive that very myth.”
I stood there, utterly speechless. Genepool was someone I had
truly trusted. He was polite every time he saw me, never condescending
because I was a child. As I grew, he would visit and check in on Valencia
and I, joining us for dinner once in a while. Now I learned he was the

222

person responsible for the eradication of Atlantia. Not only that, but he
apparently intended on altering the genetics of these people without their
consent.
We stood there like statues, our gaze never faltering. Finally, I
said, “I could stop this.”
“Vincent, this is going to happen. Besides, you helped make this a
reality. You’re the one that developed the system to get the egg out.
Without you, we’d still be trying to figure out a good way to uncover it
without disturbing her on the way up. Your very presence here was part
of the plan as well. Convincing that egomaniacal father of yours to bring
you here for your education was a breeze. Granted, I had already sent Ra
to Egypt to teach you, but it appears he made out just fine.
“I know this is painful for you to hear. I can see it in your eyes. I
won’t apologize for using your gifts for my own purposes. Propheteus
foresaw it and I wanted it. It worked out precisely as I’d hoped. Maybe
I’m being selfish, but look at it this way. Your friends in Egypt, how
would they react to everyday life in Atlantia? Do you think they could
handle all it has to offer? I doubt it. Their minds cannot grasp all that
Atlantia has to offer. It would most likely drive them mad. So let us
compromise, shall we?”
“What are you proposing?” I asked.
“You want to see the knowledge of Atlantia passed on. Believe it
or not, so do I. So, if you choose to leave and impart the lessons of
Atlantia to the masses, I will not alter anyone that does not wish it. If
they choose to live a life as only an air breather, so be it. In return, I ask
only that you pass on your vast wealth of knowledge of plant life to all
peoples. You, Vincent, shall author the Book of Nature Lore. I will give
you a tome of recorded plant life to get you started. Let them know what
is safe to eat and what is not. Tell them which plants are medicinal and
which ones are poisonous. Search out those plants you’ve never
encountered and record what uses they have. Do this, and I will give the
people of Atlantia a choice. Refuse and they evolve willingly or not.”
I stood in silence, pondering the choice before me. It wasn’t a
bad offer, given the circumstances. Besides, writing down all the plant life
couldn’t be all that tough. I was still fuming inside at being used. I felt
like, though I brought peace to the earthen races, my time on Atlantia was
all a set up for one man’s sick goals. The more I thought about it, the
more I knew that was exactly what happened. Resigned to failing in my
quest to save Atlantia from its watery grave, I said, “I’ll do as you ask.”
“Good. And I will uphold my end. Now I advise you to leave
Atlantia. The Shield will be operational soon. Once it is, and Zaron stirs,

223

you won’t have long before it gets swallowed up. You never did learn
how to swim, did you?”
I wanted to knock the smile off his face and wished I had Terran’s
maul to do it. “Where can I get the information on plants you spoke of?”
I asked, refusing to dignify his question with a response.
Genepool snapped his fingers and a man in a green robe and
white sash entered the room from a door behind his throne. He
wordlessly walked over to me and handed me a satchel he was carrying. I
opened it as he turned and left. There was one book inside and nothing
else. Before I could ask where the rest of the books were, Genepool
answered my question for me.
“That book is from Propheteus’s library. Open it to any page and
you will see what you need. If you are looking up a certain plant, the page
you open to will show that plant. If you need to record it as new, you will
open to a blank page.”
I placed the book back in the satchel and tied it shut. Before I
left, I had one thing left to ask. “Now that you’ve told me things I didn’t
want to know, why don’t you tell me what I want to hear?”
“You mean how I define order? Vincent, I was hoping I wouldn’t
have to tell you. It should be easy enough to figure out. Just keep life
going. That’s all. Help people thrive and survive. Help them learn and
grow. Help them evolve.”
A tiny grin appeared on my face for the first time today. “You
know, that’s the most reasonable definition I’ve heard yet.”
“And from me, no less. How disappointing that must be for
you.”
My grin shifted into a snarl. I turned and walked out of his temple
without another word. I had nothing left to say to the Ancient. Next
time we met, that would change. I would never forget his audacity in
using me for his own gains.
I wasted no time departing. Sprinting eastward, I ran until I
reached the African shore. For the first time in weeks I had no other
pressing matters to attend to. I stood there, looking out over the ocean,
and I could barely see a few of the taller peaks of the island. I sat down,
wondering how much longer Atlantia had left. My question was answered
before the sun set. I felt an immense rumbling and watched as the water
receded from the shore. I knew this was the moment. Zaron had finally
been disturbed enough and had moved. Now the earth moved with her.
Knowing the water would return with tremendous force, I stood
and prepared myself for a hasty exit. The whole world seemed to quake
at Zaron’s stirring and I had trouble keeping my balance at first. Without

224

warning, a giant plume of steam shot up from the island, clouding the sky
and obscuring the mountains from view. Out on the ocean, I saw a wall
of water closing in on the shoreline. Not wanting to get swept away, I
took this as my cue to go. I saw the mountains begin to sink into the sea
behind the wall. As I vacated the area, the image of Atlantia sinking was
burned into my mind for eternity.
Days passed by, rolling over into weeks, months, years. Centuries
passed as I roamed the Earth, dispensing the knowledge of Atlantia to
civilizations everywhere. Much social advancement occurred due to my
influence. Great cities sprung forth with my guidance. I witnessed
kingdoms rise and fall. Sometimes I helped them survive. Other times, I
caused their downfalls. Everywhere I went my teachings were heard and
cherished. I found I worked best when I stayed in the background. I was
the valued adviser to many leaders, always giving them my unvarnished
advice. My counsel always guided these leaders, and therefore the
kingdoms, in the principles of order. If I felt a leader was getting too far
from what I deemed orderly, I would create a situation that would lead to
their demise. These various leaders, self-centered and self-serving as they
were, never doubted my words and put my advice into practice without
question. I was never loyal to these men, only to order. Order, above all,
must be the driving force in the world.
I ruminated over all the Ancients had told me about order during
my long travels. I came to the conclusion that of all the Ancients to
impart their wisdom to me, Propheteus was the wisest of them all. I
wasn't exactly shocked by that revelation. It was just that he told me to
listen to what all of the Ancients had to say, not just him. As I met more
people and spread my influence and knowledge to all I encountered, I
came to find that there was no one, easy way to establish order. Every
city was different, every kingdom unique. Sometimes I would talk to the
townsfolk and get them to work in an orderly fashion. Planting their
crops in neat rows, having the streets in town line up parallel to one
another with perpendicular intersections, making laws to govern by, all of
these things had to be pushed upon people once in a while. Not everyone
intrinsically leaned towards order. I worked hard to preserve life, as
Genepool had asked. I recorded every plant I came across in the book he
gave me and used the information repeatedly when helping raise the
quality of life in towns I came upon. The establishment of empires was
The Beholder's way of maintaining order and I freely assisted many
empires succeed. When the time came that the empire was no longer
following the guidelines I'd set, I would judge them, sometimes violently,

225

and let Styx sort them out. I did not judge men as good or evil, just
orderly or chaotic. Good and evil was Christi Lona and Lillith’s domain.
It was almost two thousand years after I’d left Atlantia before I
met another Ancient. I almost walked right past him without knowing he
was there. More specifically, I walked over him. I was in Asia and had
just left the ruins of a village. The eerie quiet I experienced when I
entered told me straight away something was amiss. The town had been
wiped out, every man, woman and child killed. I had assumed they had
been killed even though I could find no evidence. Since I couldn't find a
body, I considered that evidence enough. The town was utterly deserted.
Then I noticed the silence. There were no birds singing in the trees, no
dogs barking in the distance, nothing at all. The land in front of the
houses had no flowers or bushes to speak of. There weren't even any
insects buzzing around. Every form of life had been eliminated. Since
there was nothing I could do, I left. The mystery of its inhabitants would
have to be solved by someone else.
A few miles outside of town there was a river cutting a path
through the valley, creating a vast canyon. I continued in that direction
and noticed a large land bridge allowing passage from one side of the
canyon to the other. As I started across this massive structure, it moved.
I was so startled I nearly fell off. Once I regained my composure, I
examined what had moved and, although it was difficult to believe at first,
came to the conclusion I was now looking at a gigantic head. The eyes of
this being were bigger than my entire body. I was seriously afraid of being
drawn into its lungs when it inhaled. Standing firm, I extended my
metallic claws and asked this creature to identify itself. His voice was
deep and raspy, but his words were clear. This was The Hunger, Ancient
destroyer. I stood on his shoulder as he relayed his version of order.
Again, I listened intently, hoping to glean something useful from his
advice. When he finished, I asked a few questions and he gladly complied
with concise answers.
According to the mammoth Hunger, order among civilizations
depends on isolation. He told me that when every town was selfsufficient and able to function on its own order could take hold. If a
town could not grasp the beauty of order, they would be fed to The
Hunger. He explained that his mission was to devour. That was it, just to
devour. The Hunger explained that he fed off the energy within every
mortal body. He used the fuel from their bodies to continue devouring.
It was an endless cycle. When towns were isolated, according to The
Hunger, it made it easier for one to disappear. The only things left
standing after a visit from The Hunger was the buildings.

226

I politely thanked The Hunger for his guidance and promised to
take his words to heart. I had to admit that isolation did have its
advantages. If every town was separated from the others, the negative
influence of one could not infect the others. However, any town that
remained isolated would also become stagnant. They wouldn't have
anyone new coming in to help them advance as a society. So, though his
words did have merit, I didn't think The Hunger's advice was very
practical. At least not in every instance.
I still made an effort to put The Hunger's recommendation to the
test. Over the next century I tried to keep some towns apart from others.
I figured that as long as a town wasn’t totally xenophobic and would allow
like-minded outsiders into their village, isolation could be beneficial to
certain groups. I helped one town set up in this manner shortly after my
encounter with The Hunger and left believing it went quite well.
Slightly over a hundred years had passed since I'd met The
Hunger and decided to check up on the first town I'd set up according to
his definition. At the gate of the village, I came upon a man's body
resting in a large pool of his own blood. His head had been cleanly cut
from his body. I extended my gauntlets and prepared myself for battle. If
this were The Hunger’s doing, there would be no body left for me to find.
Someone else was responsible for his death. Determined to find out who
this person was, I entered the village.
It was horrific. I had to step over and around the dead bodies
scattered everywhere. The streets were absolutely littered with corpses.
Rodents were gnawing at some of the fresher remains. The scurried away
as I approached, trailing pieces of intestines behind them as they ran. My
stomach roiled at the sight but I became more determined than ever to
find the perpetrator. I scanned the area and saw two men at the other end
of the main street. One man was holding a sword above his head and was
preparing to decapitate the other. I sprinted towards them, intent on
stopping another murder from taking place. Somehow the man with the
sword saw me coming and pointed his weapon at me. I came to a
screeching halt, leaving the end of the sword inches away from my chest.
The tip of the sword was glistening in the sun. The rest of it was coated
with blood.
The stranger before me was about six feet in height and all toned
muscle. He radiated strength and power. His shoulder-length black hair
was matted with blood. The man didn't say a word. He only looked me
dead in the eye. With a grace and speed that impressed even me, he
swung his sword backwards and struck his detainee. The man on the
ground was instantly separated from his head. The rest of his body

227

slumped over and fell to the ground as his head rolled a few feet away.
The killer swung his sword around and it was once again pointed at me.
What must have been the dead man's aura, for I'd seen similar things
while in Limbo, left his body and entered the sword. His gaze never left
mine the entire time.
After a minute of staring at each other he finally lowered his
weapon and introduced himself. To my surprise, I had come upon
Gilmore the Traveler, not some ordinary mass murderer. He said he must
kill people to control their souls. When I asked him to explain in more
detail, he told me he couldn't. All he knew was that he was Gilmore the
Traveler, Ancient devourer of souls. Anything more than that wasn't
from his memories but the memories of the people he'd killed. Their
souls, their memories and experiences, their abilities both physical and
majickal, and sometimes their personalities, were transmitted to him.
Although his memory was hazy, he was convinced he wasn’t the first
person to walk the earth as Gilmore. He couldn't explain why he felt this
way, just that he did. Maybe it was one of the souls he'd devoured that
remembered and not him.
After identifying himself, he shocked me further by telling me I
had been expected. My timing was a little off though. He had wanted to
complete his undertaking before I arrived. Amidst all the carnage and
death, Gilmore proceeded to tell me what he believed order to be. Déjà
vu set in at once. His words echoed those of The Hunger. Gilmore
considered isolation to be the most beneficial way of keeping things in
order as well. The only difference in their motives was the personal
aspect. They each wanted the citizens of these towns for themselves.
Gilmore only wanted to devour their souls, not their entire bodies. It
bothered me a little that he only killed for the souls. At least The Hunger
didn't leave such a mess.
I let Gilmore speak even though I knew what he was going to say.
It was the polite thing to do. Once he finished, I swore to take his words
to heart and we parted company. My vow to him was going to be easy
enough to keep. Since I had already established some towns on the
theory of isolationism, I would simply keep doing what I had been all
along. This time, I would not place as many towns apart from others.
Two Ancients wanted me to isolate the population into tiny groups,
making it easier for them to decimate. I couldn't bring myself to place so
many people in harm's way. Since I didn't believe in total isolationism
myself, I couldn't rationalize having their deaths on my hands. A few here
and there as I saw fit, but not many.

228

Chapter 15
I kept my vow to the Ancients for many more centuries. Along
the way I helped more empires rise and, in time, watched every single one
fall. I isolated some villages and interconnected others. I taught Nature
Lore to all I encountered. I even taught cooking, mainly while I lived in
Europe. I had grown tired of wandering around the globe trying to
directly influence everything all the time and decided to settle down for a
while. Not having anything better to do, I taught the locals the fine
culinary arts. All the while, I was teaching them what herbs they could
use in their cooking, what plants could be used to treat burns, what leaf to
stay away from to avoid a rash and more. It was a much easier way to
teach Nature Lore than walking around everywhere.
I remained in southern Europe for more than a millennium. I
moved from small town to small town every thirty to forty years as not to
arouse suspicion. You couldn't exactly live in the same place for a few
hundred years without having to answer an uncomfortable question or
two. I'd found most mortals had trouble associating with a known
immortal so I tried to remain incognito as much as possible. With my size
and build, not to mention feral fangs, I still stood out in a crowd. Hence
the need to relocate now and again. When it was time for me to move on
from a town, I would take the opportunity to check up on other villages
I'd assisted along the way.
The world had taken a dark turn as of late. Wars between
countries were constant. Wars between races and clans of the same
country were even more prevalent. Blood soaked the earth of many lands
I'd once helped grow. These places were now torn asunder, burned to the
ground in one skirmish or another. Order was deteriorating rapidly but it
didn't feel like chaos was making any ground. I couldn't explain it, but the
only place I’d ever felt the presence of chaos reigning over the land was in
Egypt. My sister's influence was wide in the area and spread out from
Egypt to the surrounding region. Other than that, there were only trivial
pockets of chaotic places around the world. This was different. This felt
like two other forces pulling at each other. I wondered if this meant Love
and Hate would soon be brought to bear. I had to assume Valencia and I
would be informed if this were to happen. They would need our help and
guidance.
I was returning to Europe from a recent trip to Persia and had
noticed a plant I had never seen before. I pulled the Book of Nature Lore
from my satchel and opened to a blank page. I examined it closely,
making sure it was a new variety. Once convinced, I pulled a leaf off and

229

went to place it on my tongue. Before I could, I heard a voice.
"I wouldn't do that." The voice came from nowhere and
surrounded me. It was soft, as if the breeze itself was talking to me. "It’s
poisonous."
"I don't think that really matters," I replied to no one and felt
foolish the second I did it. I was responding to thin air.
"No, for you I guess it doesn't."
This time I was sure I wasn’t hallucinating. As I went to reply, the
light breeze I'd noticed grew into a gust of wind. The wind intensified
and began to swirl around in front of me. A small twister formed before
my eyes. To my wonderment, the miniature tornado transformed into the
shape of a man. He was wearing a dark maroon robe that covered his
entire body with the exception of his face. I couldn't see what his face
looked like because he had his head lowered. When he did look up, I
stumbled backwards in shock. He looked like me.
"Do not be alarmed, Aggression," the wind said to me. "I will not
harm you."
"You look just like me," I said to the stranger. I watched his
mouth move as I spoke, mimicking my words.
"Right now I do, yes," was the reply. This time, his mouth didn't
move at all.
"What do you normally look like?" I asked and saw his mouth
again move with mine.
"That is not important right now," the wind replied.
"Right. What is important is you telling me how you're doing
that." Watching my face on another person, moving their mouth with
mine, was very possibly the most annoying thing I'd every experienced. It
was too bizarre to comprehend.
"That is not important either."
"Then let's start at the beginning. Who are you?"
The stranger tiled his head back and I heard polite laughter swirl
around me. My mouth on his body remained closed. "You have finally
asked the proper question. I am the Ancient Each, Aggression, and it is
my honor to meet you at last."
My bewilderment faded at the mention of his name. “Ancient
one, the honor is all mine,” I said with all due respect. Smiling, I added,
“I was beginning to wonder if we’d ever cross paths.”
“You are not that easy to keep up with, child.” The voice lilted
with laughter as the words floated past my ears.
“I assume, of course, that you are about to tell me what you think
order is.”

230

“Soon. There are other pressing matters to discuss first. I can
sense that, though you are quite eager to receive my advice about order
and how I perceive it to be, you have other questions clouding your
mind.”
There were indeed several things I wished to know more about. I
wanted to find out more about Genepool. Since his deception was
revealed to me millennia ago, I’d wanted to get some sort of retribution.
The means of accomplishing that goal eluded me however. Also, when
Christi Lona and Lillith paid that unpleasant visit to The Beholder, they
mentioned the Ancients. Not only that, they mentioned a way to kill an
Ancient. He was right. I did have a lot more to discuss than I realized.
Questions I hadn’t considered in ages leapt to the forefront of my mind.
I felt as if my mind wasn’t my own.
“My apologies, Aggression. I simply noticed these things. You
see, I’m not really here. I’m just a projection from your mind.”
My thoughts may not have been completely my own, but I
definitely owned the headache. “Please, just tell me what’s going on,” I
moaned.
“I will try. I do not reside on this plane in physical form. I watch
from the air, for I am the air. My mind resides at the end of time yet I am
in the mind of every individual, conscious mind on Earth. What you see,
the reason you see your face on my body, is that I have no body as such.
I choose to show the face of the person I’m speaking with only because it
is normally less troubling for the individual. It is also the face most
readily available to one’s own mind. As I said, that’s all I did. I merely
created a projection from your mind. The door to your mind was much
easier to open than I had expected.” The last words flittered by with a
tone of pleasant surprise.
“Why do I suddenly want to ask you questions that I haven’t
thought about in centuries?” I asked.
“Because I knew you wanted to ask them. I prodded them from
you mind.”
“Don’t you think it’s rude to go around prying into people’s
minds?” I asked, my anger growing. I was getting confused and wanted
this cleared up.
“Again, my apologies, but I only looked for things I knew were
there. No thoughts are private to me, child. Where Propheteus knows
what will happen in the annals of time, I know why. I know a person’s
motivations, their innermost rationale. I know why people make the
choices they make.” The voice paused with the wind. The air around me
was perfectly still. In my mind, I saw memories of my life cascading past

231

me. I saw Valencia and I sitting on a log by the riverside in Egypt. I saw
The Beholder standing in a vast desert as I sped towards him. All of the
Ancient’s words came flooding back to me, visions of them enlightening
me with their counsel as clear to me now as it was centuries, even
millennia, ago. My time spent in Asia teaching construction methodology,
centuries in Greece holding council with the local teachers and
philosophers, even memories as banal as a beginner’s cooking lesson in
Italy, they all came rushing back to me. Minutes later, after I’d seen
countless years run through my mind, the breeze and the voice resumed.
“There are no secrets from me.”
I hadn’t moved in a while yet I was utterly exhausted. Reliving
almost four thousand years of one’s life took a lot out of you. I bent over
and put my hands on my knees. I shook my head in an attempt to totally
clear my head but a few stray thoughts remained. They were the
questions I wanted to ask. First, I wanted to clarify something. “If you’re
in my mind, you can control it.”
“I can, but I do not. I do not interfere in the everyday choices
people make. I observe. I do not intrude.”
“Fair enough,” I mumbled. Regaining my composure, I
straightened up and asked, “So what happened to The Beholder?”
To explain what I felt would be impossible. The only way to
accurately describe it would be to say the wind smiled. The breeze kicked
up some stray leaves. Soon, small whirlwinds formed and scooped up
more and more leaves. The leaves bounced from one twister to another
in a display of aerobatic brilliance. More and more leaves joined the
dance until the small twisters merged into one. Hundreds of leaves
floated higher and higher into the sky. When the breeze subsided, the
leaves fell from the treetops. Before the first one landed, the voice of
Each said, “A judgment was made and his sentence was carried out.” I
wouldn’t say the voice sounded happy about The Beholder’s demise, but
he most assuredly wasn’t upset about it.
“Judgment made by whom?” I asked.
“His fellow Ancients. There was a conference of sorts where
Propheteus informed us of The Beholder's intentions. The Beholder was
planning to take control of the portals on Earth. He would decide who
could pass and who could not. If a being arrived from the portal that The
Beholder did not want present, it would be slaughtered. Had he
succeeded, he would’ve controlled what beings roamed the planet, thereby
essentially holding Haven and Haedes hostage. It is why you were first
brought to Egypt, for there is a portal not far from where you once called
home. To achieve his objectives, he needed your leadership, your logical

232

mind to be able to overthrow leaders and races around the world. Your
decision to reject his arguments about order ruined his plans. That was
why he felt you had to be terminated. His actions that day, as well as
many others spanning all the years since his return, has caused irreparable
damage to future events.
"Christi Lona and Lillith were present at the meeting as well.
They had been asked by Tag and Nacht to inform us of The Beholder’s
belligerence in regards to you and your sister. Tag and Nacht were privy
to the prophecy that foretold of your death. Neither of them, however,
knew which realm you would be called to upon death. There were many
people who were very interested in that information.”
“Why on earth would my death be so important?” I asked,
appalled at such a macabre notion.
“Had you gone to Haedes upon your death, you may have been
the one to fulfill a prophecy told only to Lillith. The same holds true with
Christi Lona had you gone to Haven. Since you showed up in Limbo,
they both knew you weren’t the one they were waiting for.
“So they both wanted me to die?”
“Yes, but naturally. Prophecy cannot be forced. It must occur
naturally, without undue pressure. Forcing the issue only causes problems
in the future. Only Tag and Nacht knew of your pending death by The
Beholder’s hand. Propheteus doles out his writings to those he believes
should have them. His choices do not always make sense at first.
Personally, I stopped doubting his wisdom eons ago.”
“Can we get back to the topic please?” I no longer wanted to talk
about how everyone was waiting for me to die. It was morbid.
“Absolutely. Christi Lona, Lillith and the Ancients decided that
drastic measures would have to be taken in regards to The Beholder.
Christi Lona and Lillith were assigned to kill The Beholder, and before
you ask, yes, you can indeed kill an Ancient. Only the most powerful
beings in the universe, working in concert with one another, can even
dream of attempting it. Christi Lona and Lillith are two of those people.
The Will Cosmic gave them the ability to dispose of The Beholder
permanently.
“Christi Lona refused to kill him. She believed it was not justified
to destroy him. He should be punished, just not killed. Even though all
others disagreed, a compromise was reached. The sisters were taken aside
by one of the Ancients and told how to hurt him badly without killing
him. Since it left him alive, which was important to Christi Lona, and
caused immeasurable pain, which of course appealed to Lillith, it was a
good compromise. They were given pass to Earth by Styx for the sole

233

purpose of dealing with The Beholder and were then called back to their
realms.”
I stood there and let his words fade away. It was a lot to think
about after all these years. The memory of The Beholder’s fall was never
gone from my mind. After Each’s little show, I guess no memory ever
faded completely. After I digested all the information, I said, “I guess I
have two questions. First, where is the mask?”
“It is safe,” came the brisk answer. From the increase in the wind
when the words passed by, I assumed nothing else need be said on the
topic.
“Second, who told the sisters how to hurt him?”
The wind laughed and the leaves that had cascaded over us
moments ago flew into the air again. “It was not me, I assure you.”
“I don't care who it wasn't. I asked who it was.” I decided it was
time to take charge of this conversation.
“Very well. Who do you believe it was?”
“Can’t you read it in my mind?” I asked sarcastically.
“Actually, no. I see the different possibilities and theories but no
one definite thought. I will say that it is not the person you most strongly
believe to be the guilty party.”
“Genepool?”
“Correct. Though he did deceive you, The Beholder’s downfall
was his own. Genepool played no part except to vote at the council.”
“Why is it that every answer from you gives me more questions?”
“The vote was unanimous,” he answered before I could ask. “But
for your original question, it was in fact Styx that imparted her knowledge
to the sisters. She gets along quite well with both Lillith and Christi Lona.
That is information worth remembering by the way.”
“Styx didn’t seem too fond of him when I met her,” I
commented.
“The Beholder is not very well liked, as the vote tally should
imply. Had Zaron not been resting, I am sure she would’ve voted the
same way. He has a certain attribute none of the other Ancients share, at
least not at his level.”
“And what is that?” I prodded.
“Arrogance,” Each replied. The word blew by and pounded in
my ears. Though the mouth on his body moved with mine, when he
spoke or reacted to my words, the head would move normally. The
expression I saw on that familiar face showed nothing but disgust and
contempt.
“I noticed,” I replied, rubbing my chest where he had impaled me

234

millennia ago. My physical scars always faded rapidly, from that first
attack by The Beholder and beyond. The memory and the mental
scarring that went with it remained to this day.
“I do not feel much is lost by his absence myself. We have
different philosophies.”
“So I finally get to hear your take on order,” I said. I was truly
eager to hear his thoughts on the topic. Besides, this marked the end of
an almost four thousand year task. I was to hear from all available
Ancients and now it would finally come to pass.
“I have no definition of order for you, just advice. This is only
the way I see things. Everyone is different.”
“Believe me, I know,” I replied with a laugh. I had seen so many
varied races and peoples that I’d come to the conclusion order was not
going to be an easy thing to establish worldwide.
“I’m sure you do,” the wind laughed back. My mind had finally
grasped the concept of Each’s voice being separate from his body and had
fallen into conversation with him easily. It was good to see he had a sense
of humor too. “In every town you’ve come upon you’ve taken your time,
talked to a few of the people, visited the local shops and gathered as many
facts as possible. From there, you made a conclusion as to whether or not
you could help and if you could, how. I’ve witnessed you lift a tiny village
from abject ruin and make it a viable society again, and I’ve see you help
topple great empires that stretched over many lands. I’ve seen you take
matters into your own hands and slaughter entire towns as well. You
have leaned away from violence yet not once have you hesitated to use
your aggressive gifts when necessary. Your self-restraint and control have
helped you in immeasurable ways. Along with your ability to assess all
relevant facts and draw accurate conclusions, most of the time, they are
your greatest assets. It is what has made you able to push the evolution of
society forward. Now you must bring them together.”
“Bring them together? How?” Each seemed to be proposing the
exact opposite of what Gilmore and The Hunger had advised. I stood
still, patiently waiting for the headache to start in earnest.
“When societies work together, they flourish. I’ve noticed you
have put Gilmore’s advice into practice on occasion. I do not believe
isolation is good for the people of a village. They don’t get to share in
vast experiences. They don’t get to see new things, visit new places or
meet new people. Also, they don’t get to share their knowledge with
others. Everyone has something to offer a society. It was not the
architects that built the castles of England or the pyramids in Egypt. It
was people, toiling everyday, who built these things. Laborers, masons,

235

carpenters, these people all serve a purpose. The shopkeepers, the
blacksmiths, the innkeepers, a town cannot survive without these people.
In a village, if a man is a skilled carpenter and his neighbor is not and
needs assistance, the man will most often gladly help. If this is true, why
shouldn’t a village that has several skilled carpenters help a village that
does not? Maybe that village has more proficient blacksmiths. Could
they not help each other in this instance? When every village can live in
peace and harmony, becoming one with each other, order cannot only be
established, it can be maintained with less and less influence from you as
time goes on. If they are teaching each other, helping each other to grow
and prosper, have you not accomplished your goals? Good and evil,
living side-by-side and cooperating on a base level. Cast your nets wide,
Aggression, and bring them all into one.”
His words rang in my head. It made sense on the surface but
omitted one vital piece of data. The nature of evil was to kill. There
could never be peace this way. Each’s advice was worth the wait
however. I could picture a world where everyone lived together, working
towards common goals. I wasn’t sure if Each was putting that image
there or if it was my own. He said he didn’t interfere but I’d been lied to
by an Ancient before. After careful consideration, I thanked him for
taking the time to impart his wisdom to me and turned to leave. I took
one step and got pushed back by a wall of solid air.
“Believe it or not, that is not the most vital information I must
pass along,” the voice spoke with clear reservation.
I turned back and looked at the image of Each. His head was
bowed again and I assumed he was unenthusiastic about the next part of
our conversation. “Then what is?” I asked.
“I must advise you to go to Egypt.”
“Absolutely not,” I replied emphatically and without hesitation.
“Aggression, it is essential that you leave here and go directly to
Egypt.”
I paused to let my temper subside before saying, “As long as I
don’t have to go near her, I’ll go to Egypt.”
“Aggression, why else would you need to go there?”
“Absolutely not!”
The wind never ceased but the words did. Once my anger had
again abated, Each continued. His voice was as calm as when I’d first
heard it. “There is a very good reason. Would you like to hear it?”
“I have a very good reason for not bothering my sister. Would
you care to hear that?” I mockingly replied.
“I already know it.”

236

“Of course you do.”
“Please do not be upset with me, Aggression. What I have to tell
you is in fact good news, in a way. When you tell Valencia what I have
said, she may not be as upset as you imagine. May I at least speak my
piece? After that, I will let you make your own decision.”
“Fair enough,” I replied.
“Twelve years ago, two brothers were born onto the Earth. These
brothers are unlike nearly every other being on the planet…”
“Stop right there!” I demanded. I was furious. He was talking
about Love and Hate. I was sure of it. For twelve years, our brothers had
been walking this realm and we weren’t told. “Why am I only hearing
about this now?”
“Because your influence, and your sisters for that matter, would
be too powerful for them at such a young age. They did not have the
same benefits you enjoyed. They were born as mere babies and grew with
only human influence for half their lives. The last six have been spent in
slavery to a man named Nathaniel Graves. A human as well, Nathaniel
Graves is no mere mortal. Graves is a powerful master of the majicks,
both light and dark. He is a dark individual, cruel and unforgiving of the
smallest transgression. Though human, his influence is not. This
evening, Nathaniel Graves will kill one of them. Which one at this time is
unknown, even this close to the actual event.
“They do not know who they are, Aggression. They do not
understand why, at the tender age of twelve, they are as tall as many adults
and many times stronger. They can hear each other’s thoughts but cannot
comprehend why. All the knowledge you’ve revealed to the world over
the millennia is unknown to them. The existence of the Ancients is but a
story their adopted parents told them. The Aseraphim are but a fantasy.
They do not know these things for they have been in the ethereal for
eons. Their spirits, their auras, have not faded, but without Order and
Chaos by their side they failed to retain their concept of self. That is why
they had to be born as infants. They needed to be allowed to grow as
naturally as possible. Now one of them will die and they will need to
know. You need to go to Egypt, tell Valencia what I have told you, and
wait.”
“Wait? Why can’t I stop it?”
“Because it has to happen,” the voice said sadly.
I was growing tired of that excuse. “Fine. Then why do I have to
wait when I get to Egypt? Why can’t we just go to where they are?”
“Because you must wait for someone. An escort, if you will.”
“Who?”

237

“I do not know at this time. It depends on who dies and how.
There will be another that will join you. Of that I am most sure.”
“And after that?”
“I recommend you have your sister wait with the slain sibling.
When he returns from whichever realm he was destined for, he will most
likely be very disoriented.”
“And she’s supposed to help?” I asked sarcastically.
“When it comes to her family, Valencia can be trusted. She will
comfort the slain until you complete your task.”
“And that task is…”
“To judge and punish Nathaniel Graves as you see fit.”
I nodded. It sounded simple enough. “I guess I’m off to Egypt
then,” I said unenthusiastically.
“I believe so. Be well, Aggression. Remember all that we’ve
discussed and use it well.”
“I will. It truly has been an honor,” I said sincerely.
“For me as well.” As his words faded with the wind, the figure of
Each dissolved into a small whirlwind and dissipated into the remaining
breeze.
Now I had to go break a promise. Well, not really a promise. It
was more like a deal. Somehow, I knew the finer distinction would be
lost on Valencia. Knowing I was in for a serious verbal bashing upon
arrival, I sprinted off for the pyramids of Egypt.

238

Chapter 16
The sun was still high in the sky when I arrived at the pyramid,
bringing with it unbearable heat. The great pyramid had weathered much
in the centuries since I’d seen in last. I wanted to visit the village while I
was here, just to see if it was still standing, but time was of the essence. I
was about to go in when a young man approached. He eyed me up
suspiciously and I had to admit, I looked very different from everyone
else around.
"Who are you?" he asked.
"My name is none of your concern," I replied as politely as
possible.
"You aren't going in there, are you?" He was visibly shaken by the
prospect.
"Yes, I am. Why?"
"Many men have ventured into the pyramid. Very few ever
return. Those that do have been driven insane by what they've witnessed.
They say the Labyrinth swallows them whole. I would not enter that
cursed place for all the Pharaoh's gold."
I smiled warmly at the nervous gentleman and replied, "There's no
need to worry about me, sir, but I appreciate your concern. I assure you,
I'll be fine."
"Then you take a greater risk than I," he said and quickly ran off.
I could only imagine what Valencia was doing to these poor people to
make them react in such a way. If time permitted, I planned to talk to her
about it.
The moment I entered the pyramid, the path to the Labyrinth
came rushing back to me. My mind felt so open and free since my visit
from Each. Every thought and memory I possessed was instantly
available. That all changed the closer I got to the Labyrinth. My
headache started out small until I got to the first intersection. By the time
I reached the entrance to the Labyrinth of Chaos, it was as if someone
was swinging a mallet inside my head and battering the inside of my skull.
I wanted to get this over with as quickly as possible so I sprinted
into the maze. A few seconds and a few wrong turns later I saw the walls
shift. The majicks Set placed in motion so long ago apparently still held
their power. I continued running as the walls reset. I didn't mind the
moving partitions as much as the corpses.
Down every corridor there was at least one dead body. I paused
the first time I came across one and came to the conclusion the man had
died of dehydration. His body was severely decayed and I could only

239

guess at how long it had been down here. Every corpse I encountered
seemingly suffered the same fate. After getting lost in the Labyrinth they
just sat down to die, exhausted and most probably insane.
I was moving faster and faster through the maze. Going so fast, I
didn't see the man wandering aimlessly until I was almost on top of him.
I slowed down as fast as I could but still bumped into him. He pitched
forward but did not fall. Stranger still, he never turned around. He kept
wandering along, oblivious to my presence. I stepped around and looked
into his face. The moment I saw the look on his face I regretted it. This
man was clearly insane. He was smiling but behind his eyes was abject
madness. He glanced over at me and just kept walking. Since I was on a
schedule and he didn't appear to be in any physical danger or hurt in any
way, I continued past him in search of my sister.
The walls kept repositioning themselves constantly, making my
mission more challenging than I cared for. After three hours of top speed
running, I finally reached the center of the maze. All those years ago,
upon arriving at this place, Valencia and I rescued Ihmo from Set's grasp
in this very chamber. This time, it appeared empty.
"Val! Are you here?" I yelled.
She darted out from behind a curtain. To my amazement, she
looked worried. Running over to me, she leapt up and hugged me. "Are
you okay?" she asked excitedly. "You got killed, didn't you?"
"What?" I blurted out, thrown off by her question. This was not
what I had expected.
"After you left here you died, didn't you? It was only a few weeks
later." The concern on her face and in her voice left me dumbfounded.
"It happened, didn't it? Was it The Beholder? I bet it was. I never did
like him, and I tried to tell you…"
"How did you know? Did one of your teachers tell you?"
"No they didn't, Aggression," she said, humorously lilting her
voice when mentioning my nom de plume. "I felt it."
"What? How?" The confusion never ended with her. I was with
her less than a minute and just like that, I had no idea what was going on.
"It's like this," she replied and held her right hand out palm up.
She closed her eyes for a moment and when she opened them I saw an
image appear. It was a perfect, three-dimensional rendering of the planet.
"Pretty cool, isn't it? It's only an illusion obviously. So far, it's the only
spell I can do with any proficiency. Anyway, that's not what I wanted to
show you."
"Would you get to the point? I have something I have to talk to
you about."

240

"In a minute. Watch." As I gazed at the globe, a blanket of black
and yellow began to cover the surface. "This is what the world looked
like about four thousand years ago. You'll notice Atlantia is still on the
surface."
"I see that," I said as I spotted it underneath the floating masses of
yellow and black.
"What you see is the influence you and I had on the planet at the
time. You're yellow, of course."
I looked at my outfit. I still dressed in yellow and red all the time.
"Of course. But why are you represented by black?"
"Why do you think?"
I looked into her light green eyes hidden behind her bright blonde
hair. Though she had spent several millennia in Egypt, one of the hottest
locations on the planet, she'd been able to maintain her pale skin color.
She dressed in white from head to toe and had from day one. "I have no
idea. Personally, it doesn’t make any sense at all."
"Exactly. Anyway, a few weeks after you left, something began to
happen." A small section of a yellow mass began to quiver. It was
located directly over Atlantia. I could make a good guess and say it was
directly over the spot where The Beholder killed me. Valencia waved her
left hand through the globe and continued, "I didn't actually see this
happen. It's just a way for me to tell you what I felt."
"I get it, but can we finish this later."
"No," she offhandedly replied. "That feeling went on for about
thirty seconds. The whole time it felt like someone was sticking daggers
in my chest. Suddenly, the hole appeared." The place that had been
quaking before now dropped, forming a cylinder that seemed bottomless.
Tiny drops of yellow fell into the chasm and disappeared. "That's when
you died. I know, because it felt like those daggers that had been driven
into me were violently ripped out. Then there was nothing."
She paused and I saw a tear form in her eye. She looked up at me
and saw the impatience in my gaze. "Keep going," I urged.
She wiped the tear away with her free hand and resumed. "After a
minute or two, the hole patched itself up." The yellow funnel instantly
filled back up and everything looked like it had when she started. "So,
you did really die?"
"Yes, I did."
"And I sensed it."
"It would seem that way," I replied.
"Good." She let out a sigh of relief and relaxed. That lasted
about three seconds. Gruffly, she asked, "So, why are you here? You're

241

breaking your promise."
"It wasn't a promise. We had a deal."
"Oh, so you're only going back on a deal, not breaking a promise.
That doesn't sound much better, does it?" Her voice was getting louder
the angrier she got. This was what I’d been waiting for.
"No, it doesn't. You know what else? I don't care. I was told to
be here so I'm here. If you don't like it, take it up with him!" I shouted.
"So I see you're still taking orders from others. Some things never
change," she said cynically.
"Val, when an Ancient tells me to do something…"
"Like The Beholder?"
"It was Each."
"And this makes a difference?" she sarcastically replied.
I took a deep breath, exhaled, and as calmly as I could muster said,
"Valencia, sit down. Or stand, I don't care. But you are going to listen to
what I have to say. It is very important."
"What could be so important that you would break your
promise…"
"Our deal," I corrected.
"…and show up here? You leave me alone, I leave you alone.
Remember?"
"Valencia, Love and Hate have been born."
That worked. Her mood swings, problematic as they may be
sometimes, were a sight to behold. Her face went from contorted and
angry to shocked and elated in a heartbeat. "Really? Where are they?"
"I don't know. There's more." Valencia sat down in a chair as I
paced around the room. "They've been on this plane for the last twelve
years."
"Impossible," she contested.
"It's true."
"Can't be. Someone would've told us." She was on the verge of
tears again.
"They had their reasons and they're good ones."
"So they sent you to tell me about it? They don't even think I'm
worth the time to do it themselves, is that it?" With that outburst, tears
began to flow down her cheeks.
"Val, it's not that at all. In fact, I'm here because we're going to go
see them. They wanted us together to make it easier."
"Really?" she asked, wiping away her tears. "You aren't just saying
that to cheer me up, are you?"
"No, I'm completely serious. Trust me." I winked at her after

242

using her trademark reply.
I got the smile I was looking for. Instantly, she was happy again.
"So when do we go?" she excitedly asked.
"I don't know. There is one more thing I have to tell you
though."
And just like that, glee was replaced with exasperation. "What
now?"
"There's a problem with one of them," I replied.
"A problem? What kind of problem?" she demanded.
As I opened my mouth to answer, the room was suddenly awash
in a brilliant, white light. I saw Valencia squinting as I covered my own
eyes. As the light diminished we saw before us Cherub, protectorate of
Haven. His glorious wings were unfurled and he appeared on the verge
of panic. He stepped towards us and placed a hand on each of our
shoulders.
"We have to go," he curtly said.
Valencia quickly ducked away from him. "Excuse me?"
"Valencia, there is no time for this!" Cherub hollered at her.
"Cherub, my brother was in the middle of telling me something
very important and you interrupted," she scolded.
Cherub went to reply and I held him back. "Valencia, I'm sure
Cherub didn't mean to be rude by his intrusion. Now, we have to get
going. Are you coming along or not?"
"We're going to see Love and Hate, right?" she asked.
"Yes!" Cherub and I both shouted at her.
As soon as she was close enough, Cherub placed his hand on her
shoulder. A flash of light lit up everything around us and I was
temporarily blinded by the intensity of it. The radiant glow faded quickly
but the spots in front of my eyes didn't. Thankfully it didn't take too long
to recover. When I could see clearly again, I couldn't believe my eyes.
The scene was sheer chaos. Now I knew why Each said Valencia
would be helpful. We were in the foyer of a castle watchtower. The
room was very dimly lit. Only two candles burned at opposite ends of the
room, casting an ominous glow. We appeared directly beside one of these
candles, furthest from the entrance. The only other faint light was from a
burning hole in the wall near the entrance. In the center of the foyer was
a man. At first glance, the unknowing would assume he was in his late
teens. I knew better. This was one of my brothers. He was slightly
shorter than me, with coal black hair and luminous blue eyes. Years of
indentured servitude had toned his body into a lean, muscular specimen.

243

I glanced around and saw another person in the room. It was my other
brother. He looked exactly like the first, except for the large wound
winding from his hip to his temple. I still had no idea which one was
Love and which was Hate. All I knew was he was running for the door
and fast. I darted for the exit and stepped in front of my fleeing brother.
“He’s going to get away,” he cried.
“Relax, he can’t outrun us,” I assured him. I looked over at
Cherub as he told Valencia to keep an eye on Patrick. I now knew his
name on Earth, but I still didn’t know if he was Love or Hate.
Unfortunately, now was not the time to try and sort it out.
I stepped back inside as Cherub went around me. Without
warning, Cherub was violently thrown back through the door of the tower
directly into me. Cherub was agile enough to stay upright but I fell into
my brother and we collapsed into a heap.
“Do not try to stop me brother,” came a familiar voice from the
darkness. It was the mistress of evil herself, Lady Lillith. “He will be a
prize to offer my prodigal nephew for when he comes to my side.” She
glanced at my brother, who was struggling to get up, and smiled fondly.
“He didn’t know, Lillith,” Cherub protested.
“I don’t care,” she replied. “And neither will his new lord and
master.” With that, she stepped into a shadow and disappeared.
“I saw him running for the castle and disappear into the darkness
before you got here,” the child said as we got to our feet.
“Teleportation. Damn it,” I cursed.
“Watch you language,” came a dull voice from the corner.
Valencia was still standing next to the candle where we’d first appeared.
She was staring blankly at our slain brother. I had to hope she would
snap out of it when he regained consciousness. Right now, she wasn’t my
primary concern.
“Sorry,” I mumbled back at her. Turning back to the Aseraphim,
I asked, “Cherub, can you tell where he is?”
“He’s in the library,” my brother answered for him.
“How do you know?”
“It’s where his spellbooks are. It’s where I’d go if I were him.”
Without a word, Cherub vanished in a brilliant flash of light. I
looked at my brother and asked, “How do we get to the library?” When
he had given me the directions, I picked him up, told him to hold on, and
took off.
I stopped just short of the library and put my passenger down.
He didn’t hesitate one second and rushed in headlong. I followed him
and knew right away we were too late.

244

Cherub was just inside the doorway staring at Lillith and her
captive. “Lillith, do not kill him.”
“Who do you think you are, telling me what to do?” she replied.
She was caressing Graves’s neck with her razor-sharp fingernails. Graves
was petrified, shocked into silence at his current situation.
“There is no need to kill him. He has done good in the past.”
“That is the past. He has enslaved our family for years and now
he kills one of them, and you say he should live?” She took one of her
talons and placed it on his neck, pressing ever so gently on his jugular
vein. “Give me one good reason why I shouldn’t just slice him open right
now and let him slowly bleed out like the pig he is.”
“The Beholder was allowed to live,” I reminded her.
She glared at me with her hollow black eyes. “That he was, but
not by my choosing. I’m surprised to hear you defend this filth, especially
by invoking the name of your father.”
“It’s not your job to judge him.”
“Oh, right,” she laughed. “That’s for you and Styx. In this case,
I’m sure she won’t mind.” Her voice lowered to a seductive growl as she
added, “Neither should you.”
Cherub withdrew his sword and pointed it at Lillith, “Let him go,”
he warned.
“Never! Because of him, the prophecy of Light will transpire
before the Dark. This cannot be allowed!” she roared.
Cherub smiled, feeding Lillith’s anger. “You jump to conclusions
too often, dear sister. The slain child is no longer in Haven nor has he
returned to his physical self.”
Lillith laughed. “Then I shall deliver him to his lord and master
now.” She looked at my brother and said with a laugh, “And here I was
going to kill him for you.” Grinning, she stopped caressing, and plunged
her talons into her captive’s neck. With one swift motion she tore out his
throat. Blood spurted as his heart continued beating. Lillith bent down
and commenced to drink his blood. Crimson droplets flew from her lips
and his throat and sprayed onto various books and scrolls. Graves kicked
a moment longer, and then went still. Lillith let his limp body fall to the
floor. Flashing her darkly beautiful smile, she dropped into a shadow and
was gone.
The three of us were alone in the library. The boy was crying, so I
put my arm around him to comfort him. “Don’t let what you saw disturb
you. She won’t harm you.”
He brusquely shrugged my arm away. “Who are you?” he
demanded. “What is going on? Graves killed my brother and all of a

245

sudden people keep appearing out of nowhere!”
I opened my mouth to answer but Cherub cut me off. “Can I talk
to you privately for a moment?” he asked me. I nodded and asked my
brother to stay put and I’d answer everything he wanted to know. What I
didn’t tell him was I’d probably end up telling him many things he didn’t
want to know too.
Cherub and I left the library, closing the door behind us. Alone in
the hallway, I asked, “What is going on here?”
“I do not have much time, so I’m afraid I cannot go into great
detail,” he responded. “Inside this library is your brother, Love. He is
known as Maelduin. His brother is Patrick, whom you know as Hate.
They do not remember who they truly are or their time in the ethereal.
With Order and Chaos gone…”
“Yeah, I got all that from Each. Get to the point.”
“My apologies. This evening, Maelduin attempted to cast a
binding spell on himself and his brother. Nathaniel Graves interrupted
and tried to kill Maelduin for his impudence. Patrick jumped in the way
and saved his brother’s life. For his selfless act, he was granted access to
Haven. That is where the complications started.
“As far as life on Earth was concerned, Patrick was in Haven for
less than a heartbeat in time. That was long enough for Lillith to assume
that the prophecy of Light was going to come to pass. She passed to this
realm to vent her anger at Nathaniel Graves. It also seems she was going
to kill him as a prize to Maelduin under the misapprehension that he was
the one the prophecy of Dark foretells of. While she was on Earth,
Patrick’s essence arrived in Haedes. I knew this for I was by Christi
Lona’s side as she passed judgment on poor Patrick.” A tear ran down
the Aseraphim’s cheek and he casually wiped it away.
"Why did you care if Lillith killed him or not? Seems to me as if
he got what was coming to him."
"As I told Lillith, Graves did some good works in the past. Lately
he has been nothing more than a cruel taskmaster to your siblings. Still,
his actions should be judged by Styx in due time. He may have had a
chance to redeem himself on Earth or he could've passed to Limbo for
redemption. I'm not sure if Graves could have redeemed himself or not,
but he should've had the choice."
“So where do Valencia and I fit in?”
“All that was required of her was to stand watch over Patrick until
his return. You have a much larger task.”
“I have to tell Maelduin and Patrick who they are,” I presumed.
“Actually, you only need to tell Maelduin. Christi Lona has

246

already told Patrick much about his family. With what you tell Maelduin,
the pieces should come together quickly for them both. These two are
very close, Aggression. One learns as the other learns. Their minds are
linked not only telepathically but also on a much deeper level. Only the
Will and Power Cosmic are more closely linked. The only time they
cannot visit the other’s thoughts is when one resides in another realm.”
“Like now,” I remarked.
“Exactly. Maelduin cannot understand why he still senses his
brother’s essence but not his thoughts. All Maelduin receives is a sense of
fear, of violence and torment.”
“I’m glad Valencia and I don’t share that trait.” I knew it was the
wrong time for such comments. I just needed to release some of the
stress from the day’s events. When the sun rose this morning, I was
walking alone in Persia about to document another species in the Book of
Nature Lore. Then it was a rapid succession of maddening episodes. On
top of it all, I still had to explain to Maelduin about his existence and the
world around him. If I didn’t let out at least a small joke, my head was
going to explode.
Cherub reacted to my uneasy laughter with a smile. “Thank you
for your help with her earlier.”
“You just have to know how to talk to her,” I said nonchalantly.
“I must go, Aggression. Be well, and tell him what he needs to
know,” Cherub said as a bright light engulfed him. The light faded and I
was alone in the hallway.
I steeled myself for the task ahead. I’d traveled the world for
centuries, taught societies how to evolve and advance their cultures,
taught the masses about the natural world and the many uses for various
plant life. I’d even spread the story of Atlantia for ages. Now I had to tell
my brother, who had no knowledge of his origins, everything I could
about his existence and his family. This task was going to be no easier
than the others.
I swung open the door to the library, ready to tell Maelduin what
he needed to know about himself. I was startled to see he was ready for
something else entirely. He had an open spellbook in one hand and his
other hand was raised to the door. Before he could do anything
disastrous, I zipped over and snatched the book from his grasp.
“There’s no need for majicks, Maelduin. I’m not going to hurt
you,” I told him.
“Who are you?” he demanded to know once more. “And how did
you move so fast?”

247

“My name is Vincent and explaining how I move like I do would
take time that we do not have. There is much I need to tell you and I
believe our time may be somewhat limited.”
“I have all the time in the world. My brother is dead and my
master has been murdered,” he said sorrowfully.
“That is why time is so valuable right now. Our brother will be
returning soon.”
“Our brother?”
“Yes, Maelduin, our brother. You see, I am your brother and the
woman accompanying me is your sister.”
Maelduin dropped to the floor and sat, weeping quietly. “I’m so
confused,” he sobbed.
I knelt down and helped him up. “I will tell you all I can,
Maelduin. You may not believe all I have to tell you but it will be the
truth. Please, sit down and I’ll do my best to ease your confusion.”
Maelduin did as I asked and I proceeded to tell him of his origins.
I explained the Ancients first, then the Aseraphim. His intelligence was
evident as he asked very pointed questions as I was talking. He had
surprisingly few questions and readily accepted the information I was
passing along. When I told him of our creation in the ethereal, a warm
smile formed on his face. I got a sense, somewhere deep in his mind, he
could faintly remember his life before this one. After a while, he
remarked how some of what I was telling him not only sounded true but
also felt true. According to Maelduin, it was familiar in a way a book he’d
read was familiar. I tried to pry more information from him about this
book but he was done talking about it. Still, I had gained his trust. I
suggested we depart from the library and return to the watchtower.
I finished up my lesson on his origins as we walked across the
field from the castle to the watchtower. When we reached the tower, I
told Maelduin to stay outside until I checked everything out. Since
Cherub was able to stay on this realm for a while after Lillith left, I had to
assume she did not leave right away. I wanted to make sure she didn’t do
anything to Patrick.
I peeked inside and saw Valencia still standing immobile in the
corner. Her gaze never left the body on the floor. Without warning,
Patrick began to stir. Valencia finally came out of the corner and walked
over to Patrick’s side. I went back to Maelduin and told him it was safe to
enter. I also warned him of his brother’s scarred appearance.
The four of us were together for the first time since my sister and
I had been born to this realm. Our reunion wasn’t the joyous occasion I
had hoped it would be. Sadly there was nothing I could do to ease

248

Patrick’s turmoil. Having accomplished my task of educating them about
their true selves, I escorted Valencia outside and prepared to leave. If
only life were that simple.
I looked up to the sky when we got outside. The night sky was
overcast but some moonlight shone through. I wanted to get my bearings
so I could get pointed in the right direction to take Valencia back to
Egypt. She had other ideas. Once out of earshot of our younger siblings,
she vented her frustrations.
“So this is what you call a problem?” she shouted. “Not only
were our brothers brought to bear in this realm without our knowledge
but when we first get to see them, one of them is dead? If that’s a
problem, what do you call a crisis?”
“Valencia, calm down,” I steadily replied.
“Don’t even start with that!” she retorted, wagging her finger as
she yelled. “You broke your word to show me our dead brother. Calm
isn’t really something I’m capable of at the moment.”
“I broke my word for a good reason.”
“According to you. I had to stay there with his dead body. Yes, I
knew he’d come back, but that doesn’t change the fact that he was dead
when I got here.”
I heard a rumbling in the distance and looked up to the sky again.
The few clouds I’d seen at first had multiplied and the sky turned darker
with every word from my sister’s mouth. “Someone needed to stay with
him until he regained consciousness.”
“And it had to be me?”
“Yes, it did. I had to go after his killer.”
Valencia’s eyes were glowing brightly as she floated up to eye
level. “If you ever think about disturbing me again, don’t. I don’t want to
see you. I don’t want to hear from you. I don’t want to acknowledge
your existence. Do you understand?” A bolt of lightning cracked the sky
as she shouted at me. The rumble of thunder was louder this time and
echoes rolled down the valley.
“I understand.”
“Do you promise?”
Hesitantly, I replied, “I can’t promise anything. If it weren’t for
Each’s direction, I wouldn’t have come to you this time. Who knows
what will happen in the future?”
“Make an effort.” One more flash of lightning lit up the sky.
This bolt struck the ground a few hundred yards from us and ignited a
tree. The thunder was so loud I couldn’t hear my own thoughts.
“That I will promise you.”

249

She floated back down to the ground and glared up at me. “I
guess we have a deal.” She turned her back to me and started to walk
away.
“Do you want me to give you a ride back to Egypt?” I asked.
“Nope,” she replied cheerfully. “I’m going to walk back. And
I’m going to take my time about it too.”
“What about staying in Egypt like you said?”
“What about you not bothering me, like you said? This is your
punishment, brother. Besides, you’ve had millennia to get a foothold for
order on Earth. I’d like to see firsthand how much progress you’ve
made.”
“And change it where you can,” I surmised.
She smiled broadly and said, “Whenever possible.” She turned
from me again and casually walked away.
I stood there momentarily to gather myself. It was not as if I
expected her to be happy about all of this, but she didn’t have to take it so
badly. The sky cleared up a tad as she left and I could clearly see Patrick
and Maelduin standing in the archway of the watchtower. There was not
much more I could do for the two of them. It was now in their hands to
decide their futures. I could only hope they would make the correct
choices as time moved on. I was hopeful as well that we’d meet up again.
Next time, maybe it would be under more favorable circumstances.
With the thought of a future encounter with my brothers to
comfort me, I decided to go back to Persia and pick up where I’d left off.
After finishing up in Persia I would not be returning to my life in Europe.
I needed to get back into the world. With Valencia roaming the land
temporarily, I couldn’t afford to rest on my laurels. I glanced at my
brothers one last time and sped off for Persia.

250

Epilogue
The old man careful closed his book and placed it in his satchel.
Crickets chipped deep in the wood, and other than the occasional owl no
other creature stirred in the forest. It was as if nature itself was
eavesdropping on the story. The fire they'd set up had been stoked
several times during the evening and was now burning out its last embers.
He looked at his son and saw eagerness in his eyes. "That is all for this
evening, my son."
"But what happened to Aggression?” he asked.
The father let out a pleasant laugh and replied, "He continued to
do what he was charged to do. He traveled the world, spreading the
lessons of Atlantia and nature everywhere he visited. Along the way, he
learned a few things himself. However, those stories are for another day."
"Is he still alive?"
"Aggression? Very much so. We may even be granted the honor
of his company eventually. One never knows where Lord Aggression will
show up next."
"Does he get to see his brothers and sister again?" the child
pressed.
"My son, there will be time enough for those stories later. You
must first learn about the siblings themselves. Otherwise, tales told in the
future will make very little sense at all."
The child contemplated these words for a bit before speaking
again. "So are you going to tell me about Aggression's sister next?"
The old man frowned at this question. "No, child, I am not.
Although she was the other one brought to this realm with Aggression,
her story is for another day as well."
"Can you please tell me just one more, father?" the child pleaded.
"I can stay awake. I promise."
The father smiled lovingly at his son and tousled his hair. "I have
no doubt. However, just because you can doesn't mean you should. You
need your rest."
"But I'm not tired," he protested.
"I'm not surprised. But I will not be telling anymore stories this
evening, so you may as well attempt to get some sleep."
The child, ever obedient, did as he was told. He retrieved his
bedroll and spread it out not far from the dying fire. "So which sibling
will I learn about next?"
The boy crawled into his bedroll and squirmed around until he
was comfortable. His father leaned down and kissed him on the

251

forehead. "That is for tomorrow, my son. The next story is best told in
the light."

