The Nocturne
Book One

Jordan S. Scott

Blackthorne Media

I

LONDON

J

This is a Griffon Book Published by
Blackthorne Media Group
Text Copyright © 2005 -2006 by Jordan S. Scott
Jacket art copyright ©2006 by Jerry Vanderstelt
All rights reserved under International and
Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Published in the United States by Griffon Publishing,
an imprint of Blackthorne Media Group.

Blackthorne Publications, Griffon Publishing and all
characters of the Nocturne are registered trademarks of
Blackthorne Media Group.
www.jordanscott.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Scott, Jordan.
Nocturne/Jordan Scott
Printed in the United States of America
First Griffon trade paperback edition: July, 2006
ISBN 10: 0-9777996-9-7
ISBN 13: 978-0-9-9777996-9-5

123456789

I would like to dedicate this to my mom,
who is always here for me.

Acknowledgments
I owe tremendous thanks to Blackthorne Media and
Griffon Publishing, but I would like, first and foremost, to
thank my mom, for supporting me in everything I do and
for encouraging me to finish this project. I would also like
to thank the rest of my family, for hours and hours of
reading random scenes at random intervals, and for going
through the entire book, word after word, when it was
finally finished. And a little shout-out to my friends—
Thank you for your support, especially the people who have
been asking me for years, “Did you ever finish that book?”
Now that I have completed it, after more than three
years of intense research, character development, writing,
rewriting, editing, and writing a little more, I also owe
thanks, in part, to my professors, without whom I would not
have learned the importance of crafting a story with
characters and dialogue that come to life on the page.

About The Author
As of the printing of this book I am approaching my
18th birthday. My goal was to have it published by the time
I turned 18. As an actress, musician, songwriter and model,
I have worked in the entertainment industry since I can
remember, but I became serious about my writing when I
graduated high school at age 14. I commenced studies in a
Harvard University Psychology program when I was 17,
after which I wanted to major in Film and Theater, and
transferred to UCLA.
I divide my time between writing, college, and playing
music.

About This Book
Let me start by saying this book is the first in a
planned trilogy. It is also written in a unique style, with
every chapter being told in the first person, from multiple
characters’ viewpoints. I chose this because, originally, the
story was told only from the perspective of the protagonist;
and once I began to add chapters where he was not present,
it created an issue in the storytelling. I felt strongly about
using this style, as character development is one of the most
important aspects of my writing. I wanted for my readers to
feel an emotional connection to each character and what
their particular feelings are throughout the book. I have
placed each character’s name at the top of their respective
chapters to remind readers who is telling the story at that
time.
This book began as a challenge for me when I was
to write a short story just after I turned 15. And I found
inspiration in an archway in my backyard, which I will not
explain as it would give away an element of the next book
in the trilogy…but I will tell you that my goal was to write
a 10 page story about a sorcerer. But as I began to write it, I
added a love story component that introduced another
crucial aspect, without which the story would not be the
emotional journey that it is. I chose the Fifteenth Century as

the setting for it, as it was not quite the Renaissance, but
past the Dark Ages—a good medium between the two.
France seemed like the ideal location, as it is one of the
most romantic places in the world, and one that comes to
mind—for me, at least—when I think of a medieval tale.
As the short story progressed it became a novel,
which was well over 700 pages at one time. What’s more—
I had only begun to tell the tale! As a result, I decided to
divide what remained of it (and added a few hundred pages,
of course) into two additional books, as there was way too
much to tell in one. It’s important to remember when you
read this book: the saga is only beginning; there’s a great
deal that my characters and I have yet to say.
This story is entirely mine, completely original, as
historically accurate as I could make it, and without
derivative archetypal fantasy themes or clichés. I’m proud
of that. So sit back and get ready for a fast-paced fantasy:
the beginning of The Nocturne Trilogy.

Table of Contents
Chapter One .................................................................................. 1
Chapter Two ................................................................................13
Chapter Three ..............................................................................21
Chapter Four ................................................................................33
Chapter Five.................................................................................51
Chapter Six ..................................................................................61
Chapter Seven ..............................................................................75
Chapter Eight ...............................................................................81
Chapter Nine ................................................................................89
Chapter Ten..................................................................................99
Chapter Eleven...........................................................................103
Chapter Twelve..........................................................................115
Chapter Thirteen ........................................................................121
Chapter Fourteen........................................................................135
Chapter Fifteen ..........................................................................149
Chapter Sixteen..........................................................................169
Chapter Seventeen .....................................................................193
Chapter Eighteen........................................................................205
Chapter Nineteen .......................................................................225
Chapter Twenty..........................................................................247
Chapter Twenty-One..................................................................251
Chapter Twenty-Two .................................................................265
Chapter Twenty-Three ...............................................................283

Chapter Twenty-Four ................................................................ 295
Chapter Twenty-Five................................................................. 299
Chapter Twenty-Six .................................................................. 303
Chapter Twenty-Seven .............................................................. 313
Chapter Twenty-Eight ............................................................... 347

Chapter One
Rainier

IT WAS TOO LATE by the time they pulled her from
the well. She was already dead. I was some distance away
when this happened, doing all I could to gain control of my
horse—Samson—as he reared and pawed madly at the
ground, causing the reins to slip from my hands. No matter
what I did he went on furiously, prancing and jolting
sideways as I clamped my knees against his ribs and fought
to steady him.
My only choice was to give him his head; and in doing
so he trotted faster. The more I urged him to slow down,
pulled back and commanded it, the faster he raced. He
made his way from the fields—back to the village—with
unbelievable speed. He leapt over all sorts of obstacles, tore

The Nocturne
through streams, thundering down the pathways until I gave
in completely and no longer tried to hold him back. He had
not been frightened in to doing this; it was far simpler: he
knew where we were going, and nothing would stand in the
way of it. Did he have a sixth sense, I never knew…but that
day he forever changed the course of my life.
I reached the pathway within the village in no time. My
horse neither slowed nor wavered; at the same speed he
continued toward the centre street, near the parish church. I
hadn’t been afraid of what may happen, and trusted him
until we neared a wall, outside which there was a fire
burning in a hollow. This was not a street, nearly too
narrow for travel by horse, the wall was perhaps four feet
tall or so—behind the merchants’ quarter. My mind and
heart were racing, for he continued onward and I was
powerless to stop him. I could not even leap from the
saddle—his speed was too great. I should have seen this
from miles away, but I’d been so concerned about keeping
hold of him that I lost all perception.
I heard his hooves rumble against the cobbled path as
he raced on, and people shouting for me to stop. But I
couldn’t. This was it. I felt the heat of the flames as we
drew near—and suddenly as I pulled back on the reins he
leapt forward with one great stride, scarcely crossing over
the wall before the fire. It felt as though, for that split

2

Chapter One
second, he was soaring through the skies, without limit.
Even now, as I look back, it thrills me to this day.
After that final leap he finally stopped, just on the other
side of the fire, and stood there catching his breath. Frothy
white sweat had spread across his body, all the way to the
long black tresses on his hocks. His mane, which came well
past his shoulder, was knotted and disheveled, as was his
tail. He was exhausted, as was I, but, to my wonder and
surprise, my journey was only beginning…
As day broke, golden tendrils of sunlight shone upon
the snowcapped Alpes, streaming down to dance across the
open forest. The sea lapped at the sparkling white shore, its
extended hand brushing over the caverns and eroded rocks
below us.
As I slid from the saddle I saw a throng of people in the
distance, all gathered around a well, woebegone and
sobbing. I hurried toward them with Samson trailing behind
me.
“My God!” I said. “What happened?”
“A girl was fetching water and she fell into the well,” a
woman said. “We pulled her out as quickly as we could, but
we lost her. The poor thing.”
I pushed through the crowd. “Aren’t you going to do
something? Help her, let me help her.”
“She is gone,” said a man beside me.
Then another: “There is no heartbeat.”
3

The Nocturne
No words can describe what I felt when I first saw her.
Without question, she was the most beautiful woman I had
ever seen, and so perfectly childlike. She could have been
no older than fifteen, a year younger than I. Her features
were so delicate, her body so petite, everything in splendid
proportion. Through her drenched little gown I could see
the ample curves of her breasts, as well as her shapely hips
and legs. Her hair, though wet, was long and wavy brown,
with sun-bleached strands here and there. Her skin was
flawless and lightly-tan, but had turned blue from the
cold…and the fact that she wasn’t breathing.
I knelt at her side and quickly felt her neck for a pulse.
There was none. She was absolutely still, in death’s hands
now. Yet somehow I could not bring myself to accept it, to
realize that she was gone. I’d never met this child-woman,
but my God, I felt the most intense connection to her, as
though it had been this way all my life. As though, being
here, I’d awakened feelings that had always lived in me.
With that came a power I’d never known before, and a
passion that made my heart pound wildly with anticipation.
When I looked at her, I felt as though this love, if I should
so soon call it love—was a dagger that had plunged straight
into my heart, and would be there for all time. My feelings
for her transcended everything—life, death. I would never
let her go. I would do as my intuition told me: breathe life
into her.
4

Chapter One
I moved her hair from her face, causing tiny beads of
water to roll down her cheek. I opened her mouth, breathing
in as deeply as I could before I brought my lips against hers
and slowly exhaled. As I did this I sensed an overwhelming
power within, and focused all my energy using it to revive
her. I crossed the threshold between life and death, it made
me feel dreadfully empty, like an abyss, without light or
touch or sound; all was still, black. And it terrified me.
Passersby were gathering round, closer now. All I
could hear—distantly, at that—were the muffled cries of
women, some telling their husbands and sons to alert this
girl’s parents of what was happening. As I breathed into her
again, I felt the faintest quiver in her chest. At this she tried
to breathe on her own, and I moved, allowing her cough up
the water in her throat.
When she opened her eyes and looked at me, I found
they were unlike any I had ever seen—amber with golden
flecks, fringed with thick black eyelashes. Absolutely
breathtaking.
The onlookers drew back, shocked and mystified by
what I’d done. Most were too shaken to speak, but a small
few gathered their wits enough to say: “He has raised the
dead!”
Those who were standing around rushed to her, helping
her to sit up as they wrapped pelts around her for warmth.
She continued to cough up water, having difficulty catching
5

The Nocturne
her breath. Yet she found the strength to ask me, “How can
I ever thank you?”
This felt so awkward, I couldn’t help but smile. “There
was nothing else I could do.”
“What happened to me?” she asked.
“I’m not sure,” I said. “They brought you out before I
arrived. You must have slipped on the ledge.”
She shivered, burying her hands beneath the pelts.
“You were the first I saw when I awoke... It was dark when
I fell; I think I slipped when I reached for the pail...and then
I woke to see you and all the people around me, and the
light. I thought I was in Heaven.”
People were scurrying about, still awestruck. Then, in
the midst of this, one woman drew close to the girl and said,
“Your mother is on her way. You had best get to shelter—it’s bitter cold.”
“I should like to thank my rescuer.”
“Thank him then, before you catch your death.”
The girl looked past the ever-growing crowd, seeing
her mother as she drew near. Then she turned to me, our
gazes locking for a second that fleeted by all too quickly.
She was adorable, so endearing with the most childlike
mannerisms. Even her voice was more pure than any I’d
heard before: soft, spirited and passionate, with courage far
beyond her years.

6

Chapter One
I could not help but wonder: Is there such a thing as
love at first sight? I tried not to be naïve in thinking that she
may have felt as I did, yet the possibility drove me wild
with wonder. I was drawn to her in ways that made me feel
as though I had known her my entire life. It couldn’t be
love, could it? Is this how it feels?
It was then I noticed I was being treated strangely:
people were whispering and glancing about this as though I
had done the most dreadful, horrid thing imaginable. Not
one person approached me to say it was a miracle, or
anything of that sort. Instead they kept at a distance,
seeming wary and fearful of me.
“It is the work of the Devil to raise the dead,” one
woman said to the others. “He must be punished.”
“Witchcraft,” said one on horseback.
At the same time the girl’s mother arrived, hastening to
her. “My God, what happened? You’re freezing—look at
this—you look like death.”
“I was fetching water and I fell into the well.” She
turned to me, and all gazes followed. “He saved me; he
saved my life, Mother.”
The people who had gathered around wasted no opportunity to speak their minds: “She was dead; he used
witchcraft.”
“I was trying to help her,” I said. “It has nothing to do
with any magic.”
7

The Nocturne
“Come,” she said; “you will catch a fever in this cold.”
“Mother, no! Thank him, please.”
“That's enough, Annora. Witchcraft, magic—what is
the matter with you? He’s a pagan.”
“He saved my life.” She turned toward me, smiling
faintly. “I don’t even know your name.”
It was by pure impulse that I reached for her hand then,
lacking the strength to think about what I was doing. As I
did she extended her hand to me, and suddenly her mother
pulled her outside my reach with one quick, jarring
movement. Just then, as I can remember perfectly to this
day, she said, “You saved my daughter, and you have my
thanks...but we will have nothing more to do with you, or
whatever this magic is that you know. Farewell.”
As I stood there I overheard even more people, beside
the well, speaking of me.
“That boy is cursed,” one woman said. “He is defying
God...and the Devil.”
Then a man on horseback added: “If the old woman
cannot control him any better than this, she should take him
back to wherever he came from.”
She shook her head. “We know that isn’t going to happen.”
“If it’s what it seems, he will leave here; I’ll see to it.”
I turned away without thinking of what they had said. I
was much too preoccupied to care about it; and I watched
8

Chapter One
as Annora and her mother walked away, wishing, if nothing
else, that I could have the chance to say goodbye. But she
made it obvious: Annora would have nothing more to do
with me. Even worse—I could not begin to understand
where this power came from or how I saved her. All I knew
was that, to the bottom of my heart I loved her more than
anything in this world. I could not overlook my fascination
with what I’d done, nor could I deny my love for her. It was
then my purpose coincided with my newfound thirst for
knowledge. This amazing power was mine alone and
somehow I would learn to wield it. But I had transgressed
nature’s most important law by raising the dead.
That was when I first became a part of a prophecy,
although I didn’t know it at the time. There was one thing I
realized was true—my fate did hold something truly
grand…but I haven’t told you about that, have I?
MY NAME IS Rainier de Aaradyn. I was born in the
year 1385, and have no memory of my parents. I was illfated when I came into this world. I am part of a dreadful
curse…or so everyone thought at first, because there is a
dark-red birthmark on my shoulder. My father and mother
were told it was a sign of evil, a scar that only Hell could
cause. They cared for me until I was three years old, which
was when my curse somehow disgraced our family. I never
learned how or why this happened—all I knew was that,

9

The Nocturne
suddenly they abandoned me. Blessedly, I neither understood it at the time nor remembered it afterward.
I was taken to a village of freemen on the south-eastern
coast of France, where I was left with a sorceress who had
no children of her own. Throughout the rest of my childhood I watched as she studied books of magic, and conjured
little spells; but, of course, it meant nothing to me. I never
realized how secretively she went about practicing sorcery
or speaking to me about it. I thought of it as an acceptable
part of everyday life, never knowing it was a forbidden
form of magic.
I had no interest in learning how to practice sorcery
until I was twelve years old, when my village was raided by
vampires and nearly all of the children my age were killed.
I felt helpless standing there, at the slit window of my
house, watching the hunters ride out, armed with silverheaded arrows and rosewood stakes. Corpses littered the
streets. Those who were bitten but didn’t die were killed
and their bodies burned, as there was no power great
enough to heal them. That night left an indelible impression
on me. It changed me for the better, as I was determined to
become a healer, stronger than any other, and put an end to
these tragedies. Not long after, my Aunt, as I called her,
began to teach me how to heal wounds by summoning
spirits, and showed me how to conjure spells and bring
forth the powers of magical creatures, but none of this is
10

Chapter One
how I saved Annora, this was an unknown power within
me.
Before I tell you any more of that, there are some less
important things you should know. I hate, more than
anything, to describe myself this way, as it makes me sound
like a sort of dandy, but it is best for creating an image of
me in your mind: I am handsome, broodingly so, one might
say. I have brown eyes and thick, wavy brown hair that is
collar-length. My skin is fair, and I have, almost always,
what looks like a night beard in the shape of a goatee,
though it is faint. I have rather smooth features; my
cheekbones are well contoured, my overall features neither
chiseled nor refined; and my nose is short and well-formed.
My lips are full enough, though finely shaped. I have a
sensuous voice; the tone is soft, pleasing yet husky with a
romantic quality.
I was then—and still am—charming and charismatic,
strong and slightly rugged-looking. I am rather tall and an
average weight for someone my size. My body is welldeveloped, with steel-tight muscles in my arms and chest;
good definition—nothing grotesquely overbuilt. This came
from all the days I spent in the forests working as a boardhewer.
Each night, toward the end of my childhood, I rode to a
hilltop near my village, carrying my scrolls and books of
spells. I had no desire to practice any other form of magic—
11

The Nocturne
I loved to heal people. I honed my skill of summoning
spirits, and during spells they would do my bidding. It had
been my greatest joy for years. Yet I wanted so much more
now—I wanted to explore the feelings I knew were because
of my powers.

12

Chapter Two
Rainier

HOURS AFTER I saved Annora, and once the people
in my village had grown even more curious of what I had
done I heard about the prophecy for the first time. My Aunt
praised me for my good deed, while she cautioned me about
trying to control this power, as it was unlike any she knew.
It was strange and unpredictable; and because of it, I was
not now to be trusted.
I remember that day perfectly: it was late afternoon,
and the sun was beginning to fall behind the jagged peaks
of the Alpes-Maritimes. The Mediterranean Sea roared as it
sprung toward the terraced village above the shore. I
tethered my horse, unloaded the cart of hewn boards from
the day’s work, and then began my walk up the hillside.

The Nocturne
When I climbed the last path between two houses, I saw my
Aunt standing there with a small group of people—her
closest friends, in whom she often sought guidance.
Whenever a message came from the north, they would
share it and encourage others to do the same, as it affected
all of us. But this time was different, somehow, and when I
heard one of them mention my name, all I could do was
wait and listen.
As I crept along the wall, gravel rolled beneath my
boots, scattering here and there. I winced, lest I be seen.
From there I stepped into the alleyway, and then I leaned
back; my legs stretched in front of me; my shoulders
touching the wall as I struggled to hear what would be said
next.
A tall, thin woman with auburn hair, said: “People are
furious about this—they say it is a curse and we will all
suffer for it. They are demanding answers—and I have
none. What am I to tell them?”
An old man stood beside her, shaking his head all this
while. “Just look at what he has done—now the whole
village is afraid of him. And they are blaming the prophecy
for it.”
“He has broken God’s Law,” she went on. “If you cannot control him, he must leave.”
“I know he doesn't realize what he has done,” my Aunt
said. “But I will talk to him about it.”
14

Chapter Two
“No one must raise the dead—it is unnatural.”
“What does the prophecy say?” the old man asked.
“It doesn’t matter.”
“Answer me. What does it say?”
With sadness in her voice my Aunt then said, “I think
it’s best not to discuss it here. I will talk to him.”
“Defying nature is a crime greater than any other,” he
said. “How do you take this so lightly? The boy is cursed.
And he has put that girl in danger by making her a part of
this.”
“I will not punish him for saving her life.”
He sighed. “Then he can take his magic elsewhere. He
is not welcome here.”
She gathered her effects and stepped toward the passageway where I stood. “It is not Rainier, I know it isn’t.
He has power he does not understand…but he is learning.
He is not the one the prophecy speaks of.”
“If only we had your certainty.”
I drew away from the wall, but unavoidably sand
crunched beneath my boots, and tiny pebbles rolled down
the trail. As I walked away, she said my name. I turned
around, having no explanation for what I’d been doing.
“You heard,” she said with little emotion.
“Yes.”
“Don’t let it worry you. The prophecy they are speaking of has nothing to do with you.”
15

The Nocturne
Once we were alone, I found the courage to ask her a
question we had both avoided for as long as I could
remember: What happened to my family. She had, in the
past, avoided talking about it, and I knew better than to
ask…yet now my life was changing—we both realized it. In
order to understand what I had done, and this prophecy that
everyone was speaking of, I would need to understand
where these powers came from and why. I had not taken it
seriously, but … now that had all changed. Now I could no
longer suppress my fears and unanswered questions.
My Aunt was folding blankets and placing things in
the storage chests behind the table when I walked in,
carrying some logs for the fire. After I set them down I
stepped closer to her, simply watching and waiting for her
to say something—anything. I knew exactly what was
troubling her: the prophecy and what I had done. It could
not have been any more obvious if written for me.
“Is something wrong?” I asked.
She looked up at me with a forced smile, and a false
sense of everything-is-just-fine. “No. Supper will be ready
soon.”
I took a deep breath in hopes of preparing myself for
what I would say. I was both thrilled and terrified at the
same time, for all the sense it makes. “There is something I
must know,” I said. “It is on my mind just as much as
yours—I know that. And I’m sorry, but please, I must
16

Chapter Two
know…why is this happening to me? What have I done and
where is it coming from?”
“I don’t think you quite understand—that girl was
dead...and you brought her back to life,” she said. “Do you
see how unnatural that is? It’s never happened before. I
don’t know how to explain it—I have no idea how it was
even possible.”
“Samson took me to her,” I said. “And she needed me.
I didn’t care what I had to do. There was this voice inside
that begged me to save her, and it was burning through me,
and I couldn’t let her go.”
She was quiet then, going over everything I had said,
with a fear so great I sensed it without her saying a single
word. But then, she said gently, “That’s just what frightens
me: your attitude.”
“Because I wanted to save her life?”
“No, because you have opened the gates to all sorts of
dreadful things. We can’t see what spirits have come back
with her. There is no way to tell what you’ve done or what
will come of it.”
All of this was sinking in with me now. I’d begun to
realize just how remarkable—and fearsome—my powers
were. And I dreaded the thought of my Aunt being angry
with me, or disappointed in my choices. Now was certainly
not the time to tell her I was in love with Annora.

17

The Nocturne
“Please,” I said, “don’t doubt me. I will find out how it
happened, I promise you.”
She waved it away. “You don’t understand. I’m afraid
you will let evil into your heart if you cannot control your
powers. I’m so worried about you, I don’t know what to
do.”
I smiled, in hopes it would put her at ease. “Then I
will learn to use them.”
After supper, I left the house, and rode across the
fields, with my little mutt, Tallis, on the trail behind me.
She looked rather like a wolf, slightly larger than a fox,
with wiry grey fur.
I stopped at the grassy hilltop I cherished as though it
was my own land. And I lay there, gazing upward at the
star-dappled sky. This was the one place in the world where
I needn’t fear anything, where I could rest in silence and
solitude that existed nowhere else. Tallis lay beside me,
pawing at my hand and whimpering for attention. As it
were, she became a perfect distraction.
How could I be a part of a prophecy? I wondered. I
had heard of the paths in life being called fate, doom and
destiny…but I didn’t quite appreciate these—not because I
feared them—but simply because, not once had I witnessed
any sort of phenomenon that made me believe there could
be such a thing. But it all changed that day. I was fated to
18

Chapter Two
meet Annora—there was no question about it. My love for
her was an unquenchable fire in my soul now, and I
couldn’t go on without it.
For quite some time I stayed there, pondering the
prophecy. As I did, I found I was thinking: It couldn’t be
true, could it? I have no great powers. I am not going to do
what they have said I will.
When I saved Annora, not only had I taken her from
the grasp of death, I had preformed a task I couldn’t quite
fathom. It was done by will, more than with my abilities or
power; yet exactly how it happened, I didn’t know. But still,
I could do nothing more than healing spells, and what was
the harm in that? I hadn’t changed. I wasn’t powerful
enough to be worthy of fear. I wanted to heal people, save
lives. Whether or not I’d been born of any prophecy, I was
going to use my powers for Good.

19

Chapter Three
Lucan

THE ARTIFACT seemed to come to life as the morning sunlight danced across it. Braden de Aaradyn lifted it
upward, examining the tiny gold orb and its finely-crafted
black wings. It was a magnificent sight, rich with wonder
and a thousand years of history.
I turned to my brother—Braden—my junior by three
years. Having a lean and well-muscled young body, wavy
collar-length brown hair that framed my chiseled features,
and ice-blue eyes, I was a ladies’ man who could effortlessly charm my way to the heart of any woman. Braden,
looking much the same, was likewise charismatic and
handsome; the most noticeable difference between we two

The Nocturne
being that, his hair was a dark shade of blonde, and his eyes
were colored with all the hues of autumn.
Braden and I, both on horseback, paused at the bottom
of a hill we were to cross, looking upward at the snowcapped mountaintops under the crisp blue sky. Lush green
fields swayed around us, twirling this way and that. In the
distance was the persistent din of mock swordplay, the
steady rhythm of wooden blades colliding with iron,
accented with the applause and laughter of spectators. The
tournament had attracted a crowd that was great enough to
populate a small town, and brought a wild stir of noise and
merriments to the streets.
Braden spurred his horse on, and with a shriek of displeasure it bolted sideways before halting. I rode beside him
quickly, grasping the artifact. I was terrified that harm of
one kind or another would come to it if he just carried it this
way. He was no more responsible now than he had been
when we were children.
“So careless,” I said. “This is why you are still in my
charge.”
He grinned. “Forgive me…I’d forgotten that you have
the brains between us.”
“And the looks,” I said, then pointed eastward, to the
arena beside the village. “Never mind. Look, out there—the
tournament won’t go on forever.”

22

Chapter Three
He sheltered his eyes from the sun by pressing his hand
sideways against his forehead. He loved the thrill of a battle
just as much as I did, but for some reason he would never
bring himself to admit it.
“When will bloodshed no longer call to you?” he
asked, in jest, though my answer would be deadly serious.
“When I am the king.”
We turned our horses around, and began to ride down
the hill, slowly. As we went on, I took the artifact in hand,
glancing at it every now and again. It was such a marvel
that, I almost regretted having promised it to one of the
local nobles—Lord Chenyn. We had been searching for
relics of this kind for months, and bringing them to him in
exchange for gold…and, with any hope, a place in his
court. I’d yet to ask him for such an honor, but intended to
do so later that day. My quest was coming to a conclusion.
Or so I thought. I could almost taste the sweet victory to
come. And my brother—well, he was somewhat of a
hindrance—but he was my last moral thread, and at times
caused me to stop and rethink my actions. But not that day;
no, even he, putting all of those little ethical and honorable
innuendos to use, could not change my mind. At last I was
finding my place in this rotten society, and well on my way
to becoming a Diplomat.

23

The Nocturne
“Don’t you ever wonder how the ancients would feel—
how it would be to know that these things still exist?”
Braden said. “And that people are finding them.”
I handed the artifact back to him. “No, all I worry
about is the prize, the end. And you should, too.”
“I think there must be more than glory and power.”
I looked at him again, smiling this time. “That’s because you are a fool.”
“Did you see the symbols here,” he asked, “on the back
of the wings?”
“There is a little dog etched on one side, and the sun, I
think,” I said. “Why?”
“No, below that. It says, ‘Mathias’.”
“I don’t know—it’s Roman. Maybe the name of the
one who made it, or an emperor.”
He ran his fingers over the item once more, then placed
it in a pouch on his belt. “Or a god.”
At the tournament, the crowd greeted us with smiles,
waving arms, and an occasional whistle—the way that all
new challengers were saluted. A sea of would-be fighters
waited in the near distance, some armed and ready for
battle, others defeated and bloodied. The mass was so thick
I could barely see the arena. A ramshackle fence surrounded it, complete with hooks where weapons were
stowed. Within it, at that very moment, a battle was
commencing between two strapping young men, one with a
24

Chapter Three
mace, the other with a shield and dagger. How uncivilized.
Yet the mere idea of setting foot in that ring filled me with
wonder and an unchecked excitement.
We slid from our horses’ backs. I removed a shortbladed court sword from the scabbard at my saddle’s side.
Then we waited, and waited—and for the hell of it, we
waited some more. But finally, it was my turn; and, just my
luck, my challenger was brawny, fierce-tempered and
outweighed me at least twice.
I stepped into the arena, confidently—perhaps arrogantly—cheered-on by voices and faces in all directions.
Braden stood beside the gate, grabbed my shoulder as I
walked by. I stopped for a second, and couldn’t help but
say, “Don’t do that—it always makes me think you’re
going to kiss me.”
He laughed, and all the high-spirited women around
him giggled stupidly. I took a shield from one of the hooks,
then stepped toward to my challenger, who was likewise
armed.
The battle began, and he charged toward me. My first
inclination was to block the blow of his sword, but the
impact would have been too great at such speed. I struck at
the same time. Our blades collided sideways, just above our
chests, with the screeching toll of iron against iron. I drew
back, and he moved in my direction once more, this time

25

The Nocturne
hitting the shield. The force of that alone pushed me off
balance.
I lifted my sword, striking at—and narrowly missing—
his arm, just when, with an uppercut he grazed my right
side. Silence overtook the crowd when this happened. I lost
focus and pressed one hand to the wound. Then, slam-bang,
he forced the shield forward, beating me another time. I fell
backward and slammed into the fence. I was stunned. Blood
was dripping down my hip. The cut was stinging as you
cannot imagine. But I brought myself to my feet, as he
stood there looking at me, with one arm in the air to signal
the now eager and screaming throng of his victory to be.
I rushed toward him this time, swinging the sword
once, then twice, then another as I jostled him sideways
using the shield for greater impact. He deflected every hit
except that, and swung at me again, narrowly missing me
this time. I was relentless. I drew closer and closer as I went
on striking with both weapons. And he was wearing down.
Finally I’d thrown him to the ground. Before he could
move, with a short running-start I leapt after him, bashing
the shield against his chest with one smooth, downward
movement. The crowd wasn’t expecting that maneuver, and
was cheerfully surprised. I rose a little and pointed the
blade at him, with confidence I’d won. But I hadn’t. All I
had done was draw nearer to him, while he still held a
sword. Then, most unexpectedly, he punched me—not
26

Chapter Three
once, but twice, rapidly—and I fell back on my knees
before collapsing to the ground. I struggled to stand, but I
couldn’t by that point. I couldn’t even hear my own
thoughts through the roar of the crowd. So I lay there for a
second, with my hair disheveled and covering my eyes,
sweat dripping down my face, and blood oozing from both
my nose and mouth. Not to mention the cut on my side. I
wanted to somehow deny it, but I had been defeated.
I stepped outside the arena, where Braden waited for
me, with a bandage for my side and a rag to wipe the blood
from my face. I saw disappointment in his eyes. He could
deny it all he wished, but still it was there, and it was real
and saddening because I’d been certain I could win. I was
furious and discouraged, and I made no point to hide it. As
we made our way past the spectators, he did his best to
sound encouraging and to reassure me of my ability as a
warrior.
When we reached the posts where our horses were
tethered, I wrapped the bandage around the middle of my
body to cover the cut, while Braden strapped our weapons
to the saddles.
“It was a great fight,” he said.
“I should have been more prepared,” I said. “Why did I
not see that coming? I thought I’d won once he was on the
ground. I felt it—victory; it was so close.”
“And it will be again.”
27

The Nocturne
“At least one of us is certain.”
“Oh, come off it. Lord Chenyn is our key to victory,
anyhow—not this. It was one fight—one.”
I climbed into the saddle. “And in order to be strong
enough, I must win. If I can’t, there is no point; we need to
prove ourselves.”
“I think not,” he said. “Once he finds out about the
other treasures we’ve found, we won’t need to do another
thing.”
Later that night we arrived at the Chenyn manor, and
were greeted by a pale-faced woman who ushered us
through the doorway. I carried the orb inside a leather
pouch.
“Do wait here,” she said. “I will summon the Lord and
Lady.”
I had seen this place more times than I could remember, yet it always impressed me as though I were setting
foot there for the very first time. I could not tear my gaze
from the gleaming wooden floors, or the spacious quarters
and leisure halls where guests were entertained, or the fact
that each and every wall in this place looked so pure and
white.
Within seconds, Lady Renna Chenyn arrived, youthful
and gorgeous, with sleek black locks that tumbled about her
shoulders, as I remembered, though it would be nearly
impossible to forget her. When she stepped toward us, we
28

Chapter Three
bowed respectfully, and I took her hand, kissing it. A rosypink color spread across her cheeks as I touched her, and a
raw, forbidden desire snaked through her mind. She hadn’t
forgotten me; in fact, it seemed she was more than pleased
by our reunion. But before there was a chance for her to
speak, her husband arrived, and greeted us amicably. He
was a typical aristocrat: tall, thin, pale…and completely
oblivious of the fact that, his wife was dreadfully unhappy
in their marriage. Despite her standing there tensely and
looking flush, he smiled the whole time. Not a clue.
“Good morrow to you both,” he said, and we bowed
accordingly.
I untied the knot at the top of the pouch, then slowly
removed it. “A pleasure, as always, my lord. I have the
artifact”—I lifted it up, presenting it to him—“the last of
Augustus’ treasures from the Roman Empire.”
“It’s magnificent. May I?”
“You are quite the treasure-hunter,” Renna said, gazing
at the item as her husband took it in hand. “This is splendid.”
“As I promised.”
“What is your price?” he asked.
“It isn’t a matter of money, my lord,” Braden said.
“It’s of far greater value.”

29

The Nocturne
I glanced back at Lady Chenyn, as to convey my message. “Like a beautiful woman. My price is that, I ask for a
place in your Court, as a Diplomat.”
He pondered it for a second, then shook his head. “I’m
afraid it is not that simple. My family wouldn’t allow it,
with the difference in…class, and all. But, perhaps, if you
can find the rest of the artifacts that belong with this one,
you will have their regard.”
“But we have an accord?” Braden asked.
“After a find like this, certainly.”
I managed to smile. “Politics have their price, don’t
they?”
“Lucan, I’m sorry I cannot do more,” he said, “but becoming a Diplomat isn’t as simple as you think. I wish it
were—and I would choose you. Without knowing more
about your abilities, they will never grant you that honor.”
“And how does my bringing you more treasures make
me worthy?”
“It was your choice, your offer. When you have not
proved your skills and worth to my family, there is no way
to convince them. They will never allow—I hope this
doesn’t offend you—a peasant to be in charge of our affairs
and negotiations. You know how important that is. I cannot
compromise it.”
“I understand.”

30

Chapter Three
“Good, then,” he said, walking toward the door of an
adjacent chamber. “I will put this with the statues in the
main hall. Then I’m off to the stables.” He turned back,
gesturing to his wife. “Care to join me, dear?”
“In a little. I was going to offer our guests some wine
before they depart.”
“Oh, right; where are my manners?” he said. “That
would be splendid. I thank you both…farewell for now.”
Once Lord Chenyn had left, Braden, who knew exactly
what was going on between Renna and I, said, “I will go
prepare, and take water to the horses.”
I acknowledged him with a quick nod, and he left
promptly. I turned back to her. Her posture was rigid, her
gaze downcast with guilt and apprehension. But, all the
same, she wanted this—for us to be together, regardless of
how long it was going to last, or the consequences it may
bring. She was miserable in an arranged marriage, with no
hope of any change…and I was there for her, charming,
gentle, and wickedly pleasing.
We had carried on this affair for several months,
though her husband never suspected either of us. In his
mind, all was well and he was living in a perfect world,
with a perfect marriage and a wife who adored him. As the
old cliché goes, Ignorance is bliss.
She began to kiss me, desperately. I placed my hands
on the small of her back, pulling her close to me.
31

The Nocturne
“Not here,” I whispered, and touched her lips with one
finger; a long stroking motion that wracked her body with a
shivering desire. “There is too much at stake.”
“But I need you. Please….”
“Hush, darling. Wait until he is not here. I’ll return
then, I promise you.”
As I drew away she was still clinging to me. I squeezed
her hand tightly before I pulled myself backward. I was
moving toward the doorway. She watched me with sad
eyes, but didn’t utter a word. It was too dangerous this time.
I wouldn’t put my future and fortune at risk for any woman.
Outside, Braden was waiting for me on horseback. He
sensed my frustration when I walked toward him, (if he
hadn’t earlier) and said, “Well, that was disappointing.”
“Indeed,” I said, “but I still bed his wife more often
than he could dream of.”

32

Chapter Four
Rainier

TWO DAYS HAD PASSED since I saved Annora, and
I had yet to see her again. I did as I thought I should: I went
on as though my feelings for her had never existed. Yet
every place I went and everything I did somehow reminded
me of her. In my soul was a longing that left me brokenhearted no matter how I told myself to forget it. And every
moment that passed when we weren’t together, my feelings
for her never waned—they only deepened.
We passed each other on the street that day—and there
it was again: the raw, heart-stopping passion that neither of
us could ignore. She looked up at me with the faintest
smile, though I did my best not to make eye-contact, for
fear I’d lose control and reach out to touch her.

The Nocturne
As I walked by she turned around. I could sense her
gaze scanning over me, but I resisted my urge to look back.
I fought this futile battle as you cannot imagine, until it
overwhelmed me and I obliged my innocent desire.
Horses and carts were moving by quickly, leaving little
room for those on foot. So by the time I caught glimpse of
her once more, she was making her way through the crowd.
I stopped, but she was gone. For quite some time I stood
there, just watching the people in an ever-moving stream,
hoping that, by some chance I would see her again…but I
didn’t.
I turned around and walked back in the same direction
as I had earlier, keeping close to the buildings and shacks to
avoid the passing carts. I had nearly left the marketplace
when I felt a quick and gentle touch grace my hand. I
stopped, trying not to make a sudden and obvious turn
down the alleyway. The space between the buildings was so
narrow I was scarcely able to make my way though it. But
there she stood before me, so cunning in her plan for us to
cross paths again. I stepped closer, and she drew further
into the alleyway, until we were but shadowy figures
between two great walls; and the din of the village was
muffled and seemingly distant. I followed her from there, to
the left, where the path ended with a door to a shed.
There was absolute silence when we stepped inside.
We stood, eyeing one-another with a yearning we could no
34

Chapter Four
longer suppress. Thousands of thoughts crossed my mind,
all at the same time, and I was baffled when it came to
words. I was at a loss for what to say. I couldn’t confess my
love yet, but neither could I deny it. I didn’t care what I had
to do to be with her, how long it would take, or how great
my sacrifice need be. I’d never felt such a way before. In all
my life I had not felt that rich fullness…the warmth of love,
when nothing else in the world seemed to matter and I had
no idea how I’d lived all this time without it.
She touched my chest with her hand, her fingers
spreading out over my heart. “I never had a chance to thank
you. You didn’t even tell me your name.”
I grasped her hand, laying mine across it and gently
gliding my fingers between hers. “Rainier de Aaradyn.”
“I have been trying to find you, ever since we met,” she
said. “But we mustn’t be seen together; my family will not
allow it.”
“They’re afraid of me.”
She rested her hands on my shoulders and pressed her
body against mine once more, driving me wild with all
these new emotions. There was sadness in her eyes, and
when she spoke it was in the softest whisper. “I’m sorry.”
“Shhh…. Don’t be; you can’t help it,” I said. “I don’t
care what anyone thinks. Having you here with me—I
wouldn’t trade that for anything—anything in the world. I
mean it.”
35

The Nocturne
“I mean that much to you?”
“I have no reason to lie.”
“My parents are very religious,” she said. “They don’t
believe in sorcery because the church says that it is evil. But
it isn’t, is it? Tell me it’s not, please….”
“No, it’s people who are evil, not magic. I wouldn’t
hurt anyone.”
As she touched the side of my face she said, “I owe
you my life—I think I’m indebted forever.”
She was so precious, so naïve, and perfectly beautiful.
Oh God, I loved her with all my heart and soul. There was
playfulness between us now, a childlike humor that was
spoken most subtly. She knew I was teasing her—and
responded in kind.
“Do you intend to repay me?” I asked.
“Yes, if your life is ever in peril.”
“What if it’s not?”
“I fear it will be if you ask again,” she said, and then
paused. “And there is something I must ask you.”
“Go on.”
“Had you been kissed before that day, before you
kissed me?”
I smiled. “It was not a kiss.”
“But it was,” she said high-spiritedly; “it was passionate.”

36

Chapter Four
I struggled to hide my embarrassment, but there was
warmth rushing to my cheeks just the same. I turned away,
then turned back and looked down at her. As I did, her body
tensed, every little muscle tightening with anticipation.
She studied me for a moment, and whatever lightheartedness and humor had existed between us, was suddenly
drawn away. We were silent again, gazing at one-another
with a naïve sense of wonder, as neither of us had an
inkling of what to do or say next. The notion of courtship
was foreign to us both.
“Was it now?” I said, and could not help but smile. “I
was only trying to help you breathe.”
“Not that,” she said. “It’s what you were feeling. I
don’t know what it was, but I felt something, too. I cannot
explain it.”
My heart began to race. It was difficult to keep my
voice from faltering. “What do you mean?”
“Well, if it is not too bold”—she canted her head and
drew closer to me, our lips nearly touching—“this.”
Instinct took over. It was obvious now, what she
wanted; and it felt, to me, like an answered prayer or a
dream come true. So with deft precision and purpose I
brushed back her hair, then lifted her chin with one
finger…and our mouths crushed together. She parted her
lips, greedily urging me on; and I explored the upper, then

37

The Nocturne
the lower. I was beside myself with pleasure when our
tongues met, as was she.
The rush of kissing her had dimmed my senses, but I
welcomed it—how I welcomed the closeness and all these
strange emotions, and how my heart ached for her. All of a
sudden, as I had seen in my mind so many times already,
we had fallen in the deepest, most passionate love.
Bells chimed and the town-crier announced it was the
hour of four. Nightfall would descend all too soon; and, the
moment Annora heard the bells of the church, she pulled
away.
“The chimes,” she said anxiously. “My Mother will be
looking for me.”
As she stepped toward the door I grasped her hand, and
she turned around quickly for one last kiss. “How am I to
find you?”
“By the road to the forest, at first morrow…before sunrise,” she said; “but you must let me go before someone
finds us. Wait here till I’m out of sight; I’ll hurry. Then go
the other way, please…don’t watch me, or some busybody
will see you.”
“What are you so fearful of?” I asked.
“The punishment. I can’t be kept from you, I can’t let
that happen.”

38

Chapter Four
A surge of pleasure went through me when I heard her
say that—not a sexual pleasure of any kind, but a deeper,
more spiritual one: it was in my heart, not my loins.
I followed her to the door to see her off safely. She
opened it, stepped outside.
“Annora,” I whispered, leaning one arm on the doorframe.
“What?”
“Before sunrise.”
She looked back at me with a smile. “Goodnight,
love.”
I WAITED until long after I felt it was safe for me to
leave there. The sun had set by the time I was on my way
home, and everyone I’d seen in the marketplace earlier had
gone on about their business. Thankfully, no one had seen
where I’d gone earlier; and it was my good fortune that
there were no suspicions when it came to Annora and I. Yet
I found myself watching everyone, guardedly. My conscience was instilling fear and guilt in my mind.
Annora was all I could think about. Everything she had
said was playing over in my memory, and I forgot why I
was at the market in the first place. So I walked back to the
square by the basilica, to the post where I had tethered
Samson, untied him and climbed into the saddle. I just
wanted to get out of there, because I was a terrible liar and
could, by no means, risk being asked where I had been. But
39

The Nocturne
that wasn’t too likely, I realized; I could have been
anyplace—who would know?
As I rode toward home I was confronted by an unpleasant—and familiar—voice. It was that of Samuel de
Cort, the son of the only other sorcerer in my village. He
was my same age, and tremendously arrogant. As long as I
had known him—since we were thirteen—he acted as
though he and I were in competition; there was a deeprooted rivalry between us, but I had no desire to act on it.
Most of the time I successfully avoided him…but alas,
there was no escape that day.
“I heard about what you did,” he said, and brought his
horse alongside mine. “Why am I the only one who’s not
surprised?”
“Because you’re the only one who pays more attention
to my life than I do,” I said.
“How clever. Your wit—it’s so…brilliant.”
I tugged my horse’s reins, and he stepped to the left. I
was facing Samuel now, and we were close enough to
touch. I was still mocking him every time it was opportune.
“What do you want?”
“Well, I thought that, with all these powers you seem
to have—”
“I haven’t time for this,” I said. “I regret that; I do.”

40

Chapter Four
“Everyone is talking about you; have they told you
that? I came here to invite you to a challenge tomorrow—
just you and I, of course.”
“I don’t care to fight”—I leaned toward him and tapped
his shoulder, sarcastically—“but I can tell that you have my
wellbeing in mind. Always.”
“It’s not a fight. Don’t be such a coward. It would be a
magic challenge, on horseback.”
I looked back at him and shook my head. My voice
was calm, collected, and firm. “I won’t accept. I’m sorry.”
He was quiet for a moment. I seized the opportunity to
get away and began to ride to the path outside of the
marketplace. And I had nearly reached it when I heard him
say, “You know, it would prove you are in control of your
powers.”
He had my attention. I stopped abruptly, but hesitated
before I turned to answer him. I hated myself for considering this…and it was obvious that it was not his intent to
help me; there was an ulterior reason behind what he was
planning. But if there was a way for me to prove my
intentions were good and I was in complete control, perhaps
people would view me differently. There stood a chance—a
slim one—that Annora’s family may gain trust in me…and
as long as any hope of that remained, I could not refuse this
challenge.

41

The Nocturne
“Tomorrow afternoon,” I said without turning back,
“by the steeple. I will wait there.”
I WENT HOME without saying a word to my Aunt
about the challenge tomorrow. If I had told her, she would
have insisted that I was not strong enough to contend.
Fortunately, for me, she was not home when I returned,
which allowed me the time I needed to practice casting
spells.
I retrieved a book from one of the storage chests. It had
been sitting there for well over a year; and all I’d done, in
the past, was glance at it. Written in the centre of its face
was: Book of Shadows…a common term for a witch’s or
sorcerer’s guide to magic. It was bound by thick leather
straps, tied in a cross pattern to create a sort of brown lace
along the spine, and was filled with fleshy sheets of
parchment. On the cover was an ornamented gold lock that
resembled a dragon’s head, with a key in the shape of a
dog’s leg and paw dangling from a string.
I took the key in hand and pressed it to the in the mouth
of the dragon head. When it came together with the tongue,
the lock flicked backward and fell to the cover with a dull
thump. Then I opened it to reveal a series of dark paintings
and enchantments. There were also poems and little tales
that had been gathered, throughout the years, by covens of
witches. But one thing—a painting that always caught my
eye—was the image of a crimson dragon. His body was
42

Chapter Four
carved with iron-like muscles that rolled and rippled
beneath his scaly, fire-worn skin; and pearly knives of bone
grew from his shoulders.
Written next to the painting was the name Sivven, and
below that was a spell; not for healing, but for protection
and a spirit guide. I had read it before, but did not until then
feel I was powerful enough to cast it. But by then I was
determined to prove I was in complete control of my
abilities, and could wield them to do whatever I pleased.
After bringing together the items I needed to do this, I
read at the table, by light of a single candle. Beside an
empty cup I placed a small mound of rubies and onyx, after
which I sprinkled ground cinnamon inside it, along with a
sprig of peppermint. On the top of the stones I placed two
rose-petals which had been dipped in oil. Next I took in
hand a short silver wand; and, holding it loosely between
my fingers as I tapped it against the edge of the cup and
read:
The spirits of all the elements, in worlds far and wide,
Bring forth a creature, and…
The stones began to glow. Lilac embers of light sprung
upward, scattering here and there.
Give this charm a soul to make my guide.
The embers soared into a tiny cyclone that turned to a
deep purple hue as the stones glowed. With the wand still in
one hand, I used the other to guide the embers into the cup.
43

The Nocturne
As the herbs and powders whirled, they moved upward, the
colors melding together in a vibrant purple shaft of light. It
burst forward as though it emanated from my palms, and
then curved toward the cup, streaming in and over its
wooden lip.
I placed the wand in the cup, and then I brought my
hands above it, guiding it to whirl in from right to left. It
spun round and round, screeching as it drilled through the
bottom of the cup. With the final movement of my hand,
the beam of light leapt forward and spread wings. Then I
could see the ghostly form of a dragon, with light pouring
through him.
He eyed me, snorting silvery tufts of smoke from his
black nostrils. His wings were short, blanketed with
ethereal white feathers. His body was aqua-blue with frilled
white ears that grew backward and curled down the sides of
his face. And he was a rather like a snake, with a sleek
body, narrow diamond-like skull, and curious little white
eyes.
He didn’t acknowledge his name—Sivven, I assumed—and was quite a challenge for me already. But,
then again—I was a healer, and I had not summoned a
dragon before.
His jaws snapped open and closed with a sharp clack as
he scurried around the room, his bony blue tail flicking to
and fro.
44

Chapter Four
“Sivven,” I said, pointing the wand at him, but he refused to return to it. “Come now; back you go.”
He floated toward the table, burrowed into the cup and
lifted his head, chirping as he watched me. I couldn’t help
but laugh.
“Ah, so you live in the cup, do you?” I asked.
He nodded, placing his tiny claws on the lip as his ears
curled to their original position. With renewed mental
strength I waved the wand over him again and commanded
that he return. With a low growl he obliged, vanishing as he
leapt toward the tip of the wand.
I BARELY SLEPT THAT NIGHT. My mind was racing. I couldn’t stop thinking about Annora, or what would
happen when I was to see her again. And, since I was
unable to sleep I wrote a poem for her, on a leaf of parchment I tore from one of my books of spells.
THE NEXT MORNING, I sneaked out of the house,
quietly, before sunrise. I ran all the way to the path by the
edge of the forest…and Annora stood there, waiting for me,
exactly as she had promised. Behind the trees we embraced,
kissing passionately.
She took my hand, and I followed her to a stream that
surged through the open forest and into a river that ran
parallel to the village. It seemed such a long way off; I
could hear only the garbled commotion of the boatmen on
the waterfront, the livestock in paddocks on the outskirts,
45

The Nocturne
and the cadence of horse and cart on the path to the village
centre…no voices.
Here we were out of sight, camouflaged by the trees
and lush grass. The air was warm and sweet. Thousands of
white blossoms were reaching for the dewy kiss of
morning, and a soft golden light was on the horizon. And
there we lay side by side, waiting for the sun to rise.
When I lay there with her, what little restraint I had left
was fading fast. I loved this woman, and I wanted every bit
of her. I didn’t think of anything more; I didn’t consider the
consequences or the fact that we were not yet married.
Though I realized we could not be together yet, though
I loved to imagine it.
“I wrote something for you,” I said as I untied the
scroll of paper from a string on my belt, “last night, when I
couldn’t sleep.”
She took it in hand—but once she began to unroll it she
pushed it back at me, smiling. “Will you read it for me?”
I nodded, then began to read the poem aloud: “Where
on life’s twisted path do we cross?
“How, at every turn do I find thee?
“In the war of love and fate,
“I am to choose but one,
“While my heart’s desires, undying, I face each day;
“And still, in its secret chambers they lay confined.
“If this I’m made to feel, until my final breath
46

Chapter Four
“I prove undeserving—
“Thy love is a dagger, my fate the shield,
“My memories of thee, my trust and hope preserving;
“And challenging either, I have chosen death.
“At which point are we not separated by common
bonds,
“When this love and passion I must not deny,
“And at destiny’s call we are not to part?
“I’ve found a love so pure, so perfect,
“For it no sacrifice is too great—
“With it, in my mind’s eye
“Our parting means
“For all time I’ll hold this love inside.
“There, in dreams and fancies we meet again
“In a love that knows no end: a bond that cannot be
broken by time or distance, in this world or another:
“A sanctuary hidden and held dear within, safe from
fear and pain and plight;
“Here we stay in sweet serenity, together, everlasting
“To succeed our final breaths—even if not taken together,
“As we are separated in body and soul, but stay one in
heart
“Where there is neither darkness nor light, neither beginning nor end….”

47

The Nocturne
There were tears in her eyes when I finished. She embraced me and we sank to the grass in each-other’s arms.
“I don’t know what to say,” she whispered. “Read it
again!”
I laughed. “Next time, love.”
“I love it, it’s beautiful.”
Starting at her knee, I slid my hand over her leg, working upward until I reached her inner-thigh. Then I stopped.
She looked up at me without saying a word. I went on,
trailing her leg with a slow circular motion, as I wished I
could touch her skin—that it not lay hidden beneath her
skirt.
“No, not yet,” she said.
“I want to marry you now.”
“It will be just a little longer, and all worth while when
it happens, I know.”
I nodded, forced to accept this, as it were; we would
have to wait, even as every second of it was torture.
“If I were to ask for your hand in marriage,” I said,
“would I have it?”
She sat up, but didn’t say a word. Then, as I sat beside
her she extended her hand and stretched it over mine. “Does
this count?”
“If I had a ring….”

48

Chapter Four
“No, I couldn’t wear it—not yet,” she said, and paused.
“Do you ever wonder how things will be when we are
married?”
“What do you mean?”
“We will be on our own and have freedom. We can do
whatever we choose, and my father and mother cannot tell
me what to do.”
“Is that all?” I asked.
“Oh, no, it isn’t. There would be babies—five or so, I
think.”
“Five is quite a lot.”
“But I love to see it in my mind.”
The sun was rising. People were moving about near the
village now. And before there was a chance for either of us
to say another thing, someone called out for her.
“That sounds like my father,” she said, and kissed me.
“Farewell, until tonight.”

49

Chapter Five
Lucan

BRADEN AND I WERE successful in getting the attention of a local Diplomat—Auberon Von Sabre—when
we offered to buy him however many drinks he desired, and
introduce him to all the beautiful women we knew—in
exchange for a few hours of his help.
We met at a tavern, seated ourselves at a table that
flanked the door. Braden was beside me, occasionally
sipping from a mug of ale. Von Sabre was explaining the
necessary skills and qualities needed to become a Diplomat:
one must be skillful with their words, which he was;
persuasive, confident, and have a keen sense for unspoken
clues.

The Nocturne
He was eloquent when it came to words, a little eccentric, and had, no doubt, a brilliant mind. But there was a
sinister quality about him that I could not quite place.
“What you must remember is,” he said, “whomever
you work for puts you in absolute control. You are in
charge of everything. You choose what happens between
them and their rivals, other aristocrats, and so on.”
“I think it will take years for us to earn their trust,”
Braden said. “Lord Chenyn was adamant about us proving
ourselves.”
“That stands to reason—it’s quite a responsibility.
They have to trust you.”
“How did you come to do this?” I asked.
He leaned back in the seat and crossed one heel over
the other knee. “I was born to aristocracy, learned all there
was to learn about knighthood, and hated it,” he said. “So I
went to train horses for the Baron and his soldiers. It took
some time, but he did finally ask me if I would help him
with his negotiations.”
The tavern doors burst open, all of a sudden. There was
no barrier to hold off the nighttime breeze, which quickly
swallowed up the fire in the lamp by the door. And then,
four men arrived, dressed in swordsmen’s tunics, creamcolored breeches and red waistcoats, decked out with belts
that held weapons, side to side.

52

Chapter Five
People were moving every which way, as no one knew
who these men were or why they had stormed in here. The
three of us sat there in awe until one of them rushed to Von
Sabre and said, “You are under arrest.”
“For what?” he asked. “There must be some mistake,
there has to be.”
“Adultery with the Baron’s wife, and for her death.”
Braden and I stood and drew back. We were awed and
stunned at the same time, with no idea what to think or who
to trust—or if this was even true.
“You don’t understand!” Von Sabre was saying. “I
have barely spoken to his wife in months, and never alone.
What happened?—someone, please, tell me what is going
on. When did she die? How?”
He stood and resisted the arrest at first. But they bound
his hands in iron clamps all the same, and placed them in
front of his waist before pushing him toward the doorway.
There was no opportunity for us to say anything more. I
wasn’t sure I had anything to say, anyhow—what was there
to ask under those circumstances?
We watched them take him outside and jostle him into
a carriage with wooden bars on all sides, and a bolted door.
Now he was a prisoner awaiting judgment. And from what I
knew about the Baron, a wrongdoer’s fate would end
tragically. What is the punishment for adultery? I tried not

53

The Nocturne
to think about it, but I had a suspicion of what to expect: he
would be put to death.
The Baron’s wife left a note to him and their son Alexander, who was twelve years old, I believe. It spoke of an
affair she was carrying on—and that she simply could not
bear to live another day. She then committed suicide. Her
death was a horribly gruesome one, or so I heard: she
slashed open every visible vein in her body, and then went
to the stables, stood upon a barrel, tied a noose around her
neck….and jumped.
The stable boy arrived and found her, but she had been
suspended for hours by then. There was blood everywhere—even on the note, which she carefully left under a
rock beside the wall.
After Von Sabre’s arrest, some time later he arrived
there. He was presented with the note, but swore he was
never intimate with the Lady, and knew nothing of any
affair. But he was punished just the same: death by
drowning…and was deemed unworthy of a burial, so his
body was taken to the forest and left to rot.
I wouldn’t begin to dream of asking the Baron for the
opportunity to become his new Diplomat. It would be
impossible for me to keep from any woman who may be
there—and God forbid—my fate would be the same as Von
Sabre’s. All we could do was continue searching for the
artifacts which Lord Chenyn desired…and hope that would
54

Chapter Five
be sufficient in proving ourselves worthy of joining his
court.
I think, by now, you must be growing curious of our
identity and our past. You have probably met Rainier,
already, so I will leave the rest of the story to him; but I will
tell you all of the dark secrets I cannot share with him.
Now, here is how it all began….
In the year 1379 I was born, and Braden three years
later. I have very few joyful childhood memories, and even
less faith. My parents, Lucian and Rixenda, were dealt a
cruelly unjust hand in life. None of us were given a moment
of freedom, as we were serfs, forever indebted to the nobles
whose land we shared. We were slaves, more or less, toiling
for every single thing in life, though none of it was truly our
own.
My father was the core of our family, the one who held
us together. I see so much of him in Braden. My mother
was somewhat frail, always in need of reassurance. We
struggled through every winter I can remember, as we were
not allowed to hunt on the nobles’ land, and whatever crops
we grew were theirs to choose from before us.
And then, in the year 1384, a deadly plague ravaged
the countryside. My mother and Braden and I were among
the few who were unharmed by it, though my father was
not so fortunate. A rampant fever struck him, and he died
within a matter of hours. Afterward, my mother’s mental
55

The Nocturne
state was free-falling to absolute despair. She was so
distraught that she attempted to take her own life.
She held a dagger firmly in her hand one night, without
knowing I could see her from behind the cracked door. I
didn’t understand what she was doing or why, and when I
asked her she said, in a soft and wavering tone, “Go on,
son, give me leave…please. Take your brother out with
you.”
“What’s wrong?” I asked, but she waved it away.
Her voice was shaking, and tears flowed down her
cheeks. And, for the first time I can remember, she shouted
at me. “Lucan, go!”
I ran outside and took Braden by the hand as he stood
flanking the doorway. Once we were out of the house I
stepped onto a stack of wood beside the window, just tall
enough to see her standing there by the faint candlelight.
She was sobbing her heart out, holding the dagger with a
trembling hand. She went to a chest near the hearth, opened
it and removed a small glass bottle, filled with some sort of
red liquid. She stabbed the blade into the middle of the
cork, then pulled it side to side until it was free.
After that she went to the bed—a straw mattress on the
floor—sat there and looked up at the roof, as though
looking to God, somewhere in the heavens. “I’m
sorry….Merciful God, forgive me. I have no choice.”

56

Chapter Five
She brought the bottle to her mouth and eagerly drank
its contents. No more than a minute could have gone by
when she crumpled to the bed, screaming and clutching her
hands in front of her. She looked to be in agony, twisting
and contorting in ways I didn’t know were possible. The
sight of her this way terrified me, but for some reason I
could not bring myself to look away. I had to stand there. I
had to watch.
Shortly after that, she managed to get to her feet, and
was coming toward the door.
“Quickly,” I said to Braden, “come on!” And we ran as
fast as we were able to, and then dashed into an alleyway
behind our house. She was barely outside the door when
she clutched her stomach in pain and nearly fell down
again. She was violently ill, vomiting and scarcely able to
catch her breath.
I covered my brother’s eyes, but I watched the entire
thing with some kind of sick curiosity. What was happening
to her? What drove her to make herself so sick? And what
was in that bottle?
She fainted then, and lay there outside the house, completely lifeless. I ran for help, and went to her sister’s (my
aunt’s) house. She rushed to help, but my mother wouldn’t
wake up...and she didn’t until the next day. Her face was so
pale it was frightening; and there were beads of sweat

57

The Nocturne
pouring down her forehead. She couldn’t even stand, she
was so weak.
We stood watching as my aunt tended to her, brought
her a cup of water and herbs. She sat on the edge of the
mattress, looking down at her. Neither of them said a word
for a moment, but then my aunt picked up the little glass
bottle, with three drops of red liquid, which were curdling
with sickly black dots in their centers now.
“What is this?” she asked.
My mother closed her eyes to hold back tears, and then
opened them, only to avert her gaze. She couldn’t bring
herself to answer.
“Rixenda, I must know. What is it?”
“I got it from one of the wizards who were staying
here,” she said. “Why am I still alive?”
My aunt opened the bottle, and a look of sheer horror
crossed her expression. “My god, it’s poison! Why? Why
would you take this?”
“I can’t bear to live anymore.”
“But you have these children—they need you.”
“No, I cannot give them what they need….and I can’t
afford another.”
“What do you mean?”
“I found out right before Lucian died,” she said with
difficulty; “I never had a chance to tell him. I’m with
child—but I cannot keep another, I just cannot. The
58

Chapter Five
children I have are doing without as it is. Better to end my
life than to make them all suffer.”
My aunt stood, both saddened and angered at the same
time. She was outraged by my mother’s decision. “This
poison”—she held up the bottle—“did they tell you what it
is?”
“Blood and fire,” she said. “That’s what they called it.
They said it would be a painless death…but it wasn’t. I felt
as though I was dying. I’ve never felt so much pain.”
“Why didn’t you come to me if you needed help?”
“Would you have given me poison?”
“I hope you’re proud of yourself,” she said and pitched
the bottle into the hearth, “very, very proud.”
There was a small explosion as the glass shattered from
the heat. Flames rose upward and lashed out, in the shape of
a dog’s head with great long fangs. I was certain I heard it
growl as well; the crackling of the flames was overcome by
a deeper, more sinister sound.
We jumped back; everyone was startled.
“That poison you drank,” she went on, “was hellhound’s blood! Now you have let the devil straight into
your soul.”
SEVERAL MONTHS LATER, my youngest brother—
Rainier—was born. The poison had not affected him, or so
it seemed at first. There was a suspicion that he had
absorbed it into his body, since it didn’t kill him. But then
59

The Nocturne
we discovered that dreadful red birthmark on his shoulder—a scar of hellfire. Whether he was doomed because of
the poison, or the fact that my mother had tried to take her
own life, no one knew…but he was ill-fated—that was for
certain.
Things were never right again between my mother and
I. There was no way I would ever forgive her for trying to
kill herself, and I blamed her for my baby brother’s
disfigurement. But she felt sufficiently guilty when she saw
him for the first time, before my aunt took him away for
good.
We didn’t see him very often after that; though they
lived in the same village, she kept him from my mother as
much as possible. And when he turned three years old, she
took him and sneaked out of there one night, somehow
escaping the guards at the nobles’ castle.
I never saw him again, nor did I learn what became of
him or where he may have gone.

60

Chapter Six
Rainier

I ARRIVED FOR THE CHALLENGE. Samuel was
waiting for me, early, of course, and still on horseback, and
there was an impatient crowd standing nearby already. We
met at a grassy knoll behind the steeple, a ways off the path.
Before us were eight posts which had been scattered
indiscriminately, each topped with a wooden bowl, and tied
with a rope which followed to the next, and on from there,
until there was a sort of maze between them.
“The test,” he said, and pointed toward the posts, “is to
ride through there as fast as we can, and cast a spirit spell
for each bowl. Toss the potion or gems into there as you
ride by, and try to summon the spirits without stopping.”
I did my best not to let him know how intimidating this
was for me. “All right.”

The Nocturne
I rode to the course, unhooked the rope and waited for
him to follow behind me. I stopped at the closest track, and
he went on to the one beside me. The horses were pawing
madly at the ground—and then, like lightning they both
lunged forward at once. And we were racing toward the
posts.
I think it would…cheapen the experience if I were to
simply tell you that I used magic to do this, so I will explain
it, in depth, as best I can in order to paint a clear visual in
your imagination. It would be insulting to you, as a reader,
if I were to describe anything less than that.
I came upon the first post within seconds. I reached
toward it, while in my mind I was delving into my knowledge of magic, and desperately searching for a gateway to
the spirits I would summon. I urged them to come forth,
show themselves, just as I opened my hand and felt a great
surging energy spring forth from my palm. It weakened me,
instantly. When I looked, once more, at the bowl, I realized
it was not a spirit I had brought forth, but rather a tiny
dithering trail of smoke. That was all. Pitiful, isn’t it? I was
humiliated; and meanwhile, Samuel was racing onward,
after having effortlessly cast a snake spirit.
I tried again, trying to gain control over the spirits; but
they were running rampant in my head all the same,
ignoring me no matter how hard I struggled to summon
them. I was furious now, and spurred my horse on, then
62

Chapter Six
tried another time…only to have absolutely nothing happen.
That was when I came to a halt, ripped the rope from the
sidelines and rode away as quickly as I could. But it served
me no good; I could still hear the jeering and shouting and
mockery of the spectators. One of them shouted the word
“Demon”, while another said I was cursed with fire and
must be put to death. My powers were becoming more and
more unnatural—and the people were right: I was not in
control of my abilities.
Not only had I failed myself, I’d just lost every possible chance of gaining Annora’s family’s trust.
I WENT HOME, heartbroken and too ashamed to talk
to anyone. Would I ever be able to marry Annora? I
wondered. What will become of us?
Since the challenge, I feared the prophecy. By that time
I was beginning to realize my fate was no longer in my
hands—there was a greater, darker plan for me and I could
do nothing to stop it. There was a prophecy. Somehow it
was a part of me, and changing who I would become. Can
you imagine how painful, how difficult this was to accept?
I wanted to forget it—at least for the time being, until I
could figure out what to do—but I knew that no matter how
I was to fight against the prophecy or ignore it, there would
be no difference. It didn’t matter anymore.

63

The Nocturne
Annora’s love was all that could keep me in here, and
for her I was willing to give my life and soul. Yet, as I now
understood, it could—and would—never be.
“What did you think you were doing?” my Aunt asked
as soon as I stepped inside the house.
“I don’t know…I was trying to prove myself and that I
am in control of my powers.”
“I can tell you are. Please, sit down here a moment.”
She gestured to the table, and we sat facing one-another.
“There is something I need to talk to you about.”
“I shouldn’t have taken the challenge,” I said, “I
know.”
“It isn’t that.”
“What, then?”
She took a deep breath, seeming deeply troubled by
this. “There is nothing more I can teach you. Your powers
are greater than mine, too…and I don’t know how to help
you learn about them.”
I was silent; lost in thought, I suppose.
She went on: “People are demanding that you leave
here. It started the other day, when you saved that girl. I
tried to reason with them; I tried to say I could help you and
it would be in control, but they won’t have it. And I’m—
I’m afraid of what will happen to you if you stay.”
“Don’t,” I said with sadness in my voice, “don’t say
that…you can’t. Don’t send me away.”
64

Chapter Six
“I have no choice,” she said. “Listen to me, listen,
please. You have two brothers; you are to go find them.
They will know about what is going on.”
For a moment I was too stunned to speak. This was the
first I had ever heard of my brothers—and the idea of it was
both exciting and strange at the same time. Why did she not
tell this to me before? I wondered. Why wait until now?
“Brothers”—I repeated the word in hopes of fully
grasping the thought of it—“did I know them?”
“You did. But you weren’t old enough to remember.”
“Where are they?”
“Last I knew,” she said, “they moved to a village by
the sea. I think it is several miles north of here.”
“Do you know their names?” I asked. “How am I supposed to find them?”
“Lucan is the oldest, and Braden is three years older
than you are. I’m not sure—you will have to go to different
villages and look for them.”
“If I find them, what am I to do?” I said. “I cannot
leave Annora; I cannot bear to be without her.”
“Ask them to help you; and they will I’m certain. I’m
sorry, Rainier, but you must go—you will be put to death
otherwise.”
“How long?” I asked. “How long do I have?”
“You should leave at first light.”

65

The Nocturne
I LEFT THE HOUSE as quickly as I could. I didn’t
know where I was going, nor did I care. I was furious and
couldn’t bear to stay there another moment. Every conceivable emotion had struck me, in a wild tangle in my mind
and soul. My life was falling apart. There were too many
new feelings for me to grasp at once: the prospect of
leaving Annora; the strange new wonder of the fact that I
had two brothers; and the fear of my life being manipulated
by this prophecy and everyone who believed in it. I didn’t
know what to make of this.
I should have spent that time preparing to leave here,
but instead I walked down the hill, toward the village; and I
stopped there, looking out at the sea. After a moment or so I
was startled as something touched my back. I turned
around—and there could not have been any greater surprise
than when I saw Annora, standing beside me. I needed her,
more than I ever allowed myself to think I would.
I trailed her cheek and jaw with my fingers. As I did
she grasped my arm and pulled me toward her. She didn’t
know how upset I was, nor did she have any idea that we
could no longer be together. She was her typical highspirited, playful self, eager for us to cuddle and talk for as
long as possible. But I wasn’t, no matter how I struggled to
hide it.
She looked so breathtakingly beautiful, standing before
the soft moonlight that reflected in the sea; her hair
66

Chapter Six
cascading freely down her shoulders and back; her eyes
warmed by her undying passion for life.
“I was waiting for you by the barn,” she said; “I
thought you would see me there.”
I wanted to say something, but there were no words to
accurately show my feelings. I was too brokenhearted to
speak. So I stood, just looking at her with sadness and
longing in my eyes.
“What is it?” she asked and brushed back my hair.
“What’s wrong, sweet? You haven’t said a word….”
“I can’t be with you anymore,” I said.
“What? Why?”
“People are afraid of me. I’m to leave here until I’m
able to control what I do with magic.”
“That’s absurd!” she said. “Where—when will you
go?”
“At first light.”
“No, you can’t”—she leaned her head on the little hollow of my chest—“please don’t, I am begging you. They
will change their minds, I know—ask them, or tell them.
They will, they have to.”
“You know I can’t do that.”
“What about me, what if I beg they let you stay?”
“It won’t make any difference,” I said in my usual softspoken tone. “And I may be killed if I stay here.”

67

The Nocturne
She looked up at me with tears building up. “Then I
will go with you.”
When I tried to sound optimistic it fell terribly flat.
“How would you?” I asked. “How do you think we would
both leave without someone finding out? I will return as
soon as I can, I promise you—”
Before I could finish she took my hand once more,
urging me to follow her…and I did, until we reached the
closest barn. When we stepped inside I could barely see
where we were going, as the only source of light was the
moonlight that filtered through the doorway. Then, as I held
her in my arms we tumbled into the side of a haystack; our
lips crushing together, our hands carefully exploring oneanother. I had not felt such passion, such neediness in her
kiss before. She grasped the bottom edge of the tunic I was
wearing, and helped me to pull it off as I lifted my arms.
Once my chest was exposed, she trailed the curves of
muscle with her fingertips, then leaned in and kissed her
way downward nonstop until she reached my stomach. But
when she caught sight of my birthmark she paused.
“I’m sorry,” I said, and began to put on the tunic. “I
should have told you.”
She reached out, took the tunic from me and tossed it
aside. “Why would you be sorry? It doesn’t offend me… I
wasn’t expecting it, is all.”

68

Chapter Six
“I try to keep it hidden,” I said. “I hate it, I hate to see
it.”
She drew closer and gently pushed me back until I was
lying down and her body was stretched across mine, our
hips so well aligned it made us both tense with desire. Then
she leaned down and forward to kiss the birthmark on my
shoulder, to show that she accepted me and all my flaws.
Being so close to her—able to position my loins against the
soft depression of hers—rocked me with the most incredible lust. I felt sensations I hadn’t even dreamed of in my
entire life. There was this…pressure that was building to an
excruciating high. Each time I touched her it throbbed as
though fed by every vein in my body; and it was so
arousing that I could give in—I was reaching that peak
faster than I realized. I tried to regain control, but I
couldn’t. I wanted her…now.
She wrapped her arms around my shoulders, and a
shudder coiled through my spine. We were still kissing
passionately. There was no way for me to pull away from
her, I thought, but drew backward anyhow. I couldn’t bring
myself to give in to my desires and then leave her behind.
“Is something wrong?” she asked.
I caressed her, desperately, longingly. “I can’t do this.”
Her voice was thick with sadness “You mustn’t leave
me. Please, take me with you!”

69

The Nocturne
I pressed my forehead against hers. “I love you more
than I’ve ever loved anyone,” I said, “and you must never
forget it.”
With one swift movement I pulled her toward me and
encircled her with my arms. She laid her hands on my
shoulders, and wrestled playfully in my grasp. Her hair was
flowing over her shoulders, its wavy texture creating a
fringe of thick brown locks that framed her face. I kissed
her neck, tickling her until she was nearly swooning with
rapture. Just as I loosened my embrace she kissed my cheek
before slipping her tongue over it, playfully.
I braced her hips with my hands, and with another swift
motion I rolled to the left, pinning her on her back. I glided
my fingers down her neck, to her collarbone…then I
touched what little of her breasts lay before my eyes, at the
top of her corseted blouse. Using my other hand, I
carefully drew her skirt upward from her ankles, and rest it
on her knees. Her body became a thousand lightning-struck
nerves, each eagerly awaiting my next touch. As I began to
kiss her, my hand slid beneath her skirt as I trailed her
inner-thigh with two fingertips. She wasn’t certain what to
make of this, but she clung to me, giving in, wanting more.
“Annora,” I whispered, “I will find a way be with you,
I swear to it.”
She breathed sharply. The pleasure was escalating—
and with it her body turned rigid, tight, pulsing with a
70

Chapter Six
maiden desire. I was so close to touching her, but I drew
back before temptation overcame me. If I had gone any
further than her legs, I would have dishonored our love. I
would have ruined what made our relationship so pure.
I brought the lower-half of her skirt down to her ankles,
put my arms around her middle and drew her as close as we
could be. I was still feeling the hard rush of my body, which
made it nearly impossible for me to think rationally. Yet I
put aside what I wanted, because my love for her succeeded
all else.
“When we are married,” I said; “we will make love
then. Not before.”
She twirled a lock of my hair around her finger, and
did all she could to hold back her tears. “How do you know
we will see each other again?”
I placed my finger on her lips to hush her. “There is no
sacrifice too great for love. Remember that. I’ll find a way.”
“But what if you don’t? I cannot go on without you….”
“Don’t you have any faith in me?” I asked.
“Yes, but I’m afraid.”
“Oh, love, come here.” I bent forward to kiss her in
hopes it would be reassuring. “The day will come, I
promise you—we are going to marry, and have as many
babies as you want, and raise them in some beautiful place.
It’s going to last forever.”

71

The Nocturne
Tears were dripping down her cheeks now. I wiped
them away, looked down at her and saw her smile. And
then there was this fierce shouting voice outside, moving
toward us. There was no time to get out of there. I had
scarcely rolled onto my side and was reaching for the tunic
beside me when Annora’s father rushed in, shouting all
sorts of foul and appalling things; I heard him say I was
worthless and had turned her into a whore. Perhaps it was
wrong for us to be here this way…but I loved her more than
it seemed possible to love anyone; I wanted to express it
and make her happy, however long I would be with her.
Annora and I stood together, and I slipped into the tunic before there was time for her father to see my birthmark. He looked on in awe as we stayed there, holding
each-other close. I wouldn’t run off and leave her; I needed
to stand my ground.
“Nothing happened, Father; nothing,” she said between
sobs. “He came to bid farewell to me—it’s my fault, not
his.”
“Be quiet!” he said and turned to me. “And you bid
farewell by...having your way with my daughter? Is that it?
You bring her out to the barn and think no one will know?
How many times has it been? Every night?”
“How can you say that?” she said. “He loves me, Father. He never touched me. And I brought him here; it was
my idea, so blame me, please. Punish me…not him.”
72

Chapter Six
He silenced her by slapping the side of her face with an
open hand, yet still hard enough that I heard the sudden
clapping sound of his palm striking her cheek. And it
awakened an anger I didn’t know I had, a dark and
powerful fury that suddenly took over me. I had kept quiet
and stood back as long as I could—and I wouldn’t after he
hurt her.
I shoved him back, into the middle of the barn. When I
came toward him he tried to push me in the opposite
direction. And we were punching at one-another, caught in
a vicious brawl, while Annora was crying and shouting at
us to stop. I didn’t want to fight, but something inside me
kept urging me on. I was powerless to refuse it. I would
stop at nothing to protect her. So we kept on, until my nose
and under-lip were bleeding, and I had forced him to the
ground and drew the dagger from my belt, ready to bear
down on it with all my weight. I didn’t know what I was
doing, nor was I able to stop and consider it and reason with
myself. I wasn’t in control of my own body, or mind, or
actions. The dagger was in my hand and I was going to
strike and end this. Yet suddenly I realized what was about
to happen, and I drew back, startled by what I had almost
allowed myself to do. I wasn’t a killer, I would never hurt
anyone! What had happened to me? What was I doing?
Annora, still sobbing, rushed to put herself between us
and stop the fighting. But I was finished—and by that time
73

The Nocturne
it was obvious to me—even more so than before—that I
had no choice but to get out of there.
He stood, grasped Annora, who continued to protest
when he dragged her toward him and held her there, firmly.
I didn’t resist because there was nothing I could do. I
couldn’t even kiss her, one last time. It was over.
“I don’t ever want to see you again,” he said, “ever! If
there is any part of you that touches her…I will cut it off.
Am I understood?”
I nodded.
“No!” she cried. “Don’t do this. Please, Father! I love
him….”
As he dragged her away he said to me, “I’m going to
return for you, with everyone who is going to find out about
what you’ve done—ruined my daughter, tried to kill me.
And I’ll burn everything, everything—you, your house—all
of it!”
After a moment I finally found the strength to walk
away. I didn’t say a word more to either of them as they
left. As soon as I left the barn I ran back home, gathered
everything I wished to take with me—and could fit on the
sides of the saddle—and swore to myself that I would never
look back.

74

Chapter Seven
Annora

MY FATHER TOOK me home as soon as Rainier left.
I tried to look back, but he kept pushing me along. I begged
him to stop, tried to tell him how much Rainier meant to
me, but he wouldn’t listen. He didn’t hear a word I had to
say. I think, what upset me more than anything else was
that, he was still treating me like a child—and I was old
enough to marry! I could choose how I wished to live; it
was my will, not theirs. This was my body, my life, and my
immortal soul to bear the consequences…so why was not it
in my ability to decide what I wanted? Why didn’t it
matter?

The Nocturne
I was barely inside the house and my Mother was
scolding me. Once my Father told her what had happened,
she waved her arms and broke down sobbing. I stood in
front of her, but I didn’t speak. I was too afraid of what
would happen if I spoke my mind, and I wouldn’t lie.
“It will be our good fortune to find you a husband,” she
said, “as soon as we are able to…if there is a man who will
take you now.”
“I don’t want a husband,” I said. “Can I not make my
own choice of who I will marry? I’m of age—I will
choose.”
“Oh, you—,” she said, got up and slapped my face, so
hard that it brought tears back after I had just been able to
hold them in.
“Why do you do this? He didn’t touch me! I am still
pure, I swear to you.”
“Of course,” she went on dryly, “of course you are.
Don’t lie to me, Annora. He took you out there to the barn,
in the dark of night, and hid …why? And he kept his hands
to himself? Come, now, we both know what you were
doing—and I am so ashamed, I cannot believe you.”
It was difficult for me to breathe, for I was crying so
much. “I swear this on my life, Mother…he did nothing
wrong. I took him to the barn. We were saying goodbye,
and I kissed him, and I’m sorry.”

76

Chapter Seven
“Go before God, then, and swear to your innocence,”
my Father said. “Ask for God’s forgiveness, because you
don’t have mine, and you never will. You have shamed this
family—and for what?—some devil-follower?”
“He is a good person,” I cried. “I would be dead if it
weren’t for him, dead and rotting someplace. And you take
me for granted.”
“The boy is a sorcerer,” he said. “He is godless, he is
damned. Do you know the kind of danger he has put you in
already?”
I gave up on reasoning with them. They were furious,
and there was no hope they were going to listen to what I
said, or what I wanted. They were never going to accept
Rainier, as we were devout in our religion and he had none.
And he practiced magic, which we did not believe in, and
which also, in the eyes of God-fearing people, made him
evil, damned. But the worst thing of all (if there was one),
was how they were planning to arrange a marriage for me,
when I had promised myself to Rainier and agreed to his
proposal. Oh, this was madness! It was the sort of awkward,
horrible situation that I’d heard about so many times in
legends and fairytales. I didn’t like to think it would ever
happen to me—no one does, I suppose…but since it had,
my heart was breaking in ways I never thought it could. I
hurt, through and through. I couldn’t live without him; I
meant that when I told him, though he promised he would
77

The Nocturne
return for me, and all was going to be well between us. If
only I could believe that now, my love, I thought; I wish it
were true, I wish I felt, in my heart, that you could come
home.
THE NEXT DAY came much too soon. He was all I
dreamed of, and the first one I thought about when I opened
my eyes. There were dried tears on my cheeks, still, from
the hours I spent awake last night, crying to myself. This
was only the first day—one in tens, or hundreds, maybe—
for me to endure without him. Where was I to even begin?
Before I met him, I believed my life was perfect as
could be. I loved every second I was on this earth; it was
too beautiful not to appreciate…but love—well, love was
so much more. It was a thousand times brighter and more
fulfilling than the most wonderful day you can imagine.
From the day I met him, our hearts were one—and neither
of us would be the same afterward. Fate brought us
together, I believed, and it would find its way to do so
again.
But now I was trying to forget him and to go on as if
we had never met. Life will be easier that way, I thought,
without the pain of our separation; without all the questions
I must ask myself; without this simmering hatred I feel for
the people who drove him away.
And yet, not a moment passed when he didn’t cross my
mind. Somehow our love was meant to be, I told myself,
78

Chapter Seven
and nothing would stand between us. Oh, but I couldn’t be
that naive. Months—maybe even years—could pass before
his return. What was I to do? It would serve no good to
count the waking time, but I would wait for him, and keep
all my faith and virtue, until my dying day. I made that
vow, in spite of what my parents wanted for me.
That day, after he left, as I walked to the marketplace,
young men gathered round me; some making insults, others
groping at me as I tried to get out of there.
“What troubles you?” one of them asked pressing himself against me. I slapped at him, missing, of course, as the
others clutched my wrists and held them firmly. “Can you
speak?”
“She’s a mute, too.”
“No,” another said, “all she understands is witchcraft.”
“It hurts,” I said, “let me go!”
Thankfully—if I should be so bold to say it—my
Mother arrived and shoed them away. After they were gone
I found composure, gathered my things in my arms, and
hastened in the opposite direction. I wasn’t able to face her
down yet. How she looked at me was making hatred swell
in my heart, and I could not bear to feel it. She had made
me so angry I was tempted to pitch something at her—I
was, truly—but I always stopped short of that, for fear I
would make matters even worse.

79

The Nocturne
I went on quietly, and would have been content if I had
not spoken for the rest of the day. I could not hide my
feelings, though; everyone who looked at me saw the
sadness in my eyes. They knew I was miserable…except no
one cared enough to help me.

80

Chapter Eight
Rainier

I TRAVELED FOR MILES, trying to put behind what
troubled me, what angered and pained me…and most
importantly: what I held so dear. But no matter how hard I
tried to forget everything, it was still with me. At first,
every moment felt like eternity, but in time the minutes
turned to hours, and hours to days. If I’d been given the
choice, I would have cast aside everything about the
prophecy and my destiny; I would have forgotten it without
the slightest hesitation if it meant I could be with Annora.
It was my second night of travel, and I stopped to rest
in the open forest. I made a bed of leaves and grass, tried to
get to sleep…but no matter what or how I did, my mind
was spinning—and everything that happened last night was

The Nocturne
going through my head again and again, which made sleep
nearly impossible. I gave it up for the time being, and
decided, if the moonlight would allow for it, find a dream
spell in my Book of Shadows.
I tore a piece of parchment from the back of the book,
and on the bottom of the page I wrote the spell I intended to
conjure. And I folded it three times (very tightly), first in a
triangle, and then I creased its lower corners, after which I
ran my left thumb over it, as I whispered:
“Give my wishes, my power and hope a force so
bright!
“That I can see her and she me, a vision to carry:
“Take my thoughts of her, to chase away the darkness
and reveal light,
“So that, Annora, my one true love,
“May dream of me tonight.”
I pulled a dagger from my belt, and gently I pressed its
blade into the pad of my thumb, bringing forth a drop of
blood. I waited for it to spread, for the blood to become the
size of a coin before I touched my thumb to the middle of
the triangle. Once it came together with the parchment I
closed my eyes and held out the triangle, shaking it
vigorously. Then I did exactly as the spell said—I tossed
the paper to the ground before I opened my eyes. And when
I did, I was absolutely astounded by what lay before me. I
crawled forward, planted my hands in the grass and leaned
82

Chapter Eight
in to gaze upon it, this marvel that was the sheer work of
magic. It was splendid. The blood had dripped here and
there in the centre of the triangle…yet the result was a
perfect little heart. I lifted it up, and as the moonlight was
cast upon it, I was able to see where the blood had soaked
through both sides…and in my hands, the heart seemed to
beat.
As silvery clouds rolled in front of the moon and the
light began to fade, I readied myself for sleep once more.
Then, with the heart beside me, still beating faithfully, I
drifted into sleep…
…IT WAS A DREAM AND I KNEW IT. I was traveling though the forest; I think it must have been these very
travels—when I had stopped for sleep—but I could not be
certain. I was startled, and the more I tried to understand
this, the more confusing it became. Why, I don’t know, but
all of a sudden I thrust my heels against Samson’s sides,
caused him to jolt into a gallop.
With sweat foaming across his chest and down his
flanks, he ran mile after mile, through the seemingly
endless thicket, with swift and erratic motions here and
there, over another shrub or stump, past the narrowest gap
between two trees. Then there were some kind of specters—and they seemed so real, so frightening that I was a
prisoner in my own imagination. All these grey and black
demons gathered round me, their bony wings in a flurry of
83

The Nocturne
ripped and torn flesh that somehow suspended them. I tried
to look back, but Samson was running much to fast. Yet as
we went on and the beasts flew round and round us, I
caught another glimpse of them…but I had no idea what
they were.
The ground began to rumble, the earth splitting in
shards like shattered glass. Trees snapped in half, creating a
labyrinth as they crashed, collided with the world as it was
torn apart. And water splashed out of streams, an upsurge—
a crystalline volcano. As the path began to separate,
Samson reared, his left hind-leg plunging into an evergrowing crevice. He let out a screech, craning his neck
upward and to the right as I was thrown to the ground. And
just when I was falling, I saw he was about to collapse on
top of me! I rolled sideways, at the moment his leg sank
and he collided with the earth with a thunderous crashing
sound.
For a moment, the demons were gone. There was silence until…flames erupted beneath the earth, dirt and fire
spraying from the ground like blood from an artery. It
flourished, rising, rising, rising until the red and golden
light seemed to devour the world, with shadows streaming
here and there. There were more demons then, floating
figures whose spines were bloody stumps that dangled
beneath their black cloaks. I caught sight of their faces: I
saw a skull with neither eyes nor flesh, but a fierce red light
84

Chapter Eight
that burned within them and shone through the cavities in
their bones.
I slid back, put my hands on the ground to brace myself. Samson rolled onto his stomach and bent his forelegs
as he tried to stand. I looked up, and I saw one of the
demons floating in front of me as the clash went on in the
distance. Again I pulled back, seeing its bony fingers curl in
a gesture for me to draw near. With a snakelike hiss, it drew
back with movements as quick as light and smooth as
mercury.
“Abaddon, Wolfbane and Nighthawk!” it shrieked, lifting its arms as though to command a great source of
energy; and as it did, all the blood and bane of hell had been
brought to earth.
Blood began to rush over the flames, first in slow
streams and then in rivers that were fast becoming a lake. I
could smell it, and with it was the horrid stench of death, of
a thousand years’ rotted flesh and burned bones.
“Rise with the flames!” he said, wild flailing gestures
of his hands still going on. “Rise, Abaddon!”
Can you imagine what a nightmare this was? I heard
myself scream, but I had not the might to awaken. I was so
deep in the dream, numbed by the spell…and it had gone
terribly wrong.
I moved toward Samson, trying to steady him as he
continued his struggle to stand. I heard the demon again, its
85

The Nocturne
voice thicker, louder and far more terrifying. The earth
rumbled again, and a shadow spread over the treetops,
darkening all but the fractures in the ground, from which I
watched the three hounds of hell emerge…
They sprung upward, their gargantuan black paws
gripping the forest floor. And trees crumbled to the ground,
branches snapping in two as the fissure spread. I stared at
them, with not the faintest idea what to make of this or why
I was seeing such awful creatures. They were frightening. I
was almost paralyzed by my fear. Their frames, massive as
those of tigers, were covered with thick agouti fur; and their
claws and fangs seemed to be arched, and were glimmering
in the dark of night. As fast as they emerged, they tore into
the thick of battle with smooth, catlike movements.
The demons let out a shrill cry; and as the hellhounds
soared far past them, toward the moon, Abaddon parted his
jaws and let out the most thunderous roar. Demons tossed
blades of fire at one-another, fiery knives whirling through
the darkness. And as the largest one fell, the hellhounds tore
after it, flames rushing from their mouths.
It seemed the battle was going on forever, while I told
myself it was a dream from which I should soon awaken
and see it come to pass. But I couldn’t.
“Bring them home now, Abaddon,” the demon said. As
he pointed to one that was fleeing, the hellhounds raced
after it, leapt onto its back and tore its flesh with wet
86

Chapter Eight
splitting sounds. When its wings were crushed and its body
ripped apart, it shrieked, lurching forward only to be
dragged toward the fissure. Roaring, screeching—the
sounds went on and on until I could hear nothing else, nor
could I see past the ongoing clash of flames.
I cried, trying to run through the blood lake…but naturally, the further into it I went, the more it deepened; and
soon I sank with the red fluid covering my face and blurring
my eyes. Then I was swimming through it…trying to find
the light, the end. All of a sudden the darkness whirled
around me, and the dream was slowly floating away. My
chest was heaving; in my sleep I could hear myself
struggling for my breath.
I AWAKENED, and opened my eyes to the warm glow
of the morning sun, and saw nothing but an endless view of
pine, oak and emerald shrubs. I was still on a bed of grass,
with the forest for shelter and a sparkling fresh stream
nearby. But that nightmare had seemed so real that, even
after I awakened I found I was reassuring myself of the fact
it was only my imagination.

87

Chapter Nine
Rainier

AFTER I LEFT the forest, I traveled for two more days
before I reached the next large settlement; I had crossed
through two small villages along the way. Each new place I
came upon, I searched the fields and buildings alike, asking
passerby if they knew anyone by the names: Lucan and
Braden de Aaradyn.
I was determined to find my brothers. I wanted to learn
about the prophecy and how I was born into it; I wanted to
know why I was cursed with such a horrid birthmark; and
more than anything else—I wanted to learn who I truly was.
I went about my search for them alone, of course, but I
wished then, even more than I had before, that Annora
could have been with me, especially since it seemed so

The Nocturne
odd—and awkward—to approach two perfect strangers in
hopes of being accepted and knowing them as family. For
so long I’d acted as though—no matter our differences—it
would bear no importance if they welcomed me or not. I
would not allow them to change my life either way. I built
a vast wall of courage in my mind, naive enough to think
that everything would stay the same. Yet, even as I
promised myself that, the day I would find them was going
to be a wondrous one—perhaps one of the most exciting
times of my life—still it was daunting beyond belief. I
could not help but wonder: How will this affect me? What
if it does change my life? If they tell me about the prophecy
and what it truly means, will I see myself differently?
Then came the day when I arrived in a coastal village
just outside of that settlement. From the meadows I could
see the harbor: ships all along the docks; boatmen moving
here and there; sails waving freely before the pristine blue
skies. I was finally there and quickly growing closer to my
goal of finding my brothers.
I tied Samson to a post just beyond the villages. Then I
walked down to the harbor, making my way through the
thick stream of sailors and other boatmen who were
carrying crates and barrels aboard the ships. I was fascinated, and stayed there for some time, until in the early
afternoon I resumed my search for my brothers, and went
about asking the local people where I would find them. It
90

Chapter Nine
took longer than I had expected (and hoped), but finally one
man told me to go to the tanner’s booth in the marketplace.
So I did—and I was given vague directions to Lucan’s
house, and went there the very next day.
I rode to the outlying section of houses, banked along
the hills of the countryside. A small few of them stood apart
from the others, being slightly larger and facing a nearby
river. One of these, as I had been told, was Lucan’s home;
the farthest from the hills. I approached it with a fear I
wasn’t certain I could overcome.
I was so nervous that, for a moment I paused and told
myself I couldn’t do this. But once I gathered my wits I
rethought it and went on…and knocked on the door.
It was sheer torture waiting for an answer. My stomach
was in knots. My palms were sweating so hard I couldn’t
keep them together. I felt like an absolute fool. I had not the
faintest idea what I was going to say.
Then the door opened, and a handsome, dark-haired
young man stepped outside, and asked: “Can I help you?”
“A boatman told me to come here…,” I said. “I am
trying to find Lucan de Aaradyn.”
He leaned against the wall beside the doorway, smiling
faintly. “Who wants to know?”
“I do. I’m looking for my brothers.”
His gaze narrowed; and for the longest few seconds of
my life he looked at me without saying a word. His silence
91

The Nocturne
made the situation even more awkward. I just wanted for it
to end, somehow.
All of a sudden, as though some ancient memory had
returned to him, he said brightly, “Rainier?”
I didn’t know what else to say, or if I should shake his
hand or stand back. So I replied with a simple: “Yes.”
“This is—oh, it’s incredible!” he said, embracing me.
“I can’t quite believe it. Where have you been all this
time?”
“Not far from here. I didn’t—I didn’t know about you
until a few days ago.”
He turned away, stepped past the house and shouted,
“Braden, come here! You won’t believe this.” Then he said
to me, “I haven’t seen you since you were just a little thing.
We didn’t know what became of you.”
Braden arrived shortly thereafter, with no idea of what
was going on. “What?” he asked, then acknowledged me
before going on. “Oh, hello. What is it, Lucan?”
“This is Rainier.”
“That’s a strange coincidence,” Braden said to me.
“We had a brother with that name.”
I laughed. “I know—it’s me.”
Lucan slapped his shoulder in the humorously aggressive way that brothers do. “You idiot.”
“Why didn’t you just say who he was?”
92

Chapter Nine
“Don’t mind him,” Lucan said as he opened the door
and gestured for me to follow. “Come in, please.”
Once we were inside and seated at the table I wasted no
time explaining about my childhood, my love for magic,
and the strange powers I was beginning to discover. They
took all of this quite well, surprisingly; they didn’t even
flinch when I told them about how I had saved Annora.
“Where did you grow up?” I asked. “I want to know as
much about you as I can. I was told that you would be able
to tell me about a prophecy. ”
They looked at each other, then back to me, their faces
without expression. Both were quiet, and then Lucan said,
“Which one?”
I didn’t want to give away too much about my past, for
fear they didn’t know about my birthmark and the supposed
curse that went along with it. So I did my best to sound
vague, hoping that, by some chance, I could learn more
about the prophecy before telling them I was thought to be
a part of it.
“I don’t know exactly,” I said. “I heard of it a while
ago; people were speaking of a prophecy—that it was going
to bring bad things to us all. Something to that effect.”
“Why ask us?” Braden said.
“When I asked, someone told me that the two of you
would know.”

93

The Nocturne
“Well, there is one…,” Lucan said, “but I don’t think it
is anything like what you are saying.”
“I want to know.”
He smiled. “Such fervor! I’m curious—why do you
keep asking?”
“Just curiosity,” I said, leaning back. “I’m on a quest, I
think; I want to learn as much as I can. And I’ve always
wanted to know this—what about our family? I don’t know
much about them.”
Their silence made it obvious to me that I had broached
a very delicate subject, which, of course, I never meant to
do. But there were a precious few things I had been told
about my parents—and now my mind was racing with all
these questions—all that I had wondered throughout the
years; all I thought of when I went to sleep at night, or
asked myself whenever that void in my life felt a little
deeper than usual. It was difficult for me to be this age and
have never heard anyone speak of my family, except when I
asked my Aunt—and even that took hours.
“A long time ago,” Braden said with difficulty; “they
died years ago.”
To hear him say that was painful, in a way, as it was
my family as well as theirs. I felt…wrong for having asked,
yet I remained just as curious, still wanting for them to have
answers for me.

94

Chapter Nine
“Don’t ask how,” Lucan said. “It isn’t easy for us to
talk about.”
“You know,” Braden said, “on a brighter note, I think
we ought to celebrate—the three of us; drink to our
reunion.”
Lucan nodded, then gestured to me. “Come; let me
show you how we celebrate. You will never forget it, I
assure you.”
“Where do you go?”
As I stood, Braden took me by the arm, opening the
door. “I’m sure you haven’t had a time like this before—
you’ll love it. And we can get to know you while we’re
there.”
I felt a bit intimidated, as I had no idea where they
were insisting I go with them; but we needed time to get
acquainted—and I wanted to spend as much time with them
as possible. So I agreed; and they took me with them to the
local tavern.
I had been in only one tavern before that. And it felt as
though I had entered a completely different world. This was
nothing close to what I was accustomed to, nor had I ever
dreamed of spending a night that way. There were women
everywhere, rushing about, and fetching drinks for the
screaming drunkards who demanded them. There was
shouting, brawling, laughter—everything, all at once, in
one crashing, ringing din that seemed to have no end.
95

The Nocturne
When we first arrived I leaned against the wall near the
entrance, watching groups of people arrive and depart every
moment or so. I didn’t know what more to do, and felt
horribly out of place, while Lucan and Braden, who did this
more often than not, had each found a beautiful woman and
were served their drinks in no time. Then they were seated
at a table in the far corner, the farthest from where I stood,
while these women practically threw themselves at them,
sitting on their laps and running their fingers through their
hair. It disgusted me, as I had never been in that sort of
situation, and I wasn’t certain how to act. And it made me
feel awkward because I would never be unfaithful to
Annora, yet I couldn’t ignore the savage needs of my body.
I used every bit of strength and will I had to subdue such
feelings. And I was thinking of her the whole time,
wondering how and when I would be able to return to her.
How were we going to wed—and where, without her family
learning about it? If my fate as a sorcerer—grand as it
seemed it would be—meant that we were not meant to be
together, then what future was it at all? A dark and
miserable one, I thought. How am I to go on this way? Why
was I made to choose between her and what the prophecy
may mean for me?
After a few moments, Lucan walked up to me and took
me by the arm, leading me to a table next to theirs, where
two attractive (and undoubtedly half-drunk) women were
96

Chapter Nine
waiting for me. I didn’t want this, but my brothers urged me
on, saying, “Go on, Rainier, have something to drink. Sit
down; relax.”
One of the barmaids brought a mug to me—and I
didn’t know what was in it, what I was drinking, but Lucan
and Braden were a strong influence around me already, and
I thought, What is the harm?
We sat there for hours, talking and laughing as though
we had known each other our entire lives. It was almost
uncanny how well we got along. For the first time I felt like
I belonged; I wanted to be here and they were thrilled I was
with them.
While I was there I drank, and I drank, and I drank
even more, until I was dizzy and weary and so out of sorts
that I had not the faintest idea what was going on. The
women took advantage of me as well, touching me in ways
I would have never allowed otherwise, as right then I was
too drunk to realize it. But I let it happen all the same.
By the end of the night I was so exhausted that leaned
on the table for support as I stood, and my brothers helped
me to get back to Lucan’s house, where I spent the night,
while he was on the next mattress, not too far from me, with
one of the women he met that night.
I didn’t notice at the time what I had done, nor did I
have the faintest idea what it would lead my brothers to
plan for me. That night changed everything because, little
97

The Nocturne
did I know, they weren’t simply being kind to me—they
discovered something about my powers that made them
decide to wield them as best they could, for their own gain.
But I knew nothing of this; in my mind, all was well, and
we were getting to know each-other after so many years
apart.

98

Chapter Ten
Lucan

THE FOLLOWING morning, when I awakened, the
woman I spent the night with had gone her own way, and
Braden had slept on the floor of his house, too tired to crawl
into bed. Rainier, on the other hand, was still fast asleep
when we were sitting at the table after sunrise sipping tea,
to ward off the lingering effects of our drinking. He had
nearly passed out from the alcohol, which, I then found out,
he was not accustomed to.
As we were talking, quietly, of course, and outside his
earshot had he been awake, I asked, “Did you see what he
did last night?”
“No, what?”

The Nocturne
“The table—didn’t you see it?” I said in an enthusiastic
whisper. “He leaned against it, and when he stood up there
were these…marks, burn marks, where his hands had been.
I checked them—and they were burned, straight into the
wood.”
Shock crossed his face. He didn’t know how to respond, and said the to-be-expected word, “Impossible! How
could he?”
“I don’t know. He didn’t even feel it—he did that and
he doesn’t know. And what’s more—he has no idea about
the hellfire or any of the other things.”
“What do you plan to tell him?”
“Simple,” I said: “I don’t. But if we can keep him here
with us, maybe he will be of some use, if you know what I
mean.”
“No,” he said quickly. “No, he’s our brother and we
finally have him back. How can you think that way?”
I sipped some of my tea, then set the mug on the table,
glanced at Rainier, who was sound asleep, then back to
Braden. “Don’t you see, this is why she got rid of him in
the first place—he is cursed. He has been this way all his
life—neither of us can change it. But if we can learn from
him—have him teach us whatever magic he knows, it will
make impressing the nobles so much easier. Braden, listen:
what is the loss? We can give him a place to stay, so we’ll
not take advantage. Fair?”
100

Chapter Ten
“Don’t you have a heart?” he said. “We ought to help
him, not use him! Be reasonable.”
“What?” I said. “And keep struggling while he is here,
with all this power? How will it hurt him, hmm? Tell me. If
we learn about magic, what will it do to him?”
Rainier had begun to awaken; he was moving about,
restlessly. There was no more time for us to talk, and I
settled our decision. “A few months,” I went on, softly.
“Give me that, will you? Then he can go on as he pleases.”

101

Chapter Eleven
Rainier

I AWAKENED, unable to feel anything below my
neck. It was a strain even to move my hands; I felt as
though I had been paralyzed, and now my body was slowly
beginning to awaken, tingling every once in a while. I
couldn’t remember what happened last night; it was a hazy
dream, locked somewhere in my memories, beneath the
pain and stiffness and the burn of the alcohol. I realized
then that I never wanted to drink so much again, for the rest
of my life.
My brothers were standing by the table when I finally
rolled over to see them. There was a fire in the hearth, with
a pot of tea suspended above it, steam rising every once in a
while. I remember staring at it for the longest time, too achy

The Nocturne
to move, too tired to speak. But finally Braden walked over
to me and knelt at my side with a cup of tea; and then he
helped me to sit up and lean my back against the wall.
“I am never going to do that again,” I said, and heard
them both laugh at once. “I feel awful.”
“But did you enjoy it?” Lucan asked. “You seemed
to….”
“I’m not sure…I can’t remember. And now”—I swallowed some of the tea—“my body hurts; my hair, everything feels strange.”
“Haven’t you had a drink before?”
“Not like this,” I said, still half-dazed. “I don’t know
what I drank, either.”
“Ah, well,” Lucan was saying, “next time you will pay
more attention. And enjoy the women, please! We must
teach you to enjoy it more, enjoy yourself.”
Thankfully, we didn’t visit any taverns after that. We
spent most of our time together in the following days,
becoming acquainted, asking questions. And a week or so
later, once I was more comfortable with them, and starting
to feel at home there, Lucan asked me: “How much magic
do you know?”
“Very little,” I said, “aside from healing spells.”
“Why is that?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “It has always interested me,
more than anything else, I think.”
104

Chapter Eleven
“Will you teach us?” Braden asked. “I mean, could
you?”
Lucan smiled. “In exchange for…a place to live, of
course. You are more than welcome here as long as you
like.”
“Thank you, but I couldn’t. That would be an imposition—I don’t want to be.”
He waved it away. “If it were, I wouldn’t have offered.
And I am going to be traveling in a few days, up to some
old place on the mountainside; would you come with me?
Braden can’t…he will be working on one of the ships.”
I considered it for a moment, then nodded.
NEITHER DAY NOR NIGHT passed when Annora
did not cross my mind. She was the center of my thoughts,
always; and now I realized how truly lost I was without her.
I acted as though I was happy and all was well, for I could
not allow my brothers to see the heartbreak I endured at all
hours.
I practiced magic with my brothers, often having hours
to discuss it as we worked side by side in the fields, and at
night before we went to sleep. My knowledge of sorcery
had a profound effect on what they learned. I’d begun to
teach them, although they chose much different paths. I still
wished to be a healer, but the interest was mine alone. They
did not share my passion for it, nor were they content to
travel to the surrounding parishes. They were bold and
105

The Nocturne
always in search of a new adventure, wanting to take
voyage abroad and learn all forms of magic. I taught them
everything they desired. Not once did I try to succeed them,
nor did I boast of what I could do. I went about my spells as
they did theirs, trying my powers against my own strength
and determination to better it. But Lucan seemed outright
jealous of me.
One day when we were in the fields, hewing boards, I
asked: “Why don’t either of you wed?”
Lucan pulled the saw toward him, bearing down as I
pushed it back to split the board. “There is no woman worth
keeping for more than one night,” he said. “Marriage—I
don’t know—but I hate the thought of being bound to one
woman. It doesn’t suit me.”
“Or me,” Braden added. “Why? Do you?”
Without saying anything I slid the next timber across
the planks.
“That must mean Yes,” Lucan said. “When you are
older—wiser—you will think differently.”
“What about our family?” I asked. “My Aunt told me
that my birthmark is some kind of scar….Is it?”
They looked at each other and then resumed their work
with downcast gazes. Lucan stopped long enough to regard
me, though his voice was firm, hinted with an anger I had
yet to see. “I don’t want to talk about it. There was a curse;
that’s all you need to know.”
106

Chapter Eleven
When he mentioned a curse, every one of my old questions arose once more. For quite some time after that I
pondered it, wondering if my powers could be passed on—
and what it may mean if they were. I didn’t like to think I
had been scarred by hellfire, but now the idea was not so far
off, considering what I had done in a whim—the powers
that suddenly came over me, and my visions of the
hellhounds.
I went on with my work, trying not to think any more
of this, though I admit that it frustrated me when he made
such…lingering statements, leaving me to ponder them for
hours on end. Yet, of course I did obsess slightly—perhaps
greatly—at times. Even after all these months I still had
thousands of questions, most of which remained unanswered; and it grated on me. I could not begin to understand
why my own family would not give me the simple benefit
of their knowledge. All I asked was to know what happened
to our parents; I wanted to be spared of nothing, to hear the
tale in its entirety no matter how horrid it might be. And
each time they denied me as though it was some great
secret and I had no reason to know. Besides that, I hated to
go on without knowing if I’d already reached my plateau of
magical power, or if my fate held something much grander.
Yet when I gave it more thought, I realized I had already
been given my answer: my life was not leading me on some

107

The Nocturne
pointless trajectory—I did have a greater purpose, no matter
what I’d been born of or who fated me to it.
DAYS LATER, Lucan and I were riding along the path
that led to the nearby mountains. The sun rose above the
forest, showering us with tiny beams of light that floated
over the leaves and shrubs, twirling and glimmering here
and there. The morning, still so crisp and cool, heralded the
newest chapter of my journey—accompanying my brother
on his quest for a relic at a Roman monument. There was a
shrine as well, supposedly; nestled between two great
mountains, just west of here.
The hills were growing steeper as we went on. Soon we
were forced to walk, leading our horses, as it was too
dangerous to ride through there. The path followed the
winding ledge of the hill, and was blocked, in several
places, by fallen rocks and broken tree stumps, as though in
the wake of a devastating storm.
I decided to tether Samson there, as he was exhausted
and a snow-capped hill lay not far ahead of us. Lucan did
likewise with his horse; and shortly thereafter we reached
the snowy peak, which alone was odd, being so close to the
sea. From its crest, as we looked at the gorge between two
mountains before us, we were able to see the outline of the
monument, along with what looked to be a massive
churchlike structure. Maybe he was right, I thought, and
there is a shrine.
108

Chapter Eleven
“If there are treasures up here,” I said, “don’t you think
that we aren’t the first to look for them?”
“Not this far out,” he said. “Who would know? The
nobles won’t come this far, and anyone else is too afraid to
leave the villages.”
As soon as we came upon the shrine we stopped in
front of two pillars at the stairway—the entrance to the
temple, covered with travertine and gold inlays. Here stood
a towering monolithic wall, carved with Romanesque
archways, and with statues of winged creatures, which
stood guard at the entrance. The doors were solid marble,
worn and moss-covered with age, and fit together as though
they were once piece, and parted slowly as we pushed them
forward with our combined strength.
Inside was a thousand years of history painted on the
walls, telling the story of the Romans and their crusades.
And strangely there was snow inside, having fallen through
an opening in the ceiling where the stone had given way
from its weight.
“Incredible,” he said, looking around to see every
chamber door and battlement that surrounded us. “It’s
enormous.”
“How did you know how to get here?” I asked.
He was still gazing upward at the ceiling with awe and
wonder. “A map. One of the nobles gave it to me…without
realizing it.”
109

The Nocturne
I took two steps in, and stopped to look at a pedestal
that stood in the centre of the room. It looked to have been
gold at one time, but was frosty-white with snow, and had
darkened with the passing centuries. I wiped it clean with
my hand, then did my best to read its inscription, which was
in Latin, of course. I knew very little of the language, as it
was long-since antiquated by my time; what I understood
was a few words and passages I learned from the church
scriptures in my childhood. I couldn’t quite read the text,
but as best I was able to tell, it spoke of Guardians. Yet
there was one word in particular, which I did decipher—
Béja—as it did not appear to fit any particular language.
Lucan came to my side, studied the pillar. After a moment he repeated the strange word—or name; we weren’t
certain what it was, exactly.
“Can you read this?” I asked.
“Only that—Béja,” he said. “The rest of it is…just
Latin to me.”
“I can’t tell, but it mentions a Guardian.”
He turned to the left, gestured to a doorway, walked
toward it, and then waited for me to follow. “This way. The
only thing we need to find is the reliquary.”
After we made our way past the door, we reached a
stairwell, with webbed stone steps that led to a spherical
chamber of tombs and a strangely lambent light. The stench
of rain-dampened earth filled my head; and that awful,
110

Chapter Eleven
sickening smell of the burial chambers was enough to drive
me wild with my own senses. Further and further we
walked, until the air was no longer damp and sultry, but
crisp and cold.
At the centre of the main chamber, suspended high
above us, was an orb that spun atop an iron axle, whirring
as it turned round and round, creating an everlasting source
of energy that traveled through the lines below the ground.
Beneath it burned a small flame, heating the copper hoops
and in turn causing the orb to continue cycling. And
attached to either side of it were two chains, both connected
to twin elevated wheels, from which spun copper strands
ran parallel to posts that surrounded the hall. Carefully
aligning it were six rows of diamonds: the first two flanking
the orb itself, then three more, followed by five, and then a
row of eight, ending with a row of thirteen. Spun-copper
lines connected a copper wheel, lined with thirteen loops of
oil-soaked rope; this helm was suspended by chains yet
self-propelled by five blades.
Once we came upon the top of the stairwell we followed a passageway straight ahead that grew narrower and
narrower with each step. And there were lamps unlike any
that either of us had ever seen: they were perfectly round,
amber-color, amazingly bright with no visible flames, and
hung from twisted chains along the corridor.

111

The Nocturne
“Look at this,” I said, pointing to the lamps. “How are
they burning?”
He shook his head, at as great a loss as I was. “No one
knows. I saw them in one of the tombs we went to, but
when the door was opened they went out.”
We reached another chamber at the end of that passageway, with deftly-carved idols and golden-swirled
facades.
“If there is one thing the Romans knew well,” he said,
“it was building.”
“And this was only where they brought the dead.”
“Well, that makes sense, really: they wouldn’t have
wanted them to escape.”
I laughed. And all of a sudden I felt a terribly cold
breeze move across my back, as though something was
crawling over my shoulder, onto my neck, and then down to
the small of my back. It startled me, and I turned round
quickly, glancing in all directions…but there was nothing.
“What?” he asked, and turned back to me. “What was
that about?”
“I don’t know.” I looked in all directions once again,
certain that someone—or something—had touched me. “It
felt so strange. There was this presence, right here.”
He sighed in a perfectly exaggerated way. “Please
don’t go mad just yet; I’m not prepared.”

112

Chapter Eleven
“No, I mean it,” I said, and reached out to touch one of
the lamps. It was white-hot—and the second I drew close
enough to peer into it, both Lucan and I were thrown to the
ground by some great force that felt as though it came from
the wall at our side.
I supported myself with my hands for balance, slowly
rising to my feet, as he did the same. His voice changed
tone so quickly: it was a low, cautious whisper when he
said: “No, don’t stand. Look, to the right….”
I couldn’t believe it when I turned to see (close enough
to touch), a massive white wolf standing beside me,
watching me as though if I were to move—even slightly—it
would strike. There was such keenness in the way it stared
at me; there was an entire world of intelligence and wisdom
behind its ice-blue eyes. This was not an ordinary creature;
there was an angelic quality about it, as it had not a single
imperfection; its fur was long, silky, flawless.
With extreme caution I tucked my leg under me and
began to stand. The wolf was stock-still until Lucan placed
his hand on the wall, which was when it leapt at him with
the fiercest snarl one can imagine, and pinned him on the
ground with a single paw. Then, with skill and precision it
tugged at the map he had just taken in his hand, pulled it out
of reach and shredded it to a thousand tiny pieces.

113

The Nocturne
All at once I remembered the pillar with the words
Béja and Guardian. So I extended my hand to the wolf and
whispered, “Béja?”
It turned, ears flicking back. Then, suddenly two more
wolves appeared at her side, the larger of them being
mottled red and brown, save for his muzzle, legs and
underside, all being white; while the other was solid black.
“Tierney,” she said, her voice soft and feminine, “take
him.” And then she turned to the black wolf, and he stepped
toward Lucan, who was too terrified to move. “Let him
sleep, and carry him home.”
She returned to me, drew close, breathed in and exhaled a frost as cold as winter. I felt myself grow tired
suddenly afterward. As she breathed over me another time
she said, “Sleep, and forget you have been here. It isn’t time
for us to meet yet.”

114

Chapter Twelve
Annora

IF I so much as spoke Rainier’s name, my Mother
would punish me, somehow. Whenever I tried to reason
with her she treated me as though I didn’t exist, ignored
everything I willed to do. So I decided to go on, as long as
need be, without mentioning a word about Rainier. He was
in my heart, nowhere else. I prayed he knew it; prayed that,
somewhere he was thinking of me at the very same
moment. My faith kept me going; without it I would have
been lost. I loved him so much, I couldn’t—and I
wouldn’t—give up.
Several days had gone by now. I quit counting them. It
was too painful for me to remind myself how long Rainier
and I had been apart. But even worse—my Mother had

The Nocturne
succeeded in arranging a marriage for me. The man she
chose was a sailor, or so she told me the night I was to meet
him. She invited him here, to our house, with me standing
inside as though I was an object at his disposal. I cried the
whole time. He was so revolting that I couldn’t bear to
think of him kissing me or touching me, or placing a ring
on my finger.
There was hatred in me that I had not felt for anyone
before, and every time I looked at him my stomach went
into knots for more reasons than I could name. After he and
I met for the first time I saved all the vile words and curses
I knew, in my mind, and unleashed them when I saw him
the next day, which made my parents furious.
Weeks had passed, and I had lived through this torture
as long as I could. I decided, not long after I learned about
the engagement, that my only choice was to run away from
here, soon if it was possible. There was no way for me to
tell which way Rainier had gone, but I would search for
him, as long as need be.
I spent two days planning how I would get out of here.
I thought it was foolproof—that no one would suspect I had
left, if the time were right; and if I were careful in choosing
a path, I would be miles outside of here by the time they
would be in search of me.
I waited until night, when everyone was asleep…and I
opened the door, an inch at a time, only far enough for me
116

Chapter Twelve
to get past it while holding in my breath. I sneaked out from
there, to the barn. I let my mare, Kaeya, out of her stall, and
was just about to saddle her when that wretched sailor—
Terric—approached me from behind. It sickened me when
he put his arms around my waist and drew me backward so
we were touching. I tried to pull away, but he locked his
fingers together, held me there.
“You wouldn’t want to rush off and miss our wedding,” he said, “would you?”
“I’d forgotten to check the stall gate,” I said. “I came
to see if my mare was safe for the night…as though it
matters to you.”
“Your mother told me to look after you. But this is our
secret; I won’t tell her that you were…trying to leave. Or
should I?”
I managed to pull away that time, and led my horse
back into her stall. “Tell her whatever you wish.”
“I don’t think you appreciate our engagement well
enough.”
“Don’t I?” I said wryly. “I didn’t realize it.”
“You are fortunate that any man will have you now,
after you spread your legs for that scoundrel.”
“You hateful bastard!” I said and slammed the stall
door. I walked away as fast as I could, for I was in tears and
my voice was quivering. “If I had I would proudly say so. I
would brag of it to everyone, and pray that I am bearing his
117

The Nocturne
child.” I stopped, turned back to see him standing there. He
was too surprised to speak, I think. I went on: “But I never
did, and I never will because I am here and hating my life
and hating you.”
I ran home in hopes of escaping him…and I did, for
the time being. Thankfully he didn’t tell my parents what I
had been doing, but I knew the generosity would have its
terrible cost: his right to touch me in ways that were too
awful to think of.
When I had watched Rainier ride away from our village, he held strings to my heart which drew me along with
him. The further he rode into the distance, the tighter those
strings wrenched all the love and passion I already felt for
him. But it was that night when I realized there was a
meaning to our love; it was the kind that would never die.
All of this was happening for a reason—there must have
been one. I was fated to be with him…and I would be, no
matter what sacrifices I needed to make.
By the time two more days had gone by I was a little
wiser than before. At nightfall I walked my mare to the
barn, then around it when no one was in sight. And I
tethered her to a stump that was blessedly close to my
house. Then, once more, when my family was asleep I
sneaked out, walked quietly to where I’d hidden my mare,
climbed into the saddle and rode away as fast as possible.

118

Chapter Twelve
From there, I began my journey in search of the only
one I would ever love.

119

Chapter Thirteen
Rainier

IT HAD BEEN several weeks since Lucan and I had
gone exploring, and we had no memory of our experience
in the temple. We traveled more often than not these days,
and I was already on a whirlwind journey to becoming to
most legendary sorcerer in France. I healed only a few
people, as there weren’t that many nearby who were ill or
injured…but because I cured them with a simple touch, I
was regarded as having unnatural powers.
After being told there was a sick child here, I stepped
inside the house, to see five people—some in grave
sadness, while others paced frantically. A young boy of six
years old was being carried around in his mother’s arms. He
looked positively dreadful; his skin was pale—milky—

The Nocturne
drained of what little color it had. And his eyes were
without expression.
“He is a sorcerer—a healer,” someone said, and all
gazes fell on me.
“Please, you must help him!” the boy’s mother said,
while frantically she tried to place him in my arms. “I beg
you, please help him!”
Everything about him was frail, and he was disoriented. He looked as though he was moments away from
death. It was heart-wrenching for me to touch his clammy
skin, or to look into his fading brown eyes.
“I am not sure I can,” I said. “He is—.” I broke off,
taking the child from his mother’s arms and laying him on
the bed. “I need basil leaves for him, and water.”
His skin was almost translucent, turning shades of blue
and dark grey around his eyes, his mouth, and in places on
his chest. There was a small wound on the lower part of his
leg. I placed my hand just above the wound, and pressed
down firmly to try and prevent any more blood from
flowing to it. As I did this I tried to soothe him; and his
mother stroked his forehead and whispered to him that he
would be all right.
There was a dagger on the floor beside the bed. I
picked it up discreetly. The boy’s mother consoled him, and
she was finally able to bring his gaze up to meet hers. I
pointed to the knife, and she nodded. I knew by then that
122

Chapter Thirteen
most of the sensation had left his leg. And I was in hopes
that had helped to contain the poison as well. I took the
blade and I cut quite deeply across the two small holes of
the wound.
Within a few moments, the boy’s father returned with
basil leaves.
“Outside!” I said as I picked the child up and pushed
past the people opening the door. “Move aside!” I set him
on the ground right outside the house. Then I ran toward the
well, which, to my good fortune was close by. I pulled the
bucket of water up as quickly as I could, and then rushed
back to the child. He was still breathing, but his breaths
were labored and seemed to bring him little air. But he had
calmed slightly since I cut into the wound.
I was draining the poison from him, and I couldn’t help
but feel evil’s presence. There was darkness, as best I can
think to describe it.
I poured the mixture into the wound, and dabbed it
into his skin, though I could still feel darkness coming from
him. I put my hands over his chest and pressed down hard.
He gasped and tried to break free. And his mother came
running toward me and shouted at me, telling to get away
from him. I closed my eyes and delved into my knowledge
of magic, feeling the energies that surrounded me. After a
few seconds I looked into his eyes while I pressed my

123

The Nocturne
hands against his chest. His heart racing, I felt the sickness
swell in his blood, which would soon kill him.
I took a deep breath, reached as far into my mind as I
could, then beyond, as though I was to draw from a well in
which all spirits sleep. I drew back, feeling my soul rise
ever-so-slightly above my body. Then there was a feeling of
weightlessness and dizziness that made everything in the
world seem to be a distant vision. I was now free to
summon the spirits, but this weakened me to the point I felt
I would not be able to stand again. Indistinctly I could hear
the voices of the people who were watching: I heard them
cry and gasp…and I remembered the day I saved Annora,
how it was so much like this.
I was determined to save this boy; and, while drawing
in the spirits, with all my might I pushed down the child’s
chest once again, ignoring his protests and airless screams.
The spirits came straight through my hands, it felt, as I was
guiding them to destroy his sickness and pain. Like a
whirling cloud, they stormed, visible only in my mind. Still
I was pressing them on, sapping out the strength of my
body to the point I could scarcely endure another moment.
My heart was pounding wildly, and the coldness of the
spirits and what evil they withdrew from the boy were
falling into me. I felt as though my energy was a current
that was whipping through me with speed and power I
could never comprehend. It scorched my veins, my mind. I
124

Chapter Thirteen
lost my sight for a moment; my eyes clouded and all I could
see was a milky glow beneath the warm sunlight. The
sound of a thousand bees hummed and buzzed through my
ears to the point that I heard myself cry out for help.
This seemed to go on and on, but I knew it lasted no
more than a few seconds. And just when I thought I would
have to let go of the child, the spirits separated—drew out
the dark energies—and freed me. I felt a burning sensation
in my palms, and I glanced around to see onlookers were
awestruck. Then, looking at the child, I realized he was no
longer struggling…and that now he was breathing with less
difficulty.
I stroked his hair, whispering to him before his mother
rushed to his side, still crying as she waited for him to
awaken. And it took no time at all; within moments he cried
for his mother to hold him.
I was so weak, though. My muscles ached, and I had
scarcely enough strength to stand. I was thanked to no end,
by the child’s parents as well as the onlookers.
Performing any act of sorcery was always a spectacle;
it drew in skeptics and believers alike. I had quite a
reputation by this point; as I had done the impossible yet
another time.
“Oh…my…,” the boy’s mother said, at a loss for
words. She pulled the child against her chest, caressing him.
“I don’t know what to say. It’s a miracle.”
125

The Nocturne
Everyone around was completely awestruck, as was I.
THE NEXT DAY everything was lovely, tranquil that
day, as it was one of the first of spring. Sunlight shone over
the countryside, casting faint shadows on the louring hills
and fields. The scent of lavender wafted in a gentle breeze,
the fragrance of spring that was soon to come.
I was riding back to Lucan’s house on a cart, which I
had filled with the last few pieces of wood and thatch we
would need to finish building another house. I stopped to let
Samson drink from one of the troughs alongside the path
and stepped down to make sure the boards were secure,
when suddenly someone wrapped their arms around me
from behind and covered my eyes with their hands. There
was no suspense after that, no wonder or wait to find out
who it was, as I knew her touch too well to mistake it for
any other.
I turned, my heart racing wildly. And then I saw her,
perfect as a goddess, wearing a somber grey dress that
curled side to side with her movements. We were both too
shocked to speak.
I took her into my arms. I kissed her—I cuddled her—I
caressed her a thousand times. We shared the most
impassioned greetings imaginable, filled with mirth and
laughter and the truly heartwarming sense that only love
can give.

126

Chapter Thirteen
At first I wanted to ask what she was doing here, how
she found me, how she was able to leave home—everything
you might expect, but each was too… formal. I left out the
likely questions, wrapped my arms around the small of her
back, and willed her closer to me with a kiss I’d been
starved of for so long. And just as I had been on the most
fateful day of my life when I saw her for the first time, I
was mesmerized by her every feature, her purity and
perfection.
“My God,” I said, short of breath. “I can’t believe it!
I’ve missed you so much, love, so much.”
“One day I’ll tell you what I had to do to get here.”
“What?”
She grinned. “There is no sacrifice too great for love,
remember?”
That day was another of the most fateful in my life. It
introduced a new chapter of my life—the one I feared I
would never see. I explained to her about my brothers,
introduced her to them, told her about everything we had
been doing in the past few weeks.
We moved into our new house two days later, (slept in
separate beds, of course) and began planning our wedding.
One night, not long after we were reunited, we visited
the tavern to celebrate the Saints’ Day, without all the wild
drinking there would have been if my brothers were there.
It was late and pouring rain, so we stayed inside longer than
127

The Nocturne
we would have otherwise, simply talking, marveling in oneanother’s company.
When we left, neither of us realized we were being
followed until we were quite a ways off from the tavern, on
our way home. A small group of men—sailors, to be
precise—was sneaking between the buildings, completely
hidden in the rain and darkness. We couldn’t even hear
them, and went on with no idea what was about to happen.
We were hurrying along, and I was holding my cloak
over her, when all of a sudden, four men—huge, burly
sailors—rushed after us, from behind one of the buildings.
With no opportunity to get away, we were trapped,
surrounded.
Annora screamed for help, but no one was nearby—
and even if they were, the rain and wind were so strong
they silenced her. Three of the men tackled me, punching
and kicking me, while the other grasped Annora and
dragged her to the side of a building which was close by,
and held her there, covering her mouth to subdue her
protests. I did all I could to fight back; whenever they
struck me I struck back, pushing and punching as hard as I
was able, in a violent struggle to break free.
The one who held Annora waved the others on, saying,
“Kill him, do it now.”
They easily overcame me, having three times my
strength between them. And then, one grasped me by my
128

Chapter Thirteen
arms and pulled me backward, two steps or so, while the
other hit my face so hard that blood gushed out my mouth,
all over my chest. I coughed, spitting out another mouthful
of it, just when he took a dagger from his belt and thrust it
into my side, straight under my ribcage…and twisted the
blade, which suddenly drew out my breath. A cold pang
went into the wound, and I put my hand over it, feeling this
gaping hole…and the outline of my ribcage, all warm and
wet with blood. My whole world went dark. I continued to
fight, though, determined to protect Annora, no matter the
cost.
They threw me against the wall. And before I was able
to breathe in once more I heard—and felt—the fleshripping, bone-crushing sound of another blade being forced
into the middle of my chest, jostling me back just as I
staggered forward. The dagger lodged there, and when they
let go of me and I sank to the ground it fell out, beside me. I
lay there in the mud, unable to breathe or see or hear for a
moment. What little blood wasn’t pouring out of my
wounds seeped into my lungs, which made my breathing
harder, heavier, more labored.
Blackness was coming, I could feel it. My body was
turning cold. I couldn’t move my limbs. I was dying.
Distantly I heard Annora screaming; and although I
had not the strength to lift my head so I could see her, I
knew exactly what they were doing: forcing her against the
129

The Nocturne
wall, trying to have their way with her. But not now, I
thought, not tonight. Not while I am still here.
When the blackness came I felt weightless all of a sudden, as though my body was being lifted up until I was able
to stand. Then, as I opened my eyes I found myself standing
there, where I had fallen…but, most frighteningly, when I
looked down I saw I was lying there, lifeless, with rain
pouring over me and blood oozing out my mouth. But there
was no time for me to think about any of that. Annora was
running out of time.
Her skirt was ripping; I heard it come apart, a stitch at a
time, as they tore it upward from her legs. And I felt this
rage inside myself: an unbridled, unstoppable power I could
not control. I lifted my hand, pointed it toward them, with
my palm opened and facing outward. Then the power began
to rise, until it was coursing through my blood. The heat
became nearly unbearable; it scorched my hand, as though
flames were lapping over it, singeing the skin, the bones—
all of it.
Annora cried one last time, shouted my name before
she fell to the ground. And as I looked at my hand, I saw
nothing; yet when I glanced back at the sailors, I watched
the blazing tongues of fire melt them from the inside,
roaring, moving upward to melt the flesh from their bones
and turn the rest to ash. Darkness came over me after that.

130

Chapter Thirteen
I awakened a few moments later, on the ground, as I
had been. Annora was by my side, as though she had been
sobbing and grieving over me, as though, for those few
moments, I had been gone.
“My God,” she said, frantically touching my hands and
chest. “You need a tourniquet, quickly. Hold on, love…I’m
going to find help.”
“Wait,” I said. “What happened?”
She stood, rain pouring over us both. Her voice was
frantic, shaking; she was hysterical, for she thought I was
dying as she stood there. “There’s no time—you’re
bleeding! Please, just…try to hold on.”
I sat up, and saw the blood stains on my tunic, without
remembering anything that happened after the struggle. “I’ll
be fine. Don’t go.”
There was absolute shock in her expression. She could
not begin to fathom how I had the strength to sit up, let
alone talk or tell her that I didn’t need any help.
She knelt down again, put her arms around me to help
me stand. “You were stabbed,” she said, “don’t you
remember? Look”—she pulled up the tunic, to my chest
and side…but there were no wounds, nor any sign of them
having been there—“they were…. Here, in your chest. I
saw it happen! They stabbed you. Where did it—.”
I ran my fingers over my side, feeling where she said
the wound had been. I felt nothing except a strange warmth
131

The Nocturne
on my ribs, though there was no evidence of my having
ever been stabbed.
Several days went by. When I stepped inside the house
one afternoon, the roaring warmth of the hearth rushed over
me. And I saw Annora, sitting on one of the mattresses,
staring at her feet, remaining completely silent. I rushed to
her and I sat down beside her, asking what was wrong.
“What is it, love?” I asked. “What’s troubling you?”
She took my hand in hers and she pulled me closer to
herself, and rested her head against my shoulder as I
embraced her. But then I drew just far enough away to meet
her gaze. And I pushed her hair from in front of her eyes,
wiping away the tears.
“What do you think it was?” she asked. “When we
were at the tavern, I mean....”
I winced a bit as the fire crackled loudly in the hearth;
twigs broke apart every now and again, and floating embers
intensely burned. I moved past her, and I lie on the bed,
stroking her sides. “I don’t know,” I said. “I can’t understand it.”
“I have tried. Over and over again, I try. I saw them
stab you—I did, I know that.”
“I remember that,” I said, “and then I woke up, and
there was nothing. The whole thing felt like a dream.”
“You healed yourself—you made those wounds disappear! Do you know how powerful you must be?”
132

Chapter Thirteen
“Why were you sitting here?” I asked, wanting to
change the subject. “Is that all that was troubling you?”
She smiled. “Well, I was thinking of it when I came in,
so I stopped and sat here.”
“Are you afraid of that—or me?”
“No, love, no…not at all. If anything, I worry that your
brothers will—I shouldn’t say this, but—they seem to be
using you for their own gain. And if they knew what you
did, I don’t know…but I just worry.”
“Sweetheart,” I whispered, then kissed her, “there is
nothing to worry about, I promise you.”

133

Chapter Fourteen
Rainier

THE DAY of our wedding arrived at last, on the fourteenth day of June. It seemed there were cheers and
celebration for miles, with white, lavender and burnt-gold
flowers strung all around, chequering the path to a hill that
overlooked the sea. At the peak was a wooden archway as
an altar, garlanded with rosemary and tiny blossoms; and
set beneath it was a flat stone with room for us to stand side
by side.
My brothers stood nearby, Lucan being closest to me.
Behind the ring-bearer and a small procession of maidens,
Annora walked down the aisle, wearing a diaphanous blue
gown with frills about her shoulders, ribbons on her wrists,
and a veil over her face. Her hair was braided tightly, in a

The Nocturne
French braid, as you might expect, and fashioned into a
chignon.
Bridesmaids tossed herbs and petals across her path for
our good fortune, as the young men before me gave a slight
bow. Annora looked even more stunning than I’d imagined. My heart leapt against my chest when she came into
view, and I stood there graciously, delighting in every
second of it. She had such poise, such grace for one her age.
I was thrilled to watch her.
Then, at last she stood before me. We each held a red
rose, exchanging them as she stepped onto the stone at my
side, where we faced each other.
“Rainier,” the Priest said, “wilt thou have this woman
to be thy wedded wife? Wilt thou love her, comfort her,
honor, and keep her, in sickness and in health; and forsaking all others, keep thee only unto her, so long as ye both
shall live?”
“I will,” I said, holding her hands in my own, never
allowing my gaze to leave hers.
“Annora,” he went on, “wilt thou have this man to be
thy wedded husband? Wilt thou obey him, and serve him,
love, honor, and keep him in sickness and in health; and,
forsaking all others, keep thee only unto him, so long as ye
both shall live?”
She smiled, in her proudest moment. “I will.”

136

Chapter Fourteen
IT WAS THE NIGHT OF OUR WEDDING. The sun
was just beginning to set when we walked to the sandy
pebble beach, golden and blood-red banners of light
dripping toward the water. Wet from wading just past the
water’s edge, Annora and I sat on the rocks on the shore,
and as I held her in my arms I gave her a deep, slow kiss.
There was silence. It could have been no more perfect.
Together we sat there, taking in every little wonder of the
world. But suddenly, Annora pulled away from me—and I
had no idea she was going to jostle me from the rock
straight into the dunes. She slid down beside me, watching
me as I lay playfully helpless in the sand.
I stood, dusting off my clothes. “That was…very
funny, love.”
“I couldn’t help myself!” she said.
I took her by the hand as she stood. “Now you must
make up for it.”
“How can I?”
“Like this,” I said, pulling her against me as we sank to
the dunes with my arms wrapped around her middle.
Her lips brushed against mine before she rolled off me,
onto the sand.
“I love you more than anything in the world,” she
whispered. “You do know that, I hope….”
We stood together. And then the ocean roared as the
night-tide swept beneath our feet; and clouds fell in
137

The Nocturne
streams, as though a heavenly touch had glided through
them to color the sky.
I walked behind her, put my arms around her middle;
and when my chest touched her back, she turned around
and pressed her body against mine. The closeness caused
me to tense with anticipation, my every nerve sparking with
a desire that would wait no longer.
We walked to the cavern, arm in arm, both laughing
and acting perfectly childish. And then, once we reached
the mouth of the cavern, she tried to pull me into it. She
clutched my hands, and with all her might she struggled to
drag me forward, her fingers locked with mine. I planted
my feet and straightened my posture, but finally I yielded,
took but a two steps inside. I could see the pale glow of the
moon against the walls, a perfect sphere that burned like
white flames in the indigo sky. There was such faint light I
was able to see little more than shadows.
The cave floor was soft, dry sand. The walls were slick
obsidian boulders that seemed ideally placed at seaside,
maritime pines jutting sideways between them.
One last time she tried to pull me. I held steadfast at
first, then suddenly I gave in, and together we tumbled to
the ground….
When her gown fell to a pool at her knees, I was awestruck by how stunning—how perfectly splendid she was in
every imaginable way. Her body was the essence of the
138

Chapter Fourteen
most ingenious design: her breasts so ample and her
stomach well-toned, her tan skin like silk to my touch, her
every muscle curving perfectly around her frame.
All the nights I’d dreamed of this moment, all the times
I’d fantasized about her, nothing could begin to compare to
how I felt when I truly saw her this way. She surpassed my
every expectation a thousand times again, and the sweet,
pure indulgence of looking at her left me breathless.
My entire body began to ache—not with a mere physical desire for her, but something even greater—the fact that
my heart had waited so long for this, and it was finally
happening. I most undoubtedly looked awestruck then, as I
paused. And when I did she crossed her arms over her
chest. She was nervous, and she must have thought that it
disappointed me to see her, unclothed…but truly she had
set off a chain reaction of urges that were going wild inside
me.
“Don’t do that,” I whispered and took her hand in
mine. “You’re so beautiful…I want to see you.”
I drew her arms to her sides, massaging her palms with
the pads of my thumbs as I leaned in, pressing my mouth
against her chest, just above her heart. When I began to kiss
her I moved my fingers over her breasts in a slow circular
motion, again and again, until her muscles tensed and she
pressed hard against me. She leaned back, her voice
catching in her throat when she tried to speak. Kissing her,
139

The Nocturne
followed the arcs of her hips, graced her taut stomach with
my lips and tongue, drew back slightly to exhale against
it…and then continued to work my way downward, over
her every curve.
With trembling hands she lifted the tunic I was wearing; pulled it off as I raised my arms. Then she began to
caress my chest, driving my senses into frenzy each time.
After she tugged away what was left of my clothes, we
were kissing again—and my tongue glided over hers in
long, deep thrusts. Her hands moved downward slowly,
until she was tracing my waist with her fingertips as we
sank into the sand. They followed my spine, up to my neck
and through my hair. My heart raced; and with it came vast
rolling waves of my most primal desires. I wanted her more
than life itself. I couldn’t stop the feelings that were taking
over: the physical needs begging that I go on, the yearning
that spiraled inside me until I ached with it, and the passion
that made this so perfect.
I cannot, even now, put into words how much I loved
her.
I touched her face, my thumb settling on her under-lip.
Looking down at her, I rubbed it soothingly to show that I
would be as gentle as possible. But I paused there, and
pressed my mouth to her neck before I said, “If you aren’t
ready, love, tell me.”

140

Chapter Fourteen
The warmth of our bodies together—and the intimacy—made it nearly unbearable for me to hold back. I
was fighting my urges, because I loved her too much to go
on unless she was absolutely certain she was ready. I took a
deep breath, moving down to rest my hips on her thighs and
support myself with my arms. I would wait for her for the
rest of my life, if she wished; I couldn’t bear the thought of
being selfish when it came to this.
“I’m a bit afraid,” she said.
“Did I do something that made you uncomfortable?”
“No. It felt so great—the kissing, and all—but now,
well…I don’t know what I’m going to feel.”
I shifted uncomfortably, then drew forward and slid
down to lie beside her; and she rolled onto her side to face
me. I trailed her cheek with my hand, stopping to rest my
palm on her chin. I was simply gazing at her—at every
gorgeous curve of her body—and marveling in her beauty
once again.
“What?” she asked. “Why are you looking at me like
this?”
“Because you’re too beautiful for me to look away,” I
said. “And I’m going to stay right here until you aren’t
afraid.”
She smiled with the thought of how devoted I was to
her. “You don’t have to. I’ll be fine. Go on; don’t stop.”

141

The Nocturne
I wrapped my hand around hers, lifted it to my mouth
and kissed her palm. “Shhh.... You are worth the wait,” I
said. “I will try to be careful, love; I will, I promise you. I’ll
be gentle as I can…but it is going to hurt you a little.”
She reached out to explore and coax me with trembling
hands. I did all I could to hold still, but she struck a nerve
that aroused what I had just managed to subdue. “I know,”
she said; “I know it will.”
I rolled onto my stomach, used my arms for support.
Then, placing my hands on either side of her I caged her
with my body and nudged my knee between her thighs. She
moved them aside to accommodate me. But before I would
go on I said: “If anything is uncomfortable you will tell me,
won’t you?”
She nodded and I pushed myself downward, finally
close enough to feel her hips beneath mine, flesh to flesh,
with absolutely nothing to separate us.
I moved against her, quivering from my restraint. She
did her best to relax and yield to me, while she willed me
on with the most passionate kisses, nudging and biting my
lips as we touched with a subtle rhythm. But I couldn’t
advance as easily as I’d been: I had to go on almost
sporadically, for each time I did she shied away from the
intrusion and her body tensed of its own desire.
She slid her hands all over my shoulders and back
while this went on, in a desperate attempt to cling to
142

Chapter Fourteen
something as the pressure and strange new feelings grew
stronger. There was a pulsation between us, building to the
torrid moment of culmination. I tightened my hips, and she
clamped her calves over mine to brace me. Seconds later
she clutched my sides as the pain spiraled to a nearly
unbearable high. Then, slowly, delicately, with one steady
movement we came together as one.
AFTERWARD I HELD HER IN MY ARMS as we lay
in on the soft cool sand, looking out to see the night tide as
it crashed over the shoreline. Maritime pines swayed with
outstretched limbs. Stars were scattered indiscriminately
across the heavens, giving a pale glow to the world and its
boundless sea. All was tranquil.
Not in all my life could I remember a moment to compare with this, with how it felt to lie beside her, thinking
that we were not only husband and wife but man and
woman, hours ago delivered from our innocence. With this
came a new sort of pride, and satisfaction that went beyond
all physical feelings. Throughout my body was warmth
unlike any other, tingling until it caused weakness in my
joints—the deepest, purest pleasure in this world.
My leg rested on hers, and I moved it back and forth,
still tempting her. Lying with my chest to her back I kissed
her neck, being slightly mischievous as I slid my fingers
down her stomach and onto her legs.

143

The Nocturne
While doing this I asked: “How long did it take you to
fall in love with me?”
“Oh, seconds.” She rolled onto her back and then said:
“I never knew I could love so much.”
“Neither did I, and it was worth the wait,” I said, before playfully biting her earlobe. “But I thought it had taken
hours—that we had to meet again before you felt this way.
Why didn’t you tell me?”
“My mother came along and ruined it! Had I caught
my breath sooner, I would have.”
“I still can’t believe you ran off. Most people wouldn’t
dare—I wouldn’t,” I said. “You’re far braver than I will
ever be.”
“And smarter,” she said, in jest of course, “because I
came all this way to find you. I should be rewarded.”
“How so?”
“Very well. Where would you be without me?”
“Horribly lonesome,” I said, “and I would not be having half as much fun as this.”
I slid down, working my way to the side so that I lay
close enough to press my lips to her thigh, nipping and
kissing my way down to her knee, then back upward. After
moment I paused, looking up at her as she giggled and
moved helplessly against me.
“Stop,” she said, as though she had been robbed of all
her strength and restraint. “Rainier, stop….”
144

Chapter Fourteen
I leaned over her, now caressing her inner-thigh with
my mouth and fingers. “Do you not like this?”
“I ought to be ashamed, but I love it. Everything.”
“No,” I whispered, “we are married now. Let me make
you happy, however I can.”
“But I feel wonderful. I shouldn’t lust for more.”
“It is not lust…it is love. Anything that pleases you, I
will do it—I want to,” I said, smiling. “We waited so long
for this, I want it to be perfect. Don’t you have any
fancies?”
She shook her head, having still this shy and innocent
look, as though she was afraid to tell me what else she
desired. “Will you always love me this way?”
“Until my very last breath,” I said. “Forever.”
“I want to think of it as that—forever.”
I hushed her, placing my finger on her mouth as we lie
side by side, facing one-another. And after that I gently
stroked the side of her face, all the way to her chin. “Then it
will be. Now, without any shame, what would you like?
Our wedding night will only happen once.”
She smiled, snuggling close to my chest. “Hold me? I
love that feeling, I feel so safe in your arms.”
I reached for the blanket, pulling it over us as a cold
breeze whisked through the cavern. “What if I were to
make love to you again?”
“Right now?”
145

The Nocturne
With one swift motion I planted her beneath me, and
she looked up at me with those innocent, sparkling eyes and
an eagerness that spoke for itself. As I drew closer I said in
the softest tone, “Right now.”
FROM THAT moment on, I had nearly everything I’d
ever dreamed of and desired. Time was ours alone, with
freedom to do whatever we pleased. I made certain that
each day was special, precious; always eager to make her
happy. Everything she gave to me—whether great or small,
a tender kiss or blazing intimacy—never ceased to deepen.
It seemed we were on a whirlwind romantic journey, as
had been in the beginning.
We traveled to the surrounding villages, where I practiced magic, sometimes participating in tourneys and
challenges with my brothers. All this time I was gaining a
reputation as a sorcerer and strength with new spells.
During the warm summer days, Annora and I worked side
by side in the orchards; and frolicked childishly in the
lavender fields.
When passion overcame us, we rode to the mountain
forest, to a secluded, quiet little place where we would
make love, because the thrill of rushing there together was
so wildly exciting. Afterward we lay side by side, watching
the sunrise. We lay there for hours, taking to heart all the
wonders we had come to see.

146

Chapter Fourteen
I thought I knew her, completely, long before this…yet
with the passing time I learned things about her that had
never crossed my mind.

147

Chapter Fifteen
Rainier

We had been married for four months, and each day I
loved her more than the one before it. I mean this, truly; not
in some sentimental way, because there was always a new
quality about her to admire or appreciate. Whenever we
disagreed—almost always about some petty thing—I would
yield as I hated to argue with her. Our time together was
much too precious to waste.
I traveled much less these days, wanting to be as close
to home as possible, despite the stress my brothers were
causing me. They wanted to fight in every tournament or
magic challenge, and insisted I join them. The more I
denied them, the greater their perseverance. At times I
wondered if they were deliberately trying to put themselves

The Nocturne
between Annora and I—Lucan especially, as he was the
most persistent. It seemed they just craved conflict. Yet,
even as difficult as they made this I went on, more or less
ignoring them. With any hope, I thought, they would
change and respect that I was now married and no longer
free to travel as we had in the past. I didn’t mention a word
of it to Annora, as I knew she was anything but fond of
them already.
I spent every moment possible with her. We visited the
surrounding villages, where I honed my healing skills as
she helped to teach and care for the local children. We
taught them how to read, write, count—simple things
known by only a small few. She went about this so
affectionately, kneeling down to face eye-to-eye with the
little ones, and holding or kissing them. Watching her I
could not help but think, What a splendid mother she will
make.
One month later we were on our way home. That day is
one of my most vivid memories. We had been traveling for
several days, and were only two miles or so away from our
village now, as we were following the long straight path
through the open forest. There were no sounds except those
of nature: the twitter and songs of birds; the coursing of the
fresh cool stream; the delicate breaths of wind that passed
over the trees and tall grass. Autumn leaves looked to have
been scattered about the trail, painting it with a lovely array
150

Chapter Fifteen
of color. In the distance, plumes of smoke rose above a
cluster of villages, swirling as downy white clouds rolled
through the sky.
We stopped at the bed of a stream to let the horses
drink, and made ourselves comfortable on the grass. While
lying there Annora seemed to have been lost in thought,
dreaming of all her fancies and what her heart desired most.
“Sweet,” she said, and I looked into her eyes, “is there
is something you have always wanted, something you
cannot live without?”
“Not anymore. Not since we have been together. Why,
what do you long for?”
Ever-so-gently she pressed against me, as she pushed
one of my legs aside to make way for hers to rest between
them. She was trembling, from excitement more than the
cold, as I took her into my arms and made gentle movements with my knee, going over hers almost playfully.
Then, at last she said, “A baby.”
IT WAS OUR FIRST anniversary, and we celebrated it
by going to the tavern in the early evening before returning
home for a romantic night together.
“Sit down,” I said. “There is something I want to give
to you.”
I opened the smaller of two storage chests. Inside it,
beneath quilts that had been rolled tightly together and
151

The Nocturne
bound, lay a gem attached to a thin, braided leather string. I
took it in hand; and when the light fell, it radiated such a
rich and mysterious hue that it seemed to bleed. It was
nearly as transparent as a crystal yet emerald in color—a
tiny green bolt of lightning. It was not formed of smooth
curves, but jagged slants that looked to have been deftly
carved by the very hand of Nature. Within it, thousands of
tiny flecks glimmered, more dazzling than all jewels in the
star-dappled heavens.
I held it in my hand as I stepped toward Annora, who
sat on the mattress while waiting for me, her eyes shut,
hands across her lap.
“May I open my eyes now?”
I laughed. “No, but rise and scoot over.”
After she rose, I sat beside her, gently pushing her hair
to the side of her neck. Gracing her shoulder with my
fingertips, I brought her back against my chest and kissed
her cheek. Then I laid the gem just above where her
breasts—so smoothly curved and ample—came together at
the top of her blouse. I pulled the ends of the string beneath
her hair and fastened it behind her neck.
“Open your eyes now,” I said.
“Oh, Rainier”—she wrapped her arms around me—
“it’s lovely! Where did you get this?”
“It was the fee for the sheep I sold.”

152

Chapter Fifteen
With a proud smile she settled the jewel into place, so
that it lay over her heart. “I love it; I’ll never take it off.”
“You look so beautiful. Must our honeymoon ever
end?”
“No,” she said, running her fingers across my night
beard. “And that reminds me—I have something to tell
you.”
“What is it?”
She couldn’t contain her excitement, grinning all this
time.
“What, love?”
“We are going to be parents!” she said with indescribable joy. “I am with child.”
At first I was too stunned to speak. I placed my thumbs
on either side of her mouth and leaned in to kiss her with
the most fervent passion. “How do you know, are you
certain?” I asked. “God, I don’t know what to say.”
“Yes, yes, I have known for nearly a month. I waited
until our anniversary to tell you.”
“How could you keep it to yourself? What an anniversary present,” I said. “I love you so, so much, I can’t think
of what else to say. Come here.” As I embraced her we slid
down to lie side by side, looking at one-another with a new
sense of wonder and intensity. I fell in love with her all
over again.

153

The Nocturne
She smiled, looking downward, then back to me. “I
nearly told you once—well, several times. I kept biting my
tongue when I would think to say, ‘When the baby
comes’—or anything like that. I’ve been so anxious to tell
you.”
I brushed back her hair using two fingers, then drew
close for another sensuous kiss. “But it is the greatest
surprise, and I didn’t expect it at all.”
“It is magical, isn’t it? Since I found out I’ve thought
so much about having the baby, what it will feel like to see
it for the first time. Life was wonderful before, but now,
well…it seems perfect.”
“I still don’t know what I am feeling, or what to say,” I
said. “I have never felt like this.”
She pulled up her blouse, just to her stomach, and did
her best to look down at it. “Do I look any different yet?”
“So small,” I said lovingly, and touched her exposed
belly. I was fascinated. “It must be so tiny.”
“What do you think, though?” she asked. “Do you see
anything more? Do I look rounder there, in the middle?”
“I’m afraid not; I think the baby is too young for us to
tell. But there’s no reason to hurry it along—you will be
plenty large, don’t worry.”
“Oh, thank you. That is not what I meant, and you
know it.”
“Which do you think it is, a boy or a girl?” I asked.
154

Chapter Fifteen
“I want to be surprised, don’t you?”
“We could guess.”
She was so childish and playful it made me laugh “If
we guess wrong, the baby’s feelings will be hurt.”
“I don’t think it will understand.”
“Well,” she said, “if you were a baby, would you want
your parents to guess if you were a boy or not? If they
thought you were a girl, wouldn’t you be hurt? I have this
strong feeling in my heart, that I can tell if the baby is a boy
or a girl. I don’t want for that to end yet—it’s so magical.”
“Which is it, then?”
“I can’t say yet!” she said with a faint smile. “I cannot
explain it, either; I just have this sense that I know what it
is. I want to see if I am right. I love this too much—all these
motherly feelings.”
I felt such great pride and an even more intense love
for her. After all these months it had finally happened: she
was not only my love, my wife, my reason for being—now
she was the mother of my child. There was a new life inside
her, growing with her every breath. Thinking of it fulfilled
me; and I could, for the first time, say I had an honest belief
in God. Something this precious could not have simply
come from our love and flesh; there must have been a
higher power behind its creation.
A FEW WEEKS LATER, Annora and I were standing
outside the house as I prepared to walk down to the stream
155

The Nocturne
to fill some pails with water. And she looked more beautiful
than ever before, I thought, as her belly was beginning to
grow with the baby, who we decided was a boy. She was
living the greatest, most joyous time of her life, as was I;
we were madly in love with this child, even though we had
yet to meet him.
Most days she sat by the hearth for hours, knitting
clothes and blankets for him; while, all this time she would
talk to him so that he would hear her voice, and know how
deeply he was loved. Our only discord at that time was my
brothers: Lucan insisted that I go with them on a voyage to
Corsica—and the more I denied him, the harder he pressed.
I told Annora about when it was first mentioned, but I
didn’t tell her how insisting they were being, as she could
not bear the stress in her condition…but it was on my mind
just the same, eating away at me, as I felt I was being made
to choose between my wife and brothers.
“Come with me?” I said to her. “It will be for just a
little—to the stream, is all.”
With a smile she nodded and began to walk alongside
me. “When will your brothers be traveling again?”
“In almost a fortnight,” I said.
“Oh,” she said. “I haven’t heard much about it. And it
is…what I told you before. I dare not say it twice.”
With a smile to ease what pained her, I said, “And you
may say it again.”
156

Chapter Fifteen
“They are your brothers, and I know you love them. I
cannot poison your mind against what they do or think or
say…it is not my place.”
By then we had nearly reached the stream. As we
walked I was silent for a moment, realizing I was nearly at
the point in my life where I would have to choose what
truly mattered to me—the will of my wife, or that of my
brothers. There should have been no scale upon which I set
these things…yet there had been for several months, and I
couldn’t help but think about it. But, as I told you, I loved
Annora far too much to have any conflicting emotions
about honoring her wishes and being told what she disliked
about my family. This should have been so simple; I should
have made my decision without the slightest hesitation, but
for quite some time I found I’d told myself: These are my
brothers…they would do nothing to harm me. They are the
only family I have now—and how could I deny that of any
of us?
I stopped the mule after we veered off the path and
onto the grass. I moved past her and gathered two pails
from the cart. “But you did speak of it—that means you
wish to talk about it. If it troubles you, I must know.”
She was quiet, following me to the stream as I knelt
beside it and drew the dagger from my belt in hopes of
catching a fish. I watched the stream, the bubbles and froth

157

The Nocturne
that bandied left and right as the crystal-blue water whisked
past us.
“Well…,” she said, folding her legs beneath her after
she took a seat by my side, “just what it is that troubles me
about them, I don’t know. But it seems when they are here,
things are different. I think they bring bad things to us, love,
and I worry—”
“What ‘bad things’? They would do nothing to hurt
me.” I took a pail in hand to fill with water. “Annora, they
share my blood!”
She looked to have been hurt by how I had replied. Her
expression changed, her smile drawn away by a frown.
“Good and Evil,” she said. “Your brothers aren’t like you—
all they care about what you can do for them.”
I was pained to hear her say such things—but this was
something I already knew all too well. She had been
anything but fond of my brothers, but she had kept quiet in
hopes of my finding happiness, gaining strength and
learning about myself.
I didn’t see them just as she did; I knew a mere inkling
of what she felt. Now I opened my mind to what she
offered me.
“I cannot see how they are looking out for you,” she
went on. “They have not half your power! They don’t care
what happens to you.”

158

Chapter Fifteen
I set the pail on the grass beside me. Then I turned to
face her and I took her hand in mine, laced our fingers. “My
sweet angel, listen. I won’t let them stand between us, I
promise you.”
She scooted closer to me; put her arms around my
shoulders. “I never mean to keep you from them…but I just
know their wills are not for your good.”
I had no choice but to yield; I loved her too much for
anything less. “I trust you,” I said, cuddling her. “I’m not
going to travel with them anymore.”
SEVERAL days passed before I crossed paths with my
brothers. They had been preoccupied with their work—
Lucan joining the local nobles on their hunts as Braden
tanned hides before the last ships would depart for Corsica
at the end of summer. That day we rode to the seaport,
where the walled quarters of the marketplace and village
centre came to an end. Being this was a blustery afternoon,
wind howled and whipped against the paneled leather-andlinen sails, causing the docked ships to creak and sway as
crates were brought aboard. Merchants and boatmen
hastening here and there, the port bustled.
I had been thinking of what Annora said. At first I had
known nothing of it, but as I pondered, I came to realize I,
too, could see the negative side of their intentions and of
what magic they practiced. I’d given my time to them, so
desperate to learn, while looking past what should have
159

The Nocturne
been in plain sight. All along I hoped as I assured myself
that, sooner or later they would tell me the things I so
longed to learn. But they were going to make me wait, year
after year until I would realize, either there was no comforting part of our past, or they chose not to share it with me. In
the beginning I was blinded by desperation, yet now I
understood I would never know what it truly meant to be
part of a prophecy. I wouldn’t understand what had given
me such unnatural powers.
While we loosened the chains that were bound to Samson’s saddle, I tried one last time to learn what had killed
our parents and why. It was pointless, I knew, but I would
not travel with my brothers now—and perhaps never
again—so, naturally I would press once more for all I may
be told.
This time I nearly begged. “Will you please tell me
what happened to them?”
Lucan breathed sharply as he leaned into the cart.
When he grasped a sail that had been rolled into a tube and
bound by horsehair ropes, he shook his head, saying: “For
the thousandth time, Rainier, no.”
Braden, dragging a wooden crate from the second cart,
paused to make a gesture toward him. “Go, help him carry
that. – Why do you keep asking?” I rushed toward Lucan
and hoisted the second half of the sail over my shoulder.
“My God! Be satisfied with what you know.”
160

Chapter Fifteen
“But I’m not satisfied,” I said. “I cannot put it out of
my mind until I know what happened.”
We walked toward the ship, the middle of the sail
drooping between us. Braden drew the crate as close to the
pier as he could, where the rickety and salt-doused planks
met the gravel patch just outside. From there we made our
way past merchants and sailors, down the walkway of the
pier.
“Come off it,” Lucan said. “You know they are gone.
Leave it at that.”
Over the stacked crates, ropes seemed a web, with
knots and crisscross patterns stretching this way and that.
After we crossed the gangplanks and carried the sail
toward the stern, Lucan paused. The ship swayed with the
movements of the men who continued to move back and
forth, above-deck and below.
Standing there, I let his words sink in, and I thought it
seemed there was such a subtle hint—something that
sprung with no intent—that he felt, somehow I was to
blame.
Then I remembered I had agreed not to mention it
again, yet always I pressed and they gave nothing. Maybe it
was something awful…but what more, and what else? Why
was I not allowed to know?
By now Braden had joined us, setting down three bundles of tallow candles atop a barrel. “It seems I have perfect
161

The Nocturne
timing,” he said, then looked at Lucan and I, who were
bandying uneasy glances at one-another. “There isn’t much
to lift now. Rainier, will you lend a hand with the crates?”
We were silent.
When Lucan tore his gaze away from me, I walked to
where the gangplanks met the deck. Men brushed by,
dragging supplies aboard where they would wait to be
arranged. Why I stood there, I had not the faintest idea; I
suppose I was in need of a moment to myself. I needed time
to think, to reason. I didn’t want to argue with them, but I
just hated how secretive they were.
“I cannot go with you,” I said, stepping forward.
They set down the bags they were carrying and shot
concerned glances in my direction. “Why on earth would
you say that?” Before he could finish, Lucan said: “You
spite yourself.”
I had not gone about this in the ideal fashion…but I
saw no other way it could be said. “It’s nothing to do with
spite,” I said. “I’ve work to do—and I’m married; I cannot
rush off and leave my wife.”
“For heaven’s sake,” Braden said. “It will not take
long—two months or so.”
There was no need to tell them about the baby, was
there? I was proud, no question. I wanted them to know,
while at the same time I was thinking this was so special to
Annora, maybe I’d best not mention it. But, after all, I told
162

Chapter Fifteen
myself, it isn’t a secret. Tell them. Only then will they
understand why you must stay here.
I brushed back my hair with a nervous gesture, sensing
their gazes search me again. “Annora and I are expecting a
child.”
Braden reached over to pat me on the shoulder. “Congratulations! She must be thrilled.”
“Well, my best wishes to you,” Lucan said, then
paused. “It’s understandable: now you’ll not travel with us;
you want to stay here. I’ll wager she asks for that—and I
wouldn’t blame her, but what will you do?—give up
sorcery?”
“Of course not; but the prophecy has not changed my
life since I have met her. What is your problem? We want
to have a family; we have wished for it more than anything
else.”
That was the first thing he had said that truly caused
me pain. It seemed as though he was casting me out
because my life and theirs were on different paths. Certainly I enjoyed when we traveled. I was fulfilled by all the
new things I had experienced and the strength I
gained…but I had little desire to do that again. I had ridden
great distances, learned new healing spells, learned to hunt,
helped to tan hides. What more did I need to know? I’d
begun my journey in hopes of learning what my future
held…and I returned with a reputation that did nothing but
163

The Nocturne
grow; I married my truelove; and I continued to practice
sorcery. But these two were never going to stop being my
brothers. I thought I would always be here for them as I
thought they would be for me. I would never be without
someone of whom I could seek guidance, help, and just a
word now and again to make me remember I was not just
important to Annora.
Now everything was becoming clear. I had too great a
sense of self-worth to admit I was wrong at first. I hated to
think that, for months I had misjudged my own brothers;
more so I hated how Annora had been right about them. It
would be impossible to tell her this—there would be no end
to it; how all along she felt they cared more about my
powers and reputation than about me.
Lucan stepped forward, and Braden leaned against the
stern. “I don’t have a problem with Annora or her having a
child,” he said. “My problem is with you, with the way you
have been acting. Suddenly you’re above us: stronger,
wiser, and are losing interest in the tournaments, the
magic—everything.”
“Mother would have wanted better for you,” Braden
said. “She would have wanted you to keep learning. It’s as
though you have given up.”
“It’s all for selfish reasons,” I said. “You want me to go
with you, to help you—that is all you have ever wanted,
isn’t it?”
164

Chapter Fifteen
What joy had been in my expression was drawn away
by anger as I tried to think if there was anything I could
possibly say to them. You cannot imagine how they had
hurt me.
Lucan sighed, brushed past me and made his way down
the gangplanks. Braden and I followed. “As I said,” he went
on: “you spite yourself. Bid farewell to the life you have
known.”
“What does that mean?” I said. “I have the life I’ve
always wanted, and if that means I must choose, I have
made my choice.”
I did just that. Not for a single second did I think or
allow the idea to flash through my mind that I could have
done differently.
I DIDN’T mention to Annora about what my brothers
had said. It would break her heart to know how cruel they
were now and how deeply they had wounded me, when it
was I who had, all along, insisted they had good intentions.
I could never bring myself to say either of those things, so I
chose to harbor the pain alone.
I had nearly everything my heart desired. All I wanted
was one more thing, something I had longed to hear ever
since I learned of the prophecy. My brothers were the only
people with the power to tell me why our parents had been
killed and by whom.

165

The Nocturne
Now I needed to accept this, didn’t I? Had I not already? Of course I wanted to ignore it, numb the pain, but I
had yet to forget what happened today. Listen to yourself;
you are acting pathetic. You mustn’t weep and worry over
the past. Let it go—don’t think about your brothers. Disown
them as they have you. Live your life as it was before you
met them.
Calming what thoughts had conflicted, I vowed to myself I would worry of this no more. I would not be paralyzed by the wounds of cruel words and with what spite had
laced them, its foul poison.
TWO MONTHS later, while lying in bed one night I
was almost dreaming of so many things that now made
sense to me. I felt foolish for having disagreed with
Annora’s beliefs all this time, but now I could say I
honestly agreed with her about faith…for the first time.
And it felt good to have these feelings and certainty; it
seemed right, wise, honorable—everything a man hopes to
someday know for himself. Not long ago I was certain of
nothing; now I’d discovered the confidence that made her
so idyllic.
I helped to give the baby life. In return he had given me
faith.
In nearly a whisper I said to her, “I’ve found proof. I
believe now.”
“Believe in what?”
166

Chapter Fifteen
“God—heaven—all of it. Before it made no sense to
me; I kept trying to find faith but I couldn’t.”
She rolled over, looking at me, beaming proudly with
the look of I-knew-you-would-someday. “What changed
your mind?”
“I look at you and see this…life inside you,” I said. “I
just feel different because of it. I always thought that life
just happened; I couldn’t see where our souls came from—
if we even had them. But when you told me…this is so
strange—but when you told me we were going to have the
baby, I thought, There is a God—she is right.”
She kept smiling the entire time, while listening to me
with great intent. Tears welled in her eyes; and after wiping
them she put her arms around me and drew closer. “It isn’t
strange. I’m so proud of you, you don’t even know.”

167

Chapter Sixteen
Rainier

ANNORA WAS nearly eight months pregnant and
literally counting the days until the baby would arrive.
When we awakened each morning she would, with a broad
smile, tell me, “One day less to wait.”
I joked that I could stand with her and watch her belly
grow, it was happening so fast. She was carrying the baby
rather low, and often found herself resting her arm on him
when she sat. But, even as she was heavily pregnant she
managed to carry on her chores. In fact, she kept perfectly
active, still horseback riding as she had in past months, and
it worried me to no end.

The Nocturne
That day was like any other in November. Brittle
leaves whisked across the paths, and the air had a faint
crispness to it, with the dew that lingered in the fields as fog
did over the sea. It was late afternoon, nearly time for
supper. I was on my way to the gardens in the fields, as
Annora was to drive a horse-drawn cart to the orchards.
I helped her step up to the seat. Then I stood on the
board beside the wheel, kissing her and then her belly. “Be
careful, please,” I said. “You worry me, riding all around
like this, before the baby comes.”
“Aren’t I always?” she said with a smile. “I am going
to the orchard, is all.”
“Wait there for me; I will ride home with you.”
With that I stepped down, took Samson’s reins in hand,
and climbed onto the saddle. Then I rode off, in the
opposite direction, pausing once to glance back at her
before we continued on to the woods.
I was barely outside the village when, suddenly, two
men on horseback charged toward me, waving their arms
and shouting. Startled, I wrenched the reins to the left,
causing Samson to pivot on his hind legs with a shrill cry.
“Come quickly!” one of them said. “Please come!”
“You are wanted—a child needs you.”
“What happened?” I asked.
“I don’t know,” said the second one. “But please come,
and do make haste with it. A boy is terribly ill.”
170

Chapter Sixteen
Acting on impulse, I didn’t take time to think about
this. I didn’t question it. I spurred my horse into a canter,
and followed them to the outskirts of the village.
Little did I know I was riding straight into a trap, foolish enough to let it happen. When we returned, waiting at
the bend just past the road were five soldiers, all decked out
in knights’ armor, carrying broadswords and daggers.
Behind them was a caged carriage; and flanking them was a
small crowd of villagers, one of whom pointed at me and
said, “There he is.” And the two scoundrels who had led me
here stood back, looking so unbelievably self-satisfied it
was infuriating.
“Are you Rainier de Aaradyn?” the commandant
asked.
I didn’t know what to do. Certainly I shouldn’t answer,
I thought. What do they want of me? Why have I been led
here?
My first inclination was to ride away—and I began to,
thinking I’d outrun them. But they rushed after me,
bringing their horses alongside mine, like predators on the
hunt, encircling me until there was no choice except to halt.
I fought against their barricade for a moment, until I felt
their swords touch my neck and chest with a fearsome
amount of pressure. That was when I realized they would
sooner kill me than not, and I would be forced to yield.

171

The Nocturne
“Seize him,” the commandant said. With those words a
soldier on either side of me gripped my hands and bound
them in irons. Then they pulled me from my horse’s back,
forcing me toward the caged carriage at the road’s end.
“You have been summoned by Baron Galtier.”
I didn’t dare to speak for fear I’d be stabbed, but my
mind was racing as I struggled to understand what this was
about. Why would the Baron summon me? How would he
even know of me?
When they led me to the carriage they flung open the
door and pushed me in, with my people watching in silence.
I looked outside the carriage every now and again, but
all I could see were the soldiers riding alongside me, and
the forest as it never seemed to change. Dampness hovered
in the air, growing thicker as we rode toward the mountains.
Thunder rolled in the distance; and rain clouds had begun to
cluster in the gloomy monochromatic sky.
How long we had been traveling, I couldn’t tell, but it
must have been an hour or so. I struggled to think of a way
to escape, though I was barred-in on all sides—and even if I
could break free it would be foolish and hopeless to run
from them. Now I could do nothing except wait…and wait,
and wonder….
After crossing several more miles of the hillside, we
finally reached the Baron’s estate. There were walls around
the perimeter, and outside spanned the thicket I’d stared at
172

Chapter Sixteen
during my journey here. When we approached I noticed the
gatehouse with smoke rising from its roof, complete with
two massive pillars that suspended a walkway above the
wall, and a drawbridge over the moat—as one would expect
to find at a castle.
The gatekeeper stepped onto the balcony, waving a
torch as a signal to the guards behind the entrance. Then the
drawbridge descended slowly—and once we were crossing
it, I was finally able to see the estate and its sprawling
grounds. From the turrets that reached toward the sky, to
the jagged black rocks along the foot of the battlements—it
was breathtaking. I had not seen anything quite like this
before. There were gardens and courtyards and statues,
with a stone path that led to the entrance. I could see that
now, as the carriage had stopped before the doorway.
The door swung open in a hurry. With a dry screech, it
was thrust outward, its ragged edge scraping the porch.
Baron Galtier stepped outside. He was a squat and hefty
man with slumped shoulders, clad in an array of fine fabrics
and jewelry: silks in burgundy and cream hues, accented
with little golden adornments here and there. His hair,
behind a receded forehead, looked to have been brown at
one time, but had faded to a dull grey. His eyes were forestgreen and set deep in his skull.
I looked past him, to the twin stone pillars at the base
of a long, spiraling staircase. From where I stood I was able
173

The Nocturne
to see a lighted corridor that seemed to go on for miles,
where engraved wooden doors led to small bed-chambers.
The ceilings were vaulted with elaborate triangular carvings
and painted leaves; gold flowers with silver berries and fruit
at the centre of every fresco.
I couldn’t help but notice the estate was well illuminated: tallow candles were set in each and every alcove
with a flickering light that moved like a butterfly as the
wind touched it. At the centre of the farthest wall in the
great room was a large cruciform, with wiry golden vines
and thorns curling round it like bony fingers.
“Please come,” he said. “Make haste! My son needs
your help.”
Without another word he gestured for me to step
through the threshold and into the entranceway, where
polished slates of marble had been laid in a puzzle-like
manner, creating an almost chequered pattern that ended
with the single step that led to the great room.
I pulled back the hood of my cloak and stepped inside.
“What ails him?”
“Nightshade,” he said as I followed behind him. From
the great room I could see the second corridor, with
chamber after chamber on the second story, beyond a
passage with finely-carved railings on either side. I
followed him to the lower corridor, until we reached a small
bedroom—the third door on the right-hand side.
174

Chapter Sixteen
He opened the door slowly, trying to be as quiet as
possible. He turned to me right after he entered the room.
I was stunned by what I saw…. The child looked far
worse than anyone I’d ever healed—or that I’d seen at all—
even in their deathbeds. Thick white foam oozed from his
mouth, and his breathing was rapid and pained. Every now
and again he would writhe and cry.
“Nightshade?” I said. “You let him touch nightshade?!”
He nodded. “My servants are certain that he took to it
last night. And he has been worsening since then. That is
why I summoned you—you’re the only one who can save
him.”
He said nothing about why the child had been allowed
to go near such a deadly herb, and I didn’t ask.
Never before had I seen anyone as ill as this. His very
presence frightened me. I hated more than anything to
admit that I could not help him, he bore the mark of the
werewolf which my powers could not overcome.
“I need water for him,” I said, then told him the necessary herbs and other things I would need to make a potion
to ease his pain. With haste, the Baron left the chamber,
locking the door so I would have no interruptions.
For a long moment I watched the child, and again an
eerie feeling came over me. I knew that nightshade was not
what ailed him. It was something worse, something darker.
175

The Nocturne
But I had to try, no matter what, as long as there was still
hope. I couldn’t let him suffer.
“I’m going to help you,” I whispered, touching his
forehead, “I promise.”
He shivered and cried as I did this, though I went on
gently, laying my hands on his chest as I summoned the
healing spirits. “Keep still. I’ll help you.”
Then, all of a sudden, he grasped my arm, flailing violently. Startled, I drew back, just when he rolled off the bed
and onto the floor, with convulsions wracking his entire
body and froth oozing out his lips.
“Monsieur!” I shouted, but heard no answer. I knelt
down, tried to steady him…but when I touched him, he was
no longer shivering and clammy. Now he had unimaginable
strength as well. Again I called for the Baron—or the
guards I’d seen outside—anyone who could help me…and
that was when I witnessed the transformation.
He brought himself to his feet, his eyes aglow with
rage, his limbs contorting with a series of wet snapping
sounds. His skin began to disappear beneath long black
strands of hair, then brown and mottled-grey. His skull took
new form as well: his jaws lengthened to a narrow muzzle;
his teeth turned to fangs that extended beyond his lips.
When he stood he was nearly my height, having grown
tremendously in seconds.

176

Chapter Sixteen
The werewolf, now a furious tangling ball of froth and
fur, leapt at me, bearing his fangs. I threw him back,
causing him to collide with the bedpost. I didn’t know what
else to do, but I had not the power to destroy or cure him.
I’d never learned such a thing—and, I think—even if I had
known how, I would not have been strong enough to
overcome the evil in him.
As soon as he rose again, he shook his head, then
slashed my arm with one ragged strike. I no longer saw him
as a child who needed help, but a demon, a body possessed
by a spirit from hell.
I was enraged. By no fault of my own I was brought
here—and now my life was at risk. There was no way out.
I rushed to the door, but he was snarling and clawing at me
as I tried to hold him off. When I took hold of the doorhandle, he had nearly bitten my hand. The warmth of his
breath passed over my skin. His mouth grazed me as I
whirled around to throw him back once more.
I turned and ran to the window, kicked it as hard as I
could, watching the glass shatter. I picked up a piece, just as
he lunged at me again—and I pushed it, with all my power,
into his eye. In the heat of rage, anger, fear and desperation,
I then grabbed his neck. Blood was everywhere, a mixture
of mine and his, smeared on the walls and floor, on the
bedpost, on the shimmering broken glass behind me.

177

The Nocturne
Still snarling, he pushed me against the wall, as I kept
hold of him, gripping harder as rage and some sort of
primal instinct overtook me. He kept forcing me backward
as I fought to bring him to the ground. One of us would
die—there was no way out of it. I wouldn’t yield, and
neither would he. When my hands began to slip from his
neck I clutched it again, pushing down with all my strength.
I felt his throat giving way beneath my thumbs, so I
continued to bear down on it until I the flesh and cartilage
were breaking.
The Baron must not have been but a few steps down
the stairwell…and what was I to do? He was drawing near.
I heard his footsteps in the hall.
The werewolf crumpled to the floor, the hair melting
away as his body re-took its original form. I ran to the
window, jumped out and hid under the bushes. I could
almost hear my heart leaping against my chest. I felt its
throbbing movements in my neck and ears.
The Baron opened the door, seeing a pool of blood and
the boy lying in it. “What have you done?” he cried, tossing
aside the items. “You killed him! Murderer!”
After that he shouted my name with all sorts of curses,
as I still hid not far from the window, waiting for the
opportunity to escape. The wall was much too high for me
to climb; my only way out would be the bridge, past the
guards.
178

Chapter Sixteen
Moments later he ordered them to search the
grounds—and not stop until they found me. Some were on
horseback, others on foot, scouring the path behind the
estate, which led out through the serfs’ village. It was too
risky; I’d never escape that way. I weighed my odds of
getting out of here…and when I felt the time was opportune, I dashed across the grounds, narrowly missing them as
they rode south from the entrance.
When I reached the gates I released the pulley that controlled the bridge, and stopped it half-way through its
descent by jamming the chain between the wheels. Then I
ran, faster then I ever have; slid down the front of the
bridge and onto the bank. I couldn’t tell where I was
headed, as there was not a star in the sky, but I kept going
with no end in sight.
THE SOLDIERS searched for me for quite a while,
riding into the darkness with torches and swords in hand. I
crouched down behind a boulder, keeping still and silent as
they approached, praying they wouldn’t find me. After
combing through miles of the thicket, they rode back to the
estate; and I dared not to move, for fear they may wait
nearby.
I spent the night in the forest, doing my best to wash
my wounds using the water in a river. There was no
shelter—not even a cave—anywhere in sight, so when I
was too tired to go on I knelt down and leaned against a
179

The Nocturne
tree. I had no way to keep warm, for my clothes were
ripped and covered in blood. My entire body ached, my legs
burning from all the miles I’d run. But there was no way to
tell how far I was from home. I had to keep going, keep
pressing on, no matter how much it hurt, or the Baron’s
men would find me.
Streams coursed somewhere near here; and as I pressed
on I heard every droplet rolling over the river rocks, the
gentle ripples of the breeze against the waters. As I
continued, I began to listen more intently, taking in the
sweet earthly scent of the copse, the soft chirping of the
birds, the unnatural cries of wolves.
A shudder passed through my body, which for a moment made me feel as though something ghostly was upon
me—a demonic presence. I stopped, realizing my vision
was suddenly sharp. Too sharp.
What is happening? I asked myself. Why am I feeling
this way?
Just before sunrise I stopped to drink from that stream,
and collapsed on its bank. I faded in and out of consciousness, until everything I saw slowly turned from grey to
black.
When I awakened I urged myself to press onward. I
was impelled by anger, love, sorrow and joy; every emotion
imaginable was thudding into my brain. Despite what I
felt—and that was certainly awful—I tried to promise
180

Chapter Sixteen
myself that, no matter what I’d done, I had no choice. I
couldn’t escape the werewolf and let him go free.
My entire body was quivering, and my heart had
plunged to my stomach. I felt the most intense pain, yet it
transformed to relief and a sense of triumph…because I
escaped. Of course I was plagued by images of what
happened. How could I not be? Guilt struck me like a tidal
wave with my every step… but I needed to go on.
I tried my best to cry out for help, but no one heard me,
and my lungs burned with my every breath. Then I fell to
the ground once more, having to rest for a moment before I
was able to continue. I could see the sunrise, the soft golden
color streaming over the thicket and countryside.
Once I was nearly home I tore through the fields as
quickly as I could, thought nothing of my condition and
injuries. The forest and fields were but a blur in my eyes as
I struggled to make my way to the path. I could hear
nothing, save for my heart; and I could remember no time I
had ever heard it thud against my chest with such force.
Lanterns burned beneath the purple sky, with pale light
dousing the empty paths between locked dwellings, and a
veil of mist clung to the fields. Not a soul was in sight,
which was uncanny to say the least. A chill moved down
my spine. At the time I told myself how odd it was I was
alone, I’d yet to realize I had traveled only a short distance
outside the thicket. I was unable to fully understand what
181

The Nocturne
had happened. And I have not the faintest idea how to begin
to explain such a thing, but I felt a haunting sense of
worthlessness inside myself. I felt empty, dark and cold.
My every muscle was tense, sinewy ropes binding me
stock-still for a long moment. Then, from across the fields,
echoed a voice—a man’s voice:
“Quickly!” he cried, making an urgent gesture for his
companions to help me. “Hurry! Help him, now!”
When the three lads rushed toward me, I tried to
stand…but I was much too weak.
“What happened?” he asked, his voice quivering with
joy and fear at the same time. I didn’t know what to make
of it, but I did know, however, that I had found shelter in
his arms. He studied me, looking over the cuts and bruises
on my body. “Annora has been beside herself worrying
about you.”
“Is she all right?” I asked, panicked. “And the baby?”
“Yes, yes, they’re fine.”
“I was summoned…,” I said, “by Baron Galtier; and I
fell in the forest. I don’t remember anything else.”
“Come quickly dear!” he shouted to his wife, who then
hurried toward us. “Find Annora! Tell her Rainier has
returned—”
“No…,” I said, “I must go to her. I cannot risk her being hurt by running out here.”

182

Chapter Sixteen
“She nearly cried her eyes out,” he said, and paused
when I tried to remove the broken sticks and dirt from the
gash in my palm, “but she is fine.”
He tended to my cuts, fetched a bandage and wrapped
it around my hand, and then he helped me make my way
toward the western side of the village.
When we approached my village, a massive crowd
flocked to my presence, reaching up to touch me with awe
and disbelief, as though I’d returned from the longest, most
perilous journey. Annora was not far away, I could see, and
as I stepped down from the cart she fought her way past
them. She hurried to reach me as I ran to her, encircling her
with my arms. I kissed her again and again, holding onto
that sweet moment as though it would last forever.
I found comfort, instantly. And I kept reassuring myself that I had made the right choice by killing the werewolf, child or not. I’d protected my family, saved my
village and countless lives from being ravaged by a
werewolf. Annora would find a way to forgive me and put
my mind at ease, I was certain. She alone could assure me
all would be well—that I had done everything within my
power to turn wrong to right.
Within seconds, twice as many people had gathered
round us, wanting to know about everything that happened
to me. I heard a hundred questions, even more suspicions,

183

The Nocturne
and whispers that faded in and out of the background as I
kissed and held my sweet wife.
“I rode out looking for you,” she said, tightening her
embrace, “and someone said you had been summoned…I
didn’t know why. What happened? I was afraid I’d never
see you again!”
I found myself looking at her with more love and reverence than ever before, as though this were a dream and I
was desperate to know it had ended this way—that we were
really there, safe and together.
She brushed aside the hair that lay in front of my eyes.
Then she reached for my hands, frightened by the sight of
the gashes on my palms and forearms. And pain ripped
through me when she touched them. “These wounds,” she
whispered. “Who did this to you?”
“Baron Galtier summoned me to heal his son,” I said.
“I cannot tell you here—not until we are alone.”
ONCE WE WERE HOME, she hugged me as she said
again, “I was so worried…I thought I’d lost you.”
“You aren’t going to lose me.” Lifting her chin with
one finger, I kissed her, deeply, passionately—perhaps even
more so than I had in the past.
After the kiss ended, she looked up at me with a sad
smile. “I cannot even sleep if you aren’t here. Does that
make me weak?”
“No,” I said, “you are the strongest person I know.”
184

Chapter Sixteen
“But without you I’m lost.”
“What would you do, then, if anything were to happen
to me?”
“Why do you say such things?” She gestured to the
tunic I was wearing. “Take it off.”
“You’ve not said that in a while.”
She laughed a little, sitting beside me when I brought a
chair to her. She was shocked by the sight of my wounds,
seeing there were gashes down my arms, chest and back;
some with shards of glass.
“You should rest now,” I said, “and I will wash up and
prepare for—.”
“Prepare for what?” She stood again before she set a
few pieces of cloth and a small batch of herbs on the table.
Then she set about to remove a pot of water from the
hearth…but I wouldn’t allow her.
“All the questions, I suppose. Leander will be here
soon enough; he will want to know about it. Here, I am
able,” I said, taking it from her and pouring it into a pail.
“Please, listen to me and rest.”
“After I tend to you, and after you tell me what happened.”
“I’ll be fine, love, I promise. Why can you not listen to
me?”

185

The Nocturne
After I added the herbs to the water to make a remedy
for my wounds, we sat together again at the table. Pain
radiated throughout my arm when she began to wash it.
“Who did this?” she asked. “Tell me.”
I kept my composure and slowly explained everything.
I told her about the boy I healed before I was taken to the
Baron’s estate, and about the soldiers who put their swords
to my throat when they demanded I go with them. I left few
things unsaid…but then I paused, unable to tell her about
the werewolf.
She was concerned yet so calm through this entire
thing, waiting to assure me that all would be well no matter
what I’d done. It served no good for me to pretend I wasn’t
afraid. I couldn’t keep the truth from her any longer.
After my wounds were clean, she rubbed the dried
herbs onto them and began to bandage my arm. There was
concern and affection in her touch and voice. “What
happened? Please tell me why he summoned you.”
“I don’t know how to tell you,” I said. “He needed me
because his son was ill. That is when I was hurt, after I was
taken there.” Taking a deep breath, I looked down to see I
had laced my hand with hers again; and she tightened her
grip. “I fear the Baron; I fear he will come in search of me.
I have never been so scared.”
She stood, and then she seated herself on the bench
where I was sitting. When she rested her head against my
186

Chapter Sixteen
shoulder and ran her hand down my chest, I almost blinked
back tears. “What makes you think he will be in search of
you? I’ve no idea what you mean—you are making no
sense. Why on earth would he do that?”
And then I found the courage to say: “A terrible thing
happened last night. I did something awful, something I
was made to do.”
“It will be a secret between us. But tell me—I must
know.”
“He said that nightshade had made his son ill. And he
was dying. I couldn’t help it; I hurt the boy.”
She took a deep breath, in timid anticipation of what I
would say next. “Is it like what happened when we were at
the tavern?”
“I tried to heal him. I put my hand on his chest and
tried to keep him still, but it didn’t matter. I did, you must
believe me—I was trying to save him. It wasn’t nightshade—it was a werewolf bite. He changed so fast, and I
was locked in the chamber.”
She put her hand over her mouth, trying to stifle a gasp
of shock and horror. She was without words for a moment.
“My God!” she said. “Did he bite you? How—what did you
do?”
“I did what I could and kept from being bitten. When I
threw him back, he lunged at me—and, I’ve no idea how—
but I grasped his neck…and I was so full of rage that I
187

The Nocturne
pushed down—I just kept pushing and choking until he quit
fighting. I killed him with my bare hands.”
Shock, pain and horror crossed her face when she
thought about what could have happened to me. Of course,
she felt awful for the boy, as did I, though she knew I had
no choice. I had protected her and the baby. But now we
were to face even greater challenges: What would become
of me? How were we to get away?
Once it all set in she began to cry. “What should become of you if the he finds out?”
“He didn’t see it, but he knows,” I said. “And his men
will be in search of me, it is only a matter of time.”
“What are we going to do?”
“We must get out of here, tonight when no one will
see,” I said. “If we can make it to the next township, there
will be shelter. No one there will know what happened. We
will leave after nightfall so we can go slowly.... I know it
will be hard for you to travel this way—and I’m so sorry.
I’m sorry, love.”
She nodded, then looked down and laid her hand on her
belly. “I just hope he doesn’t decide to be born too soon.”
“Don’t think like that,” I said as I drew her close to me.
“He’ll be fine, I promise. We aren’t going to let anything
happen to him; we’re going to go slowly, carefully.”
I absolutely hated myself for having to make such a
decision, to tell her that our only choice was to run away
188

Chapter Sixteen
before the Baron could have me arrested. Then it had been
settled: that night we would leave, stop to rest in the next
village, and then travel north until we were out of harm’s
way.
NIGHTFALL WAS APPROACHING. Upon its arrival
we would have precious little time to get out of here. Our
plan, as it were, was that after darkness had fallen I’d ready
the horses, then walk them back to the house, help Annora
onto the mare’s back…and ride north without using the
path.
That day I did my best to keep away from anyone who
may ask what happened…although, as you might expect,
they came to me. Too many questions arose. Too many
people were wary, and rumors were spreading quickly.
Everyone pried to know what had gone on, why I’d been
summoned, how I escaped.
Annora wanted to stay in this place and absolutely
dreaded the idea of traveling in her condition. Her life was
changing because of me, yet she held no grudge. Instead
she did all within her ability to offer me comfort. Even
though she suffered for what I’d done, she forgave me. And
I don’t think—in that position—I could have such compassion, such self-sacrifice.
The burdens of getting out of here, protecting her, being able to find shelter along the way and settling into a
place where she would be safe, fell like an avalanche on my
189

The Nocturne
shoulders. Yet she suffered an even greater pain, because
our refuge had been torn away. Now we had no safe place
to raise our baby.
“I don’t want to leave,” she said.
I did my best to keep her fears at bay, yet every time I
tried to sound reassuring it fell terribly flat. “I know,” I
said, taking her into my arms. “But we have time yet; by the
time the baby comes, we will be settled in.”
Suddenly she winced and drew back.
“What is it?” I asked. “What’s wrong?”
“He just kicked so hard it startled me.” She took hold
of my hands and placed them on her belly. “Did you feel
that? He is bouncing all about.”
“He needs a name.”
“I’ve been thinking about that. I want him to have a
special name—something unusual.”
“Have you thought of any yet?”
“Only one,” she said, “and you mustn’t laugh.”
“What is it?”
Just then I felt him move. Although I’d felt this a thousand times or more, it was no less heartwarming. But there
was no time to stand around and be sentimental. I had only
a few more moments until I would leave to prepare.
She went on: “I want to name him Requiem.”

190

Chapter Sixteen
“What? You aren’t serious, are you?” I said. “Requiem? That is some sort of song—thing—for Mass—not a
name.”
She was more precious than ever, still childlike in so
many ways. “It can be. How can you not adore it?”
“Requiem”—I tried to figure out what sort of name it
would make—“sounds so odd.”
“It will grow on you.”
She must have had this on her mind for quite some
time, judging by the fact she was so adamant in her
decision. I wanted for her to realize to give him such a
name would be foolish; I wanted to tell her No.…but I
couldn’t.
I reached out to touch her hand; in return she looked at
me with that look—the sadness in her eyes I could never
resist. How simply I’d been defeated.
“Please don’t look at me that way,” I said, unable to
keep from smiling.
“I love the name,” she whispered and playfully bit my
lip. “Would you please consider it?”
“But he is a nice, sweet little baby…it would be cruel
to do that to him. He’ll be teased to no end.”
“Shall we name him after you, then?”
“That would be grand.”
“Oh, you. How long will I have to argue with you
about it?”
191

The Nocturne
“Sweet,” I said, “whatever you would like is fine with
me.”
She embraced me once more, having forgotten all that
was sad, depressing. Now, it seemed, we were going to be
all right. The baby’s name meant such a great deal to her I
had no choice but to agree.
I would have loved to stay there with her, but night had
just fallen and time was now of the essence. I’d been
waiting for the sky to darken, and for the few stragglers in
the streets to go on about their business before I would
sneak to the barn to saddle the horses.
“So he has a name now?” she said, looking all too victorious.
I walked to the door, pulled it open just slightly, to see
the sun had set and darkness was descending. Then I turned,
stepping back to her with a far brighter smile than I’d
thought possible during these times. “Do I have any say in
it?”
“Certainly not.”
“Then it’s settled.” I kissed her forehead. “But it is
nightfall now. I will ready the horses and come back for
you.”

192

Chapter Seventeen
Rainier

A COLD BREEZE rushed through the doorway as I
stepped outside. Wind-torn trees swayed eerily, casting
shadows beneath the luminous white moon.
I fastened the few remaining things to go with us, onto
the colt’s back. Then I unwound the tether, and began to
lead him to the barn, which was quite a ways from here—in
the field at the end of a long, straight path.
To my displeasure, several people were still out and
about near the outskirts of the village. Careful to avoid as
many of them as I could, I tugged on the rope, quickened
my pace…and led him onto the soft grass in hopes that
fewer leaves would be crushed beneath his hooves. Yet, of
course, it was no use.

The Nocturne
Once inside the barn I wasted no time saddling Samson
and Kaeya, working by nothing save for the moonlight that
filtered through the threshold.
The Baron’s estate was nearly a half-day’s ride from
here. I still had time, I thought. Yet, even as I hurried to get
out of here, panic went through me. Instinct—no, something even deeper and more primal—a sixth sense—put my
nerves on edge.
The lanterns along the pathways to my left swayed in
the wind’s grasp. When it howled, there came a sound I
knew could be only one thing. I lifted my head, looking
toward the light of the houses in the distance, and then I
heard screams—not only of terror—but a great, fierce
anger.
The more I listened, the more I silently prayed this
wasn’t true. It just couldn’t happen like this, I told myself.
No, they cannot be here already. When I stepped past the
threshold I saw them, going door to door in search of me,
with a number of civilians who had joined in, calling me a
murderer and a liar.
I never knew people could be so disloyal, so beastly
wicked as to completely turn against a person who did
nothing but help them. But they became predators, on the
hunt for me so they could applaud when I’m arrested, and
strike me while others jeer. This was blood-sport, not

194

Chapter Seventeen
justice. My own people were willing to burn me at the
stake.
Not tonight, I told myself. Not now….Not ever.
The soldiers were riding in different directions, and
some were coming toward me, which made it impossible to
ride out of here.
I walked the colt to the door, let go of his halter, struck
his backside and watched him gallop into the distance, past
the soldiers, who immediately assumed I must have ridden
right by them. Then, on horseback, they charged after him,
across the field. After that I tied Kaeya’s reins to Samson’s
saddle, led them into a stall, bolted the latch; and then I
hastened to the door, seeing chaos unfurl. All I could do
was hold onto my hope that Annora would be wise and stay
in the house, that she would not hear all the commotion and
come outside…and be seen.
Now that I’d distracted the soldiers, there were only a
few moments for me to figure out where to hide. I looked in
every direction, finding walls on three of four sides, and a
doorway that faced a livid, growing throng. So I kicked a
loose board in the wall, near the floor, figuring it was my
only means of escape; but when it began to split, I abandoned that plan. The cob that held the board in place was
much too thick for me to tear apart so fast—and even if it
were to break, the opening would be apparent. Then I’d be
no better off.
195

The Nocturne
By the time I heard the jangling sound of armor, a single soldier had nearly reached the barn.
I’d no place to go, so I dashed out the doorway and up
the stairway to the loft, all this while praying he wouldn’t
see me I scampered behind a mound of grain in the far left
corner, slid down quietly and leaned against the wall.
Thankfully I’d found cover here, but when I moved—
even slightly—the boards creaked. Just then he rode in,
waving a torch about as he searched for me among the
livestock and in the empty stalls, fortunately paying no
attention to the fact that my horses were saddled. I couldn’t
see him after that, but I heard his every move: when he slid
down the side of his steed, and walked almost every inch of
that place; when he threw open the doors of the empty pens;
when he pushed aside the sacks and barrels that stood in the
corners and along the walls, as I sat there, struggling to
think of a way to escape. Thinking of Annora and what the
soldiers might do to her to make her tell them of my
whereabouts. Thinking that, instead of defending her I
sought refuge, like some sort of coward.
There went all my pride.
How long I hid, I don’t know. It seemed to have gone
on for all eternity; and there had never been a moment in
my life when I was so afraid. Every second that went by I
anticipated that he would see me, or walk up the staircase to
continue his search, but he didn’t leave the barn until he had
196

Chapter Seventeen
climbed onto his saddle. After that he rode across the
field—to the section of houses that were being searched,
not to look for where I lived…but for where I may have
been hiding.
I kept still for a moment or two, and caught my breath
before I crawled to the edge of the plank to see if he went
on. Even though there was no one nearby, I waited until he
was completely out of sight before I tiptoed down the stairs,
into the barn—all the way back to the stalls.
I opened the gate, took Kaeya’s rope in hand, climbed
onto Samson’s back, and rode faster than I’d ever thought
possible. I avoided the path. Instead I set out from behind
the barn, along the backside of the village, on my way
home.
I heard only the cold wind that rushed against my face.
I felt nothing except the strange, fiery rush of panic, and the
chills that followed it. A dark feeling of…emptiness came
over me, for I knew there were, literally, moments left to
get out of here—that is, if no one heard the horses galloping
across the field.
I didn’t dare to look back.
When I reached my house, I didn’t wait for Samson to
stop completely before I slid down his side and onto the
ground. Then I hurried inside, so thankful to see Annora
standing there, unharmed. She didn’t appear to be frightened at first, but when she saw my expression she rushed
197

The Nocturne
toward me, asking what was the matter. She must not have
heard the furious voices, the mayhem in the distance, or for
certain she would not have stayed there.
I was much too shaken to say anything else. I ran my
fingers through my hair, pacing in front of the door.
“They’re here. The soldiers—they’re looking for me!”
There was a sudden crashing sound nearby, and she
realized—as I did—that we no longer had moments to get
out of here…we had seconds.
“The horses are right here,” I said. “You can ride
across the meadow and I’ll come find you.”
“There is no time! I can stay.”
For a fleeting second I wondered if, by some chance,
she would be all right here without me. If I’d run out right
then, chances were I could have escaped, but I would
sooner die than abandon her.
I squeezed her hand, looking into her eyes, on the brink
of tears at the thought of losing her and the baby. “If they
come here and find you,” I said, “they’ll kill you! Hurry;
come now—there isn’t much time!”
“I’ve nowhere to go. I cannot ride fast enough to—.”
“Just go!” I said. “Anywhere; it doesn’t matter. I will
go the other way, and they’ll follow me. Please, come
quickly.” Then I heard horses galloping down the street,
and the dreadful peal of armor…the sounds I knew all too
well now.
198

Chapter Seventeen
I was rattled. Here they had me trapped—in my own
home, no less. By the time we could make our way out the
door, it would be too late. This was it. This was the end for
me. I’d walked straight into their trap.
Before I could move, the door sprang open and they
rushed in with no warning whatsoever, bearing their swords
and daggers. Annora shrieked and recoiled, instinctively
clinging to me. I wrapped my arms around her shoulders,
trying to shield her.
I recognized the commandant who had ordered I follow
the summons of Baron Galtier; I knew his black eyes, and
the unmistakable indifference of how he went about this.
“Rainier de Aaradyn,” he said and then spat at me,
“you are under arrest for the murder of Baron Galtier’s
son.”
I took my wife’s hand in mine, clutching it as she buried her face against my shoulder to muffle her cries.
I needed to hold steadfast. No matter what, I could not give
in to their commands this time. I wouldn’t be taken away
from her…I could not leave her alone this way.
From the stern look in their eyes and the way they approached to apprehend me, I knew my fate: I would not
escape again. It had been by some stroke of luck I’d done
so before, and this time the penalty would be far more
severe, more evil, more frightening.

199

The Nocturne
They stepped forth, some with court-swords, while
others bore battle swords. Though it was not only blades
that were sported by these men—some of them carried
shackles, as well as thick ropes. Each of the weapons was
pointed at me with the inevitable truth that I’d have no
choice but to surrender.
I pressed to think of a means of escape—something—
anything I could do to protect Annora from what we both
knew to be the end for me. But suddenly, three of the men
pulled me from her embrace with their swords drawn and
touching my chest.
I feared more for my wife and child than for myself. I
was desperate and determined to make certain that even if it
should take my life in the process, they would be kept out
of harm's way. As deeply as the thought of that pained me, I
realized it was all I could do. I would have no choice but to
leave them behind, praying I be given the might and
freedom to return home, one day.
“No!” she said, grasping my arm. “No, you mustn’t
take him!” She looked at the commandant, pleading now.
“He is not a murderer! Please—please—I beg the Baron
grant him clemency.”
This time would not end like the last, I told myself.
Though I could not foresee what may come of it, I resisted
the soldiers—even when two of them gripped my shoulders
and steadied me as they prepared to bind me in irons.
200

Chapter Seventeen

When the tallest and most brutish of these men tried to
push me toward the doorway, I had no choice but to yield.
Annora would have nothing of that. She clung to me,
ignoring the fact they would think nothing of ending her
life.
The commandant struck her shoulder. “Get out of my
way.”
She was stunned. I saw it in her eyes, the anguish. With
every passing moment she was losing me and I
her…perhaps forever.
“Don’t you dare touch her!” I said, whirling round to
push against his chest with both hands. In doing this I’d
nearly thrown him against the wall. “You miserable bastard,
leave her out of this. She’s bearing a child.”
Cupping her hand over her mouth, she was in tears as
he struck me again and again, until I’d gone numb from the
force of his fist. She stood opposite the bed, her entire body
wracked with sobs and tremors. “No…,” she said, her voice
catching in her throat as she tried to hold back a scream.
“You cannot take him away, you mustn’t!”
She reached for me, and I clutched her hand. She
wanted nothing more than for me to hold her…just one last
time. I was torn away from her by one of the men, while
another cast an open hand to her cheek.

201

The Nocturne
I couldn’t bear to see her get hurt again; it tore me
apart in a way I had never thought possible. When her hand
slipped from mine—when I ran my fingers across hers,
desperate to hold on to her—my heart had truly been
broken.
I would, somehow or other, beg to be released, or devise a plan of escape when I would be taken to the Baron’s
estate. Those were my only options now.
“Keep back, love,” I said as the soldiers clamped
shackles on my wrists and bound them together with chains.
“I’ll be fine, I promise you.”
They would just as soon kill me as not. I had no
strength to fight anymore. I wanted only to keep Annora out
of harm’s way…and by being so aggressively beaten I had
felt more pain in a few moments than most men feel in a
lifetime.
“Bid her farewell,” he said, allowing me to take two
steps toward her, “and make haste with it.”
Though my hands were chained, I struggled to hold her
when she wrapped her arms around mine, and laid her head
against my chest. “Listen to me,” I said. “I will be fine; I
swear to it, I will return. But you mustn’t worry”—I kissed
her forehead—“and you must promise me you will not fight
this anymore.”

202

Chapter Seventeen
She ran her fingers across my cheek. “But you have
been hurt. I cannot see you get hurt. I cannot keep away
when they do this to you.”
“I know, but I can bear it,” I said. “Please don’t cry.
You are going to be a mother; the baby needs you to protect
him.”
She smiled a sad smile as she reached for my hands
and clutched them, her fingers trailing the cold iron clamps.
An eerie sensation went down my spine when they told me
to hurry along.
She tried to lighten the sorrow with a quick yet passionate kiss. “No, don’t say such things. I’ll not hear you
talk like that.”
Again, they were trying to usher me toward the door,
but I could not bring myself to bid farewell to her.
When I looked into her eyes, I was stricken with the
most horrific thought: What if I cannot escape? What if I
would not be forgiven? As devastating as the idea was, I
had to prepare her—and myself—for what may come to be.
I clutched her hands. “I love you so much—I always
will. Don’t cry, love. You must look after the baby, I know
you can. And if I should not return, you will take care of
him; you will love him for me, as we do now.”
She shook her head, biting her under-lip. “No, it isn’t
going to happen.”

203

The Nocturne
“I will do all I can—and I pray I’ll come home. But
you must stay strong. Please, promise me.”
Her gaze was cast hell-ward, and then she lifted her
chin to kiss me before they pulled the shackles yet another
time. “Don’t talk that way, don’t say that. I can’t think of
you not being here.”
I kissed away her tears and pressed my forehead
against hers, touching her hand and mine to her stomach.
“Promise me you will stay here and not worry. I’ll do
whatever I must to keep you safe. Look after our little
boy—do you hear me?—let him know how I loved him.”
By then the soldiers had torn me away from her, and
she was sobbing her heart out as she covered her eyes with
her hands. She lifted her head long enough to catch glimpse
of me as I was being dragged away.
I cannot tell you how deeply it pained me to give in to
this, to fall powerless yet another time. In order to keep my
family safe, I had no choice but to give in to the arrest.
I went with them against my will, fighting to think of a
way I could change my fate.
When they dragged me out of my house and forced me
into the caged carriage, I shut my eyes, and I saw nothing
until…

204

Chapter Eighteen
Rainier

THE SECOND TIME I ARRIVED AT BARON
GALTIER’S ESTATE.
He stepped onto the porch. I was being pulled toward
the entranceway.
“Milord,” the commandant began with a slight incline
of his head, “as you requested. Here he is.”
“His people will see to his punishment,” another soldier said. “When they learn what he has done, milord…”
“Quiet!” the Baron said. I tried to evade his gaze.
“You miserable bastard!”
“I didn’t kill him,” I said. “I am not a murderer.”
“One of your own people heard you admit to it.”

The Nocturne
“What shall we do with him?” another solider asked,
closing the door.
When he reached the middle of the entryway, the
Baron paused. Awaiting his orders, they held me. “Take
him to the dungeon,” he said, “while I figure out what to do
with him.”
“Very well, milord. What about his wife?”
“I wasn’t aware he has one.”
“Yes sir. And she is with child.”
“Then she is of no use,” he said. “Do I pay you to work
or to think?”
“To work, sir; never to think.”
“Then take him and leave me.”
They knew exactly how to hurt me, how to anger me.
This was the beginning of my downfall, I knew, when he
had mentioned Annora. Not only did I fear for my life, I
feared for her. But I would not be taken away from her, I
swore on my life. I would find a way to get home.
I kept fighting—even though I knew it was pointless. I
resisted the soldiers; I was willful, still trying to escape.
I thought of Annora; how she must have been suffering. I needed to know she would not be afraid—that she
would find the strength to go on…even if I wouldn’t come
home.
What my punishment may be, I could not bear to think.
Yet, against my will I imagined the tortures I’d heard of in
206

Chapter Eighteen
the past: I could hear what would soon be my screams; I
could feel the heat and force of the whips and chains.
They dragged me inside the gatehouse, past the ironbolted door and down the stairwell with one soldier on each
side, kicking and pushing me.
I have never felt so powerless. I had no way to save
myself. Not even hellfire could get me out of this. I wanted
to kill these men—all of them; I wanted to rip them apart
and see their skin burn from their bodies, their blood turn to
ash. I tried to remember how it happened so long ago: how
four men suddenly burst into flames, because I’d reached
the point where I didn’t care what I had to do to escape. Yet
in some half-hearted way, I felt that the skill was no longer
a part of me. Or it was deep inside my mind—beneath the
shock, guilt and horror—that it lay buried for all time.
They took me into an empty room, through another
doorway and into the dungeon.
The staircase—not much more than a mound of broken-down, grey stone tiers—was covered with spider webs
and beetles that scattered with my movements. Rats
squealed as they rushed past me, burrowing into dark, damp
crevices beneath the stairs.
Then it all stopped. When I reached the last step they
kicked me, and I fell into a filthy puddle. A surge of pain
radiated from my side, straight into my back, and I writhed,

207

The Nocturne
muttering a curse. I opened my eyes, to see how frightening, how empty this place.
I had begun to crawl up the staircase when they
reached the door. I made my way past but two steps when it
slammed shut. So much for that. “I will escape! And I
swear to God I’ll make you suffer!” I said. “Do you hear
me?!”
Then I slid down the steps…inevitably into the puddle,
and looked around—but all around the room it was the
same—a large, damp, filthy cell with nothing but the stench
of death.
From the faint light of the torch on the wall beside the
staircase, I caught sight of something across the cell. I
could not even begin to tell what it was, but I had a strange
impulse to examine it.
Whatever lay on the floor—looked to be quite large—
nearly the size of a human being, but it was completely still.
Cautiously I walked toward it, stepping over the pitted
stone and water puddles. As soon as I drew close enough to
the object to look at it, I turned away, shielding my eyes. It
was a rotting corpse, wet with rainwater all sorts of leaking
fluids. In its flesh were sores and deep wounds from rats’
teeth, I suppose, and the ceaseless frenzy of bugs made this
poor soul appear uneasy in his rest.
Whether it was simply human nature, or some deviant
curiosity, I had no idea…but somehow I took a second
208

Chapter Eighteen
glance at this. From the sight of it, my knees brought me to
the ground, where with of course no intent, I was beside it.
I’d broken my fall with my hands, but as I rose I caught the
scent—that horrid stench of death. Vomit gushed up from
my stomach, and I could do nothing to keep it inside.
I staggered backward blindly. Then I dashed across the
cell, to the corner as far away from the corpse as possible.
I made my way onto a patch of reasonably dry stone,
and tried to melt the chill that clung to my bones; but I
couldn’t, as my clothes and skin were still wet with sludge.
I collapsed. Then my most horrible fear of all set in:
what about Annora and the baby? What will become of
them? I didn’t know how—or if—they could survive
without me. I shook my head, trying to rid myself of the
thought…not just that thought in particular—but hundreds—thousands, each more awful than the last.
I watched the rats dashing here and there, and the spiders that crept along the walls while I heard the maddening
sound of water dripping from a tiny hole in the ceiling.
I walked nearly every inch of that cell, ran my hands
across the stone, feeling its rough texture as I searched for
any possibility of escape. I kicked the wall in several
places and the found that the crevices led nowhere; so I
spent the next few hours trying to figure out a way to dig
beneath the stones or break through the iron-bolted door.

209

The Nocturne
After I tired of all my ideas, I gave up for the time being. Cold, exhausted and wracked with pain, I leaned
against the wall, put my hands over my knees and wrapped
my wet cloak around myself in an attempt to keep warm.
Sleep was my only hope if I wanted to save my strength. So
when the rats had stopped scampering around me, I closed
my eyes.
I found no comfort in being still. Somehow I found the
strength to stand, walking around the dungeon, almost
pacing as my anger turned to fury, and fury to the most
intense rage. This went on for several minutes, each a
seeming eternity. After that, hours began to pass. On and
on it went just the same, while from frustration and the
beginnings of insanity, in vain, again I tried to find a
weakness in the walls. But there were none. Without food,
water or bedding of any kind, I went to sleep on the cold
wet stones.
“GET UP,” a guard said, kicking me. I bit my lip to
keep from cursing. “Come along; stand up!”
When I turned around, I saw two more guards and the
Baron standing beside them, with a cold, vacant stare.
I did my best not to look at him, but as I stood he drew
near. I couldn’t help but see the chains he had set on the
floor, the whip he held firmly in his hand, the rope he gave
to the soldier who took off my tunic.

210

Chapter Eighteen
They bound my wrists in shackles and tied them to the
walls. All this time I kept fighting, even though it was
futile. I needed to keep trying, not giving up, and holding
onto my hopes.
I would not die here—now—like this. I would not let
word be taken to Annora that I had been beaten to death.
The Baron’s shadow moved across the wall. I saw him
lift the whip before it cracked against my shoulders.
Never before had I felt anything so excruciating. If a
thousand nails had pierced my back, or if I’d lain in a pit of
burning coals, the pain could have been no worse.
Just as I caught my breath, he struck me again. I tried
to be strong, to keep from screaming…but I couldn’t. My
knees bent and I fell forward, grasping the wall. When I
was struck the third time, blood trickled down my back.
“I am not just trying to be cruel,” the Baron said,
sounding much too composed; “this is due punishment.” He
turned to one of the guards who gave him a dagger, which
he then held before me. “It didn’t have to end this way.”
I gazed downward, taking a deep breath. “Please
don’t…. He was a werewolf. I did all I could, I swear to
you.”
“Liar!” he said and slashed my back. As the blade
sliced into me I choked back another curse. “One of your
people told me what you did; they heard your confession.”

211

The Nocturne
My blood ran cold at the thought of what may come
next.
He knew what happened, even though it I spoke the
truth then and forever after: the boy was a werewolf, and I
took his life before he could take mine. Except, most likely
all he had been told was my admitting to killing the child.
I tried to tell him what really happened, but he heard
nothing of it. He insisted that his son had been ill—and
instead of healing him, I murdered him. For that he would
make me suffer to no end.
This was the first time I had been tortured, and it left an
indelible memory. In comparison to what happened to me
that night, death looked to be a fair escape. I thought I
knew what to expect; I had a distant vision of being
punished. I had not imagined half of it. The beatings went
on until my skin was numb, and by that time I didn’t care
whether I lived or died.
I fell to the ground, holding back every single tear,
moan and curse. I kept it all inside, never allowing him the
pleasure of seeing me cry or wrap my arms around my legs
and bite myself to keep from screaming. I knew he wanted
to see the anguish in my eyes and hear it in my voice, but I
gave him no such triumph. No, I wouldn’t die that way; I
would escape this place before I could be tortured again.
He told the guards to take the shackles off my hands,
which they did quickly, then departed. I lay there, beaten,
212

Chapter Eighteen
bloody and shivering. It took every bit of strength I had to
open my eyes—and at that I saw nothing except the dark
grey battlement.
I tried to speak, but no words came forth.
IT HAPPENED AGAIN, day after day. I could no
longer measure time, because I saw neither sunrise nor
sunset. Darkness surrounded me at all hours. The days bled
together with neither a beginning nor an end; and as best I
could remember I had been here for seven days.
I hadn’t eaten, nor had I slept. Each day I was tortured
and tormented by the guards; cruelty I cannot begin to
describe. My will and desire to return home were all that
kept me alive. I was terribly weak, so weak that I had not
the strength to try once more to escape. My hands were
chained to a wall again, cold iron shackles abrading my
wrists whenever I tried to move.
The Baron and his men struck me, cut me, told me
things that tore apart my mind a piece at a time. They
tortured me until I struggled to breathe, until all my old
wounds were ripped open, until I’d become so delirious I
couldn’t remember my name. They said I didn’t deserve to
live—and I had begun to believe it.
He returned to the dungeon only once in all the time
that had passed, to say that my entire village had turned
against me. What he had told them was a distorted description of what happened, of course. I don’t know exactly what
213

The Nocturne
he said, but I could envision it perfectly; his lies were no
stretch of my imagination.
I was certain I was hearing the voices of my people, at
times…and their responses terrified me. What must he have
told them? I wondered, even though I knew what had gone
on: he had told my people I was not a true sorcerer, and I
murdered his son. For that I was to die slowly and painfully
in this dungeon.
He made the villagers turn against me. I envisioned it
as though I were standing amid the masses as they demanded I be put to death. I heard all who supported him
saying:
Burn the murderer!
Are Annora and the baby safe? I kept thinking. What
will become of them?
The Baron had repeated the same accusations again
and again until they were seared into the minds of everyone.
Suddenly and with little effort he had caused irreparable damage to my life, my work in sorcery and everything
in which I had so long believed. It made me weak, at times,
to help the villagers and their children, but I did it anyhow.
It was my goodwill to do so, out of kindness that I offered
such things to them… and in return they sentenced me to
death? I couldn’t see their expressions or their frenzy, but I
envisioned them perfectly: they were screaming about the
214

Chapter Eighteen
tortures they thought I should endure—what I suffered time
and time again.
I had nearly lost my will to fight. The tiny voice inside
that had been telling me I would escape now faded away.
There was no point in that anymore. To what purpose
should I be willful? Why should I be eager to escape this
place? I knew I never would, yet I continued to search
every crevice and hole in the dungeon walls. If there would
be any possible means of escape, I would find it.
The soldiers released me from the chains only after I’d
endured the day’s punishment—and then I was free to pace
this miserable little chamber. I tried to conserve my
strength, for I had been given only a small allowance of
water each day, its purpose to prolong my suffering. I was
given nothing, absolutely nothing to eat. After my first two
days of starvation I had grown numb of hunger pangs; all I
could feel were the wounds that spread across my body—
every rip and bruise from the chains, daggers and whips.
The Baron would oversee my punishments; his satisfaction
came in a sort of devious amusement by drawing out this
torment as much as possible—beating me and giving me
but a little water to see how long I would survive.
If it weren’t for Annora, I would have died the first day
I’d spent there. Of that I was certain, and I kept it in my
mind when there was little else to think about. I couldn’t
forget what I fought for so valiantly when I had been taken
215

The Nocturne
to this place the first time, the second…and all my torments
since in this cell. She gave me the determination I needed to
go on, and the thought of knowing my son was reason
enough to save my strength—even if it meant it would
sustain me for only one more day. There was no sacrifice
too great for love.
I awakened, thinking I’d heard someone scream. It was
far off, this sound, faint and broken by the time it passed
through the dungeon door. There had been so little noise
since I came here: the battlements kept out the voices of the
guards outside—and their clanking armor, the shod horses
trotting down the road, the howling wolves and rustling
wind.
I couldn’t help but think I would soon be liberated.
Someone had come for me…and they were so close now,
inside the gatehouse, straight above these stone confines. I
couldn’t move near the steps because my arms were
chained to the wall. There was little length of the chain for
me, and few ways I could move.
The door opened slowly, and after it was a thudding
sound against the stairs—footsteps. I blinked and tried to
look upward; but blood, dirt and tears had tarnished my
eyes; I could see only broken images moving here and
there. Suddenly everything changed…when I saw the Baron
walk down the stairs. My heart was ripped in two as I

216

Chapter Eighteen
realized it was not only he who moved toward me. Annora
was with him, being dragged down here.
She rushed to my side, embracing me. “I couldn’t bear
to go on,” she said, with tears streaming down her cheeks.
“I came to rescue you, to beg you be freed.”
“I love you,” I whispered, kissing her cheek. “I love
you more than anything.”
I snuggled her against my chest; and she wrapped her
arms around my neck, clinging with what little strength she
had left.
I was still pressed against the wall, trying to hold her.
“I won’t leave you like this,” I said, trying to comfort her,
even though my fear was so great I was trembling with it. “I
promise we will be all right.” I looked up at the Baron with
the most pleading look possible in my eyes, when I realized
my wife was so dreadfully cold and frail. Yet she felt at
ease when I was holding her; she trusted that I would
protect her...but I was completely powerless.
I put my forehead against hers, when a single tear fell
from my right eye and rolled down my cheek to touch her
lips.
The Baron stood a couple of feet away from us, eyeing
me. He knew just what he wanted and now he had it:
Annora was here and I was trying to protect her.
This was all he could have dreamed of, all he had
wanted since I had been blamed for his son’s death. I think
217

The Nocturne
that was what frightened me the most: realizing he knew no
difference between right and wrong, good and evil.
Everything was meaningless now, and I had not the faintest
idea what to think or do, how I could escape and save
Annora from being left here endure tortures I couldn’t bear
to imagine. I had saved her before… Damn me for not
having the strength to do such a miraculous thing again!
Where was the hellfire now? Where were my hellgiven powers that were supposedly so devastating?
I suppose, because of weakness and fear, all my powers
and strength had left me. I felt so weak now, and my
muscles had been worn so weary I could scarcely bring
myself to my feet. That must have been the reason, I
convinced myself; the tortures, the emotional pain that tore
me apart day after day, night after night.
Though I was hurt and bleeding and in a panic, I knew
I was going to kill the Baron. It was all I could do to know I
would not die leaving Annora to suffer as I had. “I will
protect you,” I whispered to her. “I’m going to save you
both, I promise.” I needed to assure her, to give her a will to
live and escape somehow or other—even if it would be
without me. I felt rage, hatred, anger—all rising inside my
heart in a devastatingly dark torrent. No! I said to myself. I
won’t die here…I will protect her.

218

Chapter Eighteen
I kissed her, again, as I whispered gently into her ear
that she would be all right, and that she must lie still and
quiet, for I was to leave her side.
With one forward motion I grasped the sword, jerked it
free of the loop before his arms thrust against my chest and
jostled me backward. My hands shaking, I lifted it. The tip
of the blade fell in line with his heart, as I moved with all
the strength I had, to plunge it into his chest, he moved
backward.
All I could think of was Annora, and as I glanced back
at her, the agony that rolled through her soul had plunged
straight into mine. I felt such abysmal fear; and the
grimmest thought suddenly struck me: What will happen to
her? Will she be freed? The more I let it sink into my
mind, the more I dreaded that. I felt the sword rise in my
hands, though they were quaking. Then I eyed the middle
of his chest, and I leapt forward as he fought against it and
the guard restrained me. My strength was fading, but by
no means could I quit this fight. I needed to kill the Baron.
The guards would be little threat without him—and I was
holding onto the most distant hope that, together Annora
and I would escape.
As I took a deep breath, my heart became faint; with it
I began to collapse. My knees buckled beneath me, and I
felt as though the world had come to an abrupt stop.
Everything faded to black.
219

The Nocturne
Annora cried, clinging to me again, though I had yet to
fully return from the darkness. Just what had happened, I
had not the faintest idea. I could remember lunging toward
the Baron… Now I had awakened…but I had no idea how
much time had passed or what had happened before I
opened my eyes now. I heard the sound of iron again, and I
tried to stand. All I could do now was shut my eyes and
await the death that drew closer and closer as the moments
went by. I knew I needed to fight, but I had not the strength;
and I must tell you, the thought of that, in itself was pure
torture. I wanted to sob. I needed to sob. Damn it! I just
couldn’t. For her sake I needed to withhold my suffering,
not plague her with it. She would see me die…and if she
would be given the chance to be freed, she would return
home to raise the child I would never know.
The Baron stepped toward us. And I knew what to expect now. These would be my last moments…and I could
do nothing to change it. That was not the last time I looked
upon him with the look of terror in my eyes, and an
expression that begged him from the deepest, most
desperate place in my heart.
Annora clung to me as tightly as she could, but it
wasn’t enough. I hadn’t much strength, though with every
bit I had, I fought for my life. I refused to let go of her. I
wouldn’t leave here this way.

220

Chapter Eighteen
The wounds on my back and stomach continued to
bleed, and all my bruises ached, clear into my bones. Every
inch of my body that had not been torn into by weapons of
some sort. But every moment that passed now, lashed at
me in a way that could be matched by no weapon. I
couldn’t bear to watch or listen as Annora begged for our
lives, for liberation and amnesty from my dreadful mistake.
As the Baron grasped my arm I clung to Annora, furious and refusing to let go. I had nothing to lose now, and in
death we could be at peace…I wanted nothing more than
for Annora and me to escape together, with our child out of
harm’s way. On and on I pressed. I begged. I pleaded. I
fought with a thousand-fold the power I truly had. He
punched me and I staggered backward. Ordinarily I could
have withstood such a blow, but now as I rose to my feet,
frail, weak and desperate for any possible way to escape, I
was cast to the ground another time.
Stunned, I tried to rise again, cursing myself. Then two
guards jogged down the stairwell, one helping the Baron
restrain me while the other grasped Annora by her sides as
he tore her from my embrace. She thrashed, fighting him as
I fought when I was first taken to this place, but just the
same, it was in vain.
He dragged me in the opposite direction, while I was
fighting with all the strength I could pull from within,
trying to reach her. I was scrambling, pulling to break free,
221

The Nocturne
though my body felt as though it was twenty times my
weight, and as though I’d been pushed into a deep dark
place with neither light nor air.
When the guard grew tired of holding her as she tried
to wriggle free from him, he struck her and kicked her! I
cried for her, pulling forward, only for our hands to grace
one-another, quickly.
“She is bearing a child!” I said, pushing and fighting to
get away. The more I fought the more they resisted, until I
was thrown against the wall. “Don’t you dare hurt her!
Leave her alone!”
The clamps were tightened, the irons put around my
wrists once more. Then I was bound to the wall with chains
so short I would be unable to defend myself.
Annora sobbed, still fighting, though she had become
weary now. In her eyes and expression I could see she had
little strength to fight anymore. And I couldn’t bear to think
about how she and the baby had been hurt, how they must
have been suffering…and worst of all: every bit of it was
because of me. Now my hatred had become unbearable;
with it every inch of my body trembled, my heart racing.
Again I felt the pulse rise to a deep, booming throb in my
throat.
Between Annora and I, was an outpouring of emotions
I wanted to never hear or see or feel. I thought again and
again of what I could do—a bargain I could strike with him.
222

Chapter Eighteen
Nothing came to mind, but I was left with no choice but to
press desperately for something—anything.
The sound of a sword could be heard again—he had
drawn a blade from a loop on his belt, and now held it in his
right hand. “Turn her this way,” he went on, gesturing to
the guard, then Annora. “I want her to watch.”
The guard put his arm in front of Annora’s neck and
pulled her to his left side, to be certain she would not be
able to see anything except how I would be slain. And she
looked at me with a sense of fear I had never seen in her
before.
I closed my eyes. And now I heard nothing—not the
Baron or Annora or the guards—not even the rats that
scampered about the cell. But he stood before me now, his
fingers sliding up and down the side of the blade with a
deviant sort of fondness.
At the same time he stepped toward us. And I knew
what to expect now. These would be my last moments; I
could do nothing to change it.
“You made the choice,” he said; “you made this what it
is now.” The hum of a sword could be heard again. He had
drawn it from a loop on his belt, and now held it in one
hand, sliding his fingers up and down the blade with a
deviant sort of fondness.
The guard put his arm in front of her neck and pulled
her to his left side, to be certain she would not be able to
223

The Nocturne
see anything except how I would be slain. And she looked
at me with a sense of fear I hoped never to see.
He lunged toward me, taking aim at my heart….

224

Chapter Nineteen
Rainier

WHEN HE LUNGED AT ME all I could do was give
one last attempt to protect myself. It happened in a split
second, so fast I had no idea what I’d done or how…but a
fiery flash of light rose from my palm, bursting forward,
nearly touching him. My darkest power came to life again. I
couldn’t control it, and only by chance did it move in the
right direction. Or so I thought at first….
The next second—when I realized that the sword had
bypassed me and I was safe—I realized that instead of
stabbing me, he had plunged it straight through Annora’s
stomach. I watched the blade pierce her lungs. It ripped
open the cavity just below her ribcage; and I heard the hum
of steel, flesh and bones giving way as blood spurted from

The Nocturne
the impact. It lost momentum by the time it tore into her
stomach, narrowly missing her heart as it veered to the left
while moving upward. But then it broke through her ribs
and finally stopped when the tip of the blade protruded
from between her shoulders. Oh God, I’d seen it run
straight through her. Blood came immediately, in droplets
that soon turned to a full-fledged stream. It trickled all the
way down her body, over her feet and to the floor. And he
left it that way: the hilt jutting out from her belly, the blade
lodged in her chest.
We screamed at the same time; hers of pain, mine of
shock and horror. I saw her falling backward until she was
positioned with her back against the wall, as I kept fighting
to break away.
I lunged forward, pulling so hard I tore one of the
chains. Ironically the hellfire gave me the strength I needed,
but by then it was too late. I could nearly reach her now,
though she had gripped the hilt already, trying to pull it
free. “No, no, no!” I said. “Keep still. Don’t move it—let
me help you.”
Tears filled her eyes as she looked at me, with devastation that no words can describe. She tried to speak; her
voice was shaking—and then the tears came rushing down.
“The baby…I can’t feel anything!”
By the time I broke free completely, she had begun to
pull out the sword, crying all this while. She struggled to
226

Chapter Nineteen
take a deep breath…and the wheezing gasp gave her little
air. Then she pulled again, harder this time, until the blade
slipped through her ribs. She bit her under-lip, hunching
forward and then back as she finally tore it out and dropped
it to the ground, covered in blood.
I wasted no time reaching her. She staggered toward
me, into my arms, too weak to stand on her own. I embraced her, holding her close to my chest; and she put her
arms around me, almost still for a moment.
“Here”—I slid down with her to the floor, gently, so
she could rest against the wall—“rest here. Don’t try to
move; I’ll help you.” I pulled up her blouse to see the
wound—and it was the most awful, gruesome thing
imaginable: a gash that was the full width of the blade,
gaping open. But I could—I would heal her.
She breathed in and coughed up a mouthful of blood.
“It hurts. I don’t want to die!”
“I know, love, I know it does…. But you aren’t dying, I
promise.” The words caught in my throat. “Try to be
strong—it will hurt, but I can heal you.”
I lay my hand on the wound, trying to slow the bleeding. She cried and writhed against me, struggling so hard
not to break down completely. Her blood oozed between
my fingers as I fought to summon the healing spirits. They
seemed to be gone, completely gone; I could not feel any of
their energy around me, nor could I feel the warm healing
227

The Nocturne
power in my palm. As this went on, my lifelong battle
between Good and Evil was coming to a conclusion. I no
longer cared about being a decent person and waiting for
the ultimate outcome to yield peace for me. I had no more
faith that all would be well in the end. When my pregnant
wife had been stabbed and left to die, I didn’t care what I
had to do to save her. By then I’d brought forth the flames
of hell; I knew such power was mine alone, and I would
embrace it no matter what. I had the ability to heal. I could
still save her! We were together in this until the very end. I
needed to keep trying—and believing—no matter what. I
prayed for a miracle with a faith so sound no words can
describe it. But it didn’t come.
Despite my anger and disappointment, I couldn’t believe that life was so wretched, that my existence could be
this hollow and pointless, and that we suffered for absolutely nothing. No, there must be something else, I thought;
there must be hope…somewhere. I must keep trying to save
her. Yet she was slipping away from me, dying in my arms
and I couldn’t stop it, regardless of how I tried. I didn’t
have the ability to heal such a wound; and being that I was
so weak already, I had no strength from which to draw.
Just then I heard the Baron and the guards running up
the stairwell. Without thinking I picked up the sword and
rushed after them, driven out of my mind by grief, rage and
terror. It was all I could do. I wanted to rip them apart.
228

Chapter Nineteen
The door slammed, bolts sliding into place just when I
reached it. I swung the sword anyhow, with maddened
violent motions, bearing down on it with all my weight. I
couldn’t give up, couldn’t stop. Then, finally I swung with
such force that it lodged between the straps, hardened-steel
colliding with iron.
I pulled back, tried again…and then it shattered in
three pieces, separating from the hilt. Now it was nothing
but scrap, no longer a weapon. I’d made matters worse.
I tossed it aside and hurried down the stairs to Annora.
I came to a sudden stop beside her as she reached for my
hand, clutching it fearfully.
I had never been one to cry, but everything changed
then. I let go of the inner-strength that kept me alive so
long, as well as my courage, and broke down in tears. For
the first time in my life I had not the spirit to cage it all
inside.
A frightful chill came over me. Everything felt so dark;
shadows were dripping down the walls, it seemed, as the
torch flame swayed ethereally. That, too, looked far off
now, as I could see it out of the corner of my eye; and the
air felt colder than before, just as my fear and panic grew
fiercer. My entire life was falling apart.
When she tried to take a deep breath, I heard the
ragged sound of blood filling her chest. It rose to her throat,
more quickly now, and gushed out her mouth with a
229

The Nocturne
sputtering wet cough. Her lungs weakened each time she
breathed. Her heart slowed as the blood poured out of her,
and her hands were cold to the touch.
I knew this was the end. I knew it in the worst possible
way—in the dark, chilling sense that is so primal it cannot
be truly described or fully understood. But it was unmistakable. I felt the pain of her leaving me, to the very depth
of my soul.
“Rainier,” she whispered as I was still trying to heal
her, “do you remember when we met?”
My throat hurt from the sob I held back. “Of course,
how could I forget it?”
“The way I felt inside before you saved me: it was dark
and cold. I’m going there again, I feel it.”
“Don’t say that! Don’t give up—you aren’t going anywhere, I promise you.”
“All that we’ve done, I see now, in my mind,” she said,
“and it grows slower. Is that death?”
“It doesn’t end like this, it can’t. And—listen to me—if
there is life after this, I will be with you…and if there isn’t,
there is nothing to fear.” I squeezed her hand, kissing her
forehead. “I’ll do whatever I must; I will take my own life,
right here if it means—.”
“No, I want to know that you’ll keep fighting until the
end,” she said, and coughed once more. “Tell me again, the
poem…I want to hear it.”
230

Chapter Nineteen
I did all I could not to sob, looking at the web of blood
between my fingers. Then I recited the poem, just as she
wished, and it was by far one of the most difficult things I
ever had to do. It brought forth emotions I would never
have thought possible, breaking my heart a piece at a time.
“A love that knows no end: a bond that cannot be broken by
time or distance, in this world or another;
“A sanctuary hidden and held dear within, safe from
fear and pain and plight.
“Here we stay in sweet serenity, together, everlasting
“To succeed our final breaths—even if not taken together,
“As we are separated in body and soul, but stay one in
heart,
“Where there is neither darkness nor light, neither beginning nor end….”
Annora had such passion for life; she loved every second of it and was an optimist with an enduring faith in me.
She had not let go of the chance or the hope that I could
save her. This was horribly painful—I felt it as well as she
did—yet instead of leaving it behind, she kept fighting for
her life, just as she wanted to deliver the baby.
She began to writhe again, and tears streamed down
her cheeks as they did mine. Pain wracked her entire body
when this happened, as though thousands of lightning bolts
crashed over her at once, faded and then returned with
231

The Nocturne
renewed strength. It grew worse each time she tried. She
was much too weak to give birth, despite her heroic efforts.
It tore me apart. I couldn’t let her do this.
My voice kept breaking. I struggled to stay composed.
“No, love…don’t do that,” I said, doing my best to comfort
her. “Keep still and calm.”
“I want to see my baby. I want to hold him, but I’ve no
strength.” She took another deep breath, coughing up more
blood. I saw it trickling from the wound in her stomach as
well. “Listen to me. Listen. You must save him.”
“Don’t say that!” I said. “I cannot hear you talk that
way; you are saying goodbye. There is none—I won’t lose
you! I can heal you, I know it.”
“Quickly,” she said, “save him. You cannot save me,
but please help the baby. He’s all that matters now.”
Everything happened so fast I couldn’t fathom it. When
I looked at her again, my whole world came crashing down.
I felt cold inside and out, and my hands were shaking. She
was falling lifeless in my embrace, fading in and out of
consciousness; her hands slipping down my sides, her
pained movements coming to a slow stop.
I wanted to honor her wish and do as she said…but I
couldn’t think that way. I had to keep trying to change her
fate; there was no time to worry about the baby. Even if I
had the fortitude to save him, how would I go about it? It
was over. I was losing both of them.
232

Chapter Nineteen
“My last wish. I ask this,” she said: “save Requiem,
save our baby.”
“I can’t.”
“For me, do it for me. Please, whatever you must, do it
now so he will have a chance.” She clutched my hand, then
fell unconscious.
Think, Rainier, think! Save the baby. Time is running
out.
He was her flesh and blood, as well as the proof I
needed that there was still hope. A part of her could live on,
in him. I wanted this child more than I’d ever wanted
anything in my entire life. I couldn’t sit there and let him
die. But there was only one way to get him out: cut open
her belly.
Her heart was still beating, keeping him alive. Her
blood was pooling on the floor; very little could have
remained in her body. There was no time for me to be
afraid or squeamish.
I would need a sharp object, a blade. Then it dawned
on me—the sword I’d shattered against the door—I could
use a piece of it. I slipped away gently, leaving her on the
floor as I hastened up the stairs and fumbled to find its
shattered remnants. Within seconds I did, by the crevice
where two steps met, inches from the door. I grasped the
largest piece, one that was long and slanted… and in the
light, still crimson with her blood. With it in my hand I
233

The Nocturne
returned, wiping the tears from my cheeks as I knelt beside
her.
God almighty, I shouldn’t be doing this. How can I
decide between trying to save her life and slicing open her
womb to save Requiem? One life for another…I must
choose?! What a choice to make.
“Annora,” I said, gently touching her face. She was
still, losing her life as I sat there, as I paused and struggled
with truly no choice and a duty to uphold. I would have to
honor her wish. He was dying as I waited, and every second
wasted meant a chance I took from him. This was it, the
end. I swallowed hard and instinct took over. I was finally
ready, trying so hard not to feel nauseous. Not only did this
sicken me, I had no idea how to go about it. Midwives and
surgeons knew where to cut and how deep, but I would
likely do more harm to him than good. His death was
certain otherwise, so I would have to be strong regardless of
how I felt.
I touched the blade to her belly, shaking, tearyeyed…then I took the dreaded first step without looking
back. It ripped straight across my palm, deeper and deeper
until it caught in my skin, but I pressed down anyhow,
ignoring the pain. This was so gruesome I cannot share
every detail with you, though I don’t even remember all of
what happened after I began to cut. I felt ill at once; my
stomach went into knots and I broke out with a cold sweat.
234

Chapter Nineteen
At times I couldn’t see how deep the blade was going,
and I was afraid I may hurt the baby. So when it was
impossible to see, I used my fingers to separate the skin,
gently pulling open the thick flesh and muscles of her
abdomen. Then I would cut just slightly more, push it apart,
and cut once again.
I kept going until I sensed the faintest tremor in her
body. When I did, I lay my hand on her chest, finding that
her heart continued to beat. All this time I kept saying to
myself, Don’t wake up now; don’t feel this; don’t suffer
any longer. I cannot bear for you to hurt. I love you too
much for it to end this way.
Knowing how my son’s life depended on me I pressed
on. Within seconds she awakened, coughing, tensing her
muscles. I nearly dropped the blade when she gasped and
cried in agony, but as soon as I stopped she looked up at
me, biting her lip to keep from screaming…and she urged
me on. She loved Requiem so much that she was willing to
sacrifice any chance she had in order for him to live.
After that, each time I cut a little deeper she writhed
and cried and screamed, unable to hold it in any longer.
This wounded me, emotionally, as you cannot imagine. It
warped my perception and my mind. I would never be the
same again.
I was sick by that point, on the verge of vomiting. I
would have, save my stomach was empty. I kept spitting up
235

The Nocturne
blood, and I sobbed until my eyes were bleary. “I’m so
sorry Annora,” I said. “I cannot bear to hurt you.”
With a quick, shallow breath she spoke again. “No…I
chose this. There is no sacrifice too great for love, remember? Save him.”
This seemed to go on forever. At last, when I had gone
far enough, I very carefully made the final slit down the
centre of her womb, causing her to gasp in a crippling pain.
Suddenly there were fluids gushing out, all over my hands.
I reached in, felt his tiny slippery body and pulled him out
as carefully as possible. But the baby—a tiny girl—was
already dead. There was a stab wound, straight through her.
Her body was limp, her eyes shut and still covered with
blood and film from the womb. I struggled to think of a
way to help her, but it was too late and there was absolutely
nothing for me to do. I set her down at my side, hoping that,
Annora wouldn’t see her. But she did, asking, “Is he all
right? Let me see him, let me see my baby.”
At the same time I felt the baby kicking and stirring
about, pushing his little feet up against the womb. More
blood oozed out when he did this. I could almost see him
through the cut I had made. I wanted to say something, but I
was so choked-up that no words came to mind. Annora had
been carrying two babies—twins; and one of them was very
much alive. I pulled him out carefully. After that, I so
clearly remember, I wiped the bloody membrane from his
236

Chapter Nineteen
face so he could breathe—and within seconds we heard him
cry. Annora did her best to raise her head so she could see
him, but it was impossible for her to do alone. Wasting no
time I pulled off my tunic and swathed him in it. Then, as I
held him against my chest with one arm I used the other to
help her so she would be closer to me. She could barely sit
up, needing my support and the wall for us to lean on.
This was obviously not the time to fully appreciate the
baby, though I’d noticed every detail about him all too
quickly—without trying to do so. He weighed no more than
five pounds, immature because he had been born early. His
body was the length of my forearm, his hands and feet the
length of my thumb. But he was perfect in every sense, so
beautifully…human, with tiny perfect fingers, toes,
eyelashes, lips, and round rose-pink cheeks. His head was
covered with the softest hair, so faint it could scarcely be
seen. His eyes were squinty and not in focus; as best I could
tell they were light-blue, or perhaps grey. And he kept
moving against me—crying, too—as he tried to figure out
how to get his hands or mine—something, anything—into
his mouth.
Looking at him, then at me, she whispered, “He’s
beautiful.” She reached out to touch him and he wrapped
his fingers around hers. The sight was not heartwarming, as
you might expect—it was tragic in every sense, more
devastating than her death to come, because we had waited
237

The Nocturne
so long to become parents…and now she had only seconds
to live. I could do nothing except try to make her comfortable while keeping the baby close, for she was not strong
enough hold him.
All was quiet then, with a grave dark presence coming
over us. It made my heart race wildly, and beneath this grief
I was furious in a way that cannot be expressed in words.
Above all else I had my newborn child to look after.
Annora was leaving this world, knowing that he was safe in
my arms, sheltered and loved. I felt horrible just thinking of
it, thinking of my failure, my broken promise to her. I
couldn’t keep him safe—I couldn’t even keep him warm.
We both knew this was it, our final goodbye. How
could I face it? How could I accept that the end had come? I
couldn’t bring myself to say it; neither could she. Instead,
with tears pouring down my cheeks, I said, “I will make
this right, I’ll see to the end of it, I swear to you. Our love is
not in vain and neither is this. I love you, I love you so
much and I always will. No matter what. No matter where
you are.”
Suddenly we were drawn together for a more passionate kiss than any we had ever shared. I could feel it, not
only in my body and heart, but in my soul, with the
conclusion of our journey together: her death and his life.
The spirit of our love had become immortal. It would live
on, regardless of the distance between us.
238

Chapter Nineteen
I was reeling after the kiss ended. She drew back, suddenly overwhelmed by weakness. One hand slid free from
mine while the other fell limp at the baby’s side. She was
slipping away, letting go of her tether to life: the silver
thread that joins body to soul. And seconds later she was
gone…forever.
Annora made the most incredible journey for me, because there is no sacrifice too great for love. I had promised
she wouldn’t die—and in the end I failed, too weak to
protect her. All of this was my fault. Thinking of it I was on
the verge of madness, sitting there with her and the baby in
my arms. Tears continued to rush down my cheeks, and I’d
sobbed so much it was difficult to breathe.
At first I didn’t realize what had happened—that it was
truly over—but looking at her bloody, mutilated body was
sobering. I had no choice but to accept her fate; she was
gone and here was our little baby, who needed me to stay
strong.
Even after all I said to her as she was dying, I’d never
had a chance to truly say goodbye. There was no amount of
words great enough to describe what I felt, nor had there
been time for me to say I loved her as many times as my
heart desired. I didn’t have a chance to tell her that I
accepted the name she had chosen for our baby. I hated it
all along, yet now I felt so different when I said it. A
haunting chill came over me, as though someone told me:
239

The Nocturne
This is right. You will honor her wish. So, at that very
moment, not only did I acknowledge his name, I embraced
and treasured it.
He was, in the truest sense of the word, a blessing, having been born from the darkest tragedy; but his fate was
almost certain now, as was mine. Being so young and frail,
even under the best of circumstances life would be a losing
battle for him. But I’d granted her last wish this way, no
matter how slight or great a chance either of us had. He
came into the world, and I would love him with all my
heart, however long we should live. He gave me hope when
it no longer existed.
Try to imagine: true love, passion, happiness, more
than two years together, a marriage…and a baby who
would be born in just a few weeks—the most wonderful
things that life has to offer. I was losing it all in seconds.
Now I would have no family. No hope. No reason to go on.
No possibility to settle the score. That fast, that simply…one stab wound took everything from me.
I wanted to shout and curse at God for denying me
when I needed his help most. “I am innocent!” I cried inside
my mind “Why were my prayers not heard? I prayed for a
miracle—and you are taking them from me!” I must have
already fallen from His graces, because I’d truly believed
there would be a miracle of some sort, sooner or later…and
I kept hoping, waiting and praying to no avail. Then I began
240

Chapter Nineteen
to have my doubts, not only of religion, but also of my
place in the world, my purpose, along with life’s most
perplexing question: Why? Even the most devout would
have wondered these things if they had endured what I did.
Certainly I believed in God—I always had—but right
then I faced the greatest trial of my faith. For a moment I
didn’t know what I believed—or what I felt, for that matter.
I was numb to the core. I sat there, woebegone and sobbing,
desperately trying to understand why I’d been made to go
through this…and survive—why my family was the one to
be taken. What God would give so many precious things to
me and then suddenly snatch them away? Help me to
understand. Tell me what lesson I have to learn. Did I take
it all for granted, is that the reason? Am I not deserving of
them? Is this what was in store all along—ill-fated love?
I wrapped the baby girl in Annora’s cloak, and held her
there with us. I decided she, too, deserved a name…and felt
that Raven was appropriate, considering her brother’s
name.
After no more than an hour had passed, two guards
entered the dungeon. If I had been given the will or power, I
would have brought forth the flames to destroy them as I
had the others. The first came toward me, drew his sword
with a trembling hand. The blade hummed as it was drawn
out of the scabbard, and I saw the faintest glimmer out of
the corner of my eye. Trying not to think of it, not to
241

The Nocturne
remember the blade that took Annora’s life, I didn’t allow
myself to look at it. I put it out of my mind, still gazing at
her though I was waiting for her to awaken.
One of them shoved me against the wall and pulled her
body and Raven’s away from me. The other reached down
and grasped Requiem, startling him out of his sleep.
Where was my rage now, you ask? Where was the hellfire, the prophetic powers that were to be mine alone? I
couldn’t bring such things to light anymore; for, when I had
tried to defend myself with hellfire…the Baron murdered
Annora. In part it was my fault. Though I was infuriated
and grieving in ways I cannot begin to describe, I had lost
what willed me to try to escape. I had no reason to fight
anymore, no purpose, no place in this world. If anyone
deserved to die, it was me.
It was unbearable to think about, but I realized I needed
to let go of Annora now, and let her rest peacefully in a
grave…not in this dungeon, as I needed to let go of my son
so that he would have a chance.
The first gathered her in his arms, while the other carried the babies up the staircase and to a world I would never
see again. I sobbed when they took my son from me, even
though it was impossible for me to care for him. I couldn’t
bear to think of him at the hands of the Baron.
Requiem cried as they took him away, and then all was
still. I lay there, covered in blood. I tried to keep from
242

Chapter Nineteen
looking at it or feeling it, though both were inevitable. I
looked down to see the drying pool, streams of crimson
everywhere.
WHEN I DRIFTED INTO SLEEP, I had yet another
delusion. It was different than anything I had seen before. I
was in the dark, but not in this dungeon. I was wreaking
havoc on Baron Galtier and all his soldiers and guards; I
was tearing them apart one by one with a hellish and
maddened sense of pleasure. But more than just those
men—I was murdering everyone who lived in the surrounding parishes. I was tearing apart all the miserable souls who
had cursed me and commanded I be sentenced to death. I
was taking revenge on all of the Alpes-Maritimes—
everyone except my brothers.
“Don’t forget me,” a ghostly voice whispered in my ear
when I suddenly awakened from the nightmare. “I will
always be with you.” Of course, I thought it was Annora’s
voice, but it was difficult to hear. Then I realized it had
been my mind’s eye tormenting me again. I wanted more
than anything to believe it was Annora—that her spirit
lingered here to keep me company and waited for me to
surrender my soul and join her.
“What is that supposed to mean?!” I said. “How am I
to know?”
There was no reply. I knew…I was answering the
voices in my head.
243

The Nocturne
I had grown accustomed to silence, actually. The only
time I knew laughter and voices that did not ring in my
head with anguish, were my dreams. But they, too, seemed
to have left me.
Until my death, Annora would live in my memories. I
felt responsible for her death, to a certain degree.
Annora never imagined she would be killed. There was
nothing for which she would have put our babies’ lives in
peril. She had no idea what would come from her trying to
negotiate for me to be released. Yet I couldn’t help but
think of how I had led her to her death because of my being
a failure. I had devoted my life to sorcery—and what had it
yielded in the end?—death.
If I had been stronger and been able to save the Baron’s
son instead of causing his death, I would have never been
taken to the dungeon. And if I had been in control of my
powers, the sword would not have thrust into my wife’s
stomach.
Annora had been punished for my wrongs, and she had
died out of love for me.
I thrashed around, pushed and pulled, but I couldn’t rip
the chains from the wall again. Even if I could have, it was
impossible to break out of this place. I had explored the
chamber a great deal before I was first chained…and unless
I had the means to crush the stone floor and dig my way
out, there was no escape.
244

Chapter Nineteen
Now I could see how deeply, how desperately I lusted
for the sweet taste of revenge.

245

Chapter Twenty
Von Sabre

I REALIZE we haven’t yet come to know each other—
you and I—but I must tell you what was becoming of
Rainier’s life. I will explain about myself as we go on, but
this is not my story. Would it be enough for now if I tell
you my name? It is Von Sabre.
After wandering the villages of southern France for
several weeks, maybe months…I was drawn to this one, to
the fear and scorn and fantastic tales of sorcery.
I had never met Rainier, but now I’d heard about what
wondrous things he had accomplished in times past, before
he had killed Baron Galtier’s son, before he was arrested
for murder. In little time I learned about the prophecy,
about Rainier’s brothers—the cowards—we no where in

The Nocturne
sight when he was suffering. They neither came to his
defense nor plead for his release. Though I had little time to
do so, I searched for them…but they were nowhere to be
found.
As I said, the villages had turned against Rainier, demanded he be put to death. And from what I could gather
when I traveled here, Annora had sobbed herself to sleep
for more than a week without the faintest idea what to do to
change her husband’s fate. I wasn’t here when she was still
alive, but from what I was told now and from what I
gathered from the energies and emotions that were still
present, more than anything she feared her family being
torn apart.
There was something she wanted—needed to tell Rainier, something awful. And, honestly, I have not the faintest
idea what it was. My powers to read minds and snatch
thoughts from mortals were of no use with the dead.
How brave Annora must have been, I told myself…and
just hours after I returned to the estate I saw her in her pale,
icy death. I nearly broke down in tears when the soldiers
discarded her body. And as you might expect, at the sight
of her, passersby were in absolute horror; some gasping and
turning away, while others cried and gaped in disbelief.
For a few moments I watched the soldiers, in particular
the knighted one who was their commandant—a pompous
young fellow who sported a swordsman’s blouse, with
248

Chapter Twenty
black breeches and a crimson waistcoat decked out with an
engraved silver brooch and buttons. And his hair, stringy
and blonde, was slicked into a ponytail and tied with a thin,
deep red ribbon. Without a second glance I recognized him:
Lord Camden, the one who twisted my life to nothingness…he who stood alongside Baron Galtier when I was
made to suffer in much the same way as Annora. I knew his
despicable stench, that of savageness and a monstrous ego;
from a time long since passed it was burned into my mind.
And now Rainier was in need of me, dying as I waited.
He could do nothing to get away, nothing to break free from
the dungeon. I knew he needed to escape…and if anyone in
this world could help him, it was me.

249

Chapter Twenty-One
Rainier

THERE WAS A VOICE inside me now, saying I could
have limitless strength; the power to tear apart entire
villages, turn castles to dust. It went through my head a
thousand times. It infuriated me. And finally I didn’t care
that I was speaking to someone who wasn’t there. “I cannot
bear this! Leave me alone!”
“No,” it said. This voice did not sound ghostly, but was
methodical and possessed a sort of richness I cannot
describe. It seemed to be that of a man; neither a youth nor
elder—but an eccentric, clever fellow with what seemed a
great deal of maturity. “You know what it is about now.
Revenge. Death to all who caused you this, who caused her
to die. You mustn’t give up so easily.”

The Nocturne
How does he know about Annora? I couldn’t help but
wonder, casting aside the idea that this voice was something
my mind had created. I was almost certain it was a delusion—a trick of madness. Yet it comforted me, offered a
distraction and a means of rescue from loneliness and
despair. For that I was willing to plunge straight into
insanity.
I was strangely enthralled with him. Whether it was his
voice and thick French accent, his mannerisms, or the fact
he was company to me, I had not the faintest idea; but I
was, in some odd fashion, enjoying his companionship. He
was a shadowy character, with an engaging personality and
strange, nonchalant way about everything he said.
I’d not expected an answer, and when it came I was a
little startled. I was left lurching to hear another word, to
become lost in his voice and how calm and ethereal it was;
yet my desire to talk with him was soon torn away.
“And you are here to save me, are you not?” I asked.
“No, I cannot say I am. I know of no reason I should,
except for your son and your wife’s soul.”
“You know so much of me. What are you?”
“Who am I, you mean. Von Sabre,” he said. “You have
summoned me, when you called upon spirits in your spell.
You asked for help—and here I am.”
“It’s too late.”

252

Chapter Twenty-One
“It is all in what you choose to see. For you, it isn’t too
late. I am here to help you, to make things right.”
I was quiet.
“Am I frightening you?”
I leaned against the wall again, wishing for everything
to fade away. “No,” I said. “For God’s sake!—my wife was
murdered; my son was taken away—I don’t know what
became of him…and I’m trapped here!”
“Yes, yes,” he said, grimly and with compassion, “I
know. And I’m terribly sorry.”
“I don’t want to talk about it. Please go.”
He was rather talkative for a figment of my imagination. “It is fine, I understand. But your life doesn’t have to
end this way; there is hope,” he said. “Do you think me to
be a ghost?”
“If you are not,” I said, “then you will untie me.”
“I cannot do that.”
“Why not?” As soon as I asked, it hit me. Of course, I
thought; because you do not exist.
This was what madness had done to me; the result of
pain and grief—of such a tremendous loss…and part of it
was guilt. I could still see the blade—the gleaming metal
turned crimson, blood spreading across the floor. I still
heard Annora’s anguished screams as I’d cut open her
stomach. Having witnessed that, I would never be the same
again. And long about the same time another sad truth sank
253

The Nocturne
in: that I had been left here to rot while my son was at the
hands of my greatest enemy.
“You are in my mind,” I said. “I know it.”
“Make no mistake—I am no figment of your imagination, I promise you.”
On the wall opposite me I could see a glowing orb,
floating about near the staircase, down to the chamber. I
watched it grow—like a beacon of light that shone from the
starry heavens—and wane until there was no light save for
the torch. Then, as before, I felt his presence, with his hand
gently gracing mine. He was undeniably in the flesh.
Shuddering, I asked, “Why have you come here?”
“Simple,” he said. “I came to help you. Revenge is
within your reach; all you must do is heed the call.”
“I have no strength left. I’m not strong enough to kill
him, even if I could get out.”
“So you will lie here and die instead. The coward’s
death, is that what you want? Your wife died for you—not
for anyone else—but to give you freedom.”
“Leave her out of this,” I said. “Don’t use that against
me. Don’t dare. I know what happened!”
“Then you know what you must do. Make it right.
Make him—all of them—suffer. Stop doubting yourself.”
“Why do you taunt me?”
“Because of how badly you want this,” he said with a
rich amount of certainty. “It is what is keeping you alive.
254

Chapter Twenty-One
For your wife, that is the reason. You want to escape.
Would you have lived so long otherwise? You know your
craving for revenge is to tear part this village and every
living thing in it.”
“No!”
“Sorcery is your strength against the Baron,” he said,
“as it is against everyone else. Have you thought about
what has happened? Your power leading you to this—it all
stands to reason.”
“That has nothing to do with it. I have always used my
power for Good!”
After a brief pause he spoke again. “You do not fear
me, do you?”
“You have not given me a reason to, and I don’t want
to die alone.”
“Yes, but do you trust me?”
“Trust is earned.”
“I can lead you to your revenge if you trust me.”
I recoiled when he touched my hand. “Annora didn’t
believe in revenge—I cannot betray her.”
“Ah, well.” It sounded that he was calculating his options, pondering as he spoke. “She is gone now. Your only
hope is to bring peace to her soul. Kill him.”
Tears filled my eyes. I couldn’t contain my sadness any
longer. “Why did she have to come for me, why did she do

255

The Nocturne
that? I told her to keep away, to stay out of it. Why didn’t
she listen?”
“Because she loved you,” he said. “She loved you more
than anything in this world—you should never question it.
Do you know how brave she must have been to come
here?—with child, no less.”
“It should have been me who died, not her. Never her.”
“But she gave birth. She didn’t die in vain; and that
child needs you. You have the power; I can help you
harness it, if only you trust me and believe in yourself.”
Before I had a chance to respond, he was gone. I
sensed his presence fading away. It was then I realized how
desperate I was for company and that even as I didn’t
believe him, I longed to hear his voice again.
“Don’t leave me!” I said, sounding much too desperate.
“Please, come back!”
I called him for quite some time after that, but I was
too late.
I did my best to make myself comfortable. I shifted
slightly, trying to move away from where the blood had
pooled and was now sinking between the stones, into the
tiny pits and crevices. Again I was reminded of how
helpless I was and how great a failure. I wished to leave this
world and join Annora, yet I felt such a primal need, a
desire to cling to life as long as possible. I needed to prove

256

Chapter Twenty-One
everyone wrong, just as I needed to prove to myself that I
was capable of escaping this dungeon and saving my son.
I wanted revenge…but that is a dark and forbidden
thing, is it not? No civilized person would try to ease their
suffering by causing more pain, spilling more blood. There
is no pain that can be eased by another. I realized that was
true, yet I was so determined to bring peace to Annora’s
soul that I was willing to risk whatever savage punishment
hell had to offer.
I was dying. I felt it now, far more so than any time
before. It took all my strength to fend off the rats as they
were drawn to my wounds. I could feel them as they
crawled across my legs now and again; and when I drifted
to sleep I would awaken suddenly to find them biting me.
Can you imagine how it felt to see these horrid little
creatures try to eat what was left of my wife’s blood? The
shattered sword lay nearby as a constant reminder of how
she had been murdered. I couldn’t stop looking at it…and
each time I did, my pain and grief were transforming to
malevolent hatred. This was a score that begged to be
settled, a tragic end that demanded retribution. Nothing
could bring Annora back, but revenge would make peace
for her soul as well as mine. Leaving the world in such a
way, our deaths would not be in vain.
The more I thought of this, the more I came to see: Von
Sabre is right—it doesn’t have to end this way.
257

The Nocturne
LATER THAT NIGHT I felt he was here again; a
strange, cold energy came over me whenever this happened.
He would whisper in my ear, trying to motivate the
vengeful side of me. When he did this, the evil inside began
to control my thoughts and feelings. I was giving in with
little restraint.
With every moment that went by, I grew more anguished and weary. I could feel the evil within myself. The
need for revenge was consuming me, as were his words.
The torch by the stairs still burned very, very faintly.
Though, of course, I couldn’t see him. He was drawing
near, until close enough for me to feel his cold breath
against my neck. I shivered. The tiny hairs on my arms and
neck rose as cold tremors surged through my body.
This was the first time I’d heard his footsteps: the heels
of his boots clicking against the stone, round and round
slowly as though he were pacing in front of me.
“What do you remember about that prophecy?” he
asked.
“It is nothing to do with this, either.”
“That is not what I asked. What I asked was: do you
remember it.”
“Yes, of course.”
“And you remember everything else that happened?”
I turned toward him, still unable to see my surroundings. Everything was black, slightly illuminated by the
258

Chapter Twenty-One
torch, which seemed to be miles away from me. “Where do
you think this will take us?”
“What the prophecy is about…,” he said.
“I already know.”
“Why must you fight that? Why do you hide from it
now?”
“Because there is no reason to believe it anymore,” I
said. “If I had such powers, why did Annora have to die?”
“Well, you have it, and now the rage,” he said. “It is
the people who betrayed you. It is their fault you are still in
this place. And they should be punished just as the Baron
must be.”
I hated to admit how truthful this was, and the more I
thought about them the more enraged I became. He was
antagonizing me. He knew the ways to bring out the hatred
that continued to feed on itself. As I sat there—chained in
the very place where Annora’s life had been taken—Von
Sabre awakened the demon in me that so hungered for
revenge.
“You are giving up,” he said, “because you aren’t
strong enough to face him. Revenge is within your reach.”
Then he vanished.
I fell asleep then, for the first time in days, and found
my mind wandering about in dreams of the happy times I
had spent with Annora. There was warmth, sunlight, and all
the simple pleasures of the world I’d quickly forgotten. I
259

The Nocturne
remembered our childish romps through the lavender fields,
along with the day when I asked for her hand in marriage;
and naively believing, at one point, that I could have
everything.
I awakened with a racing heart, grieving and in fear for
my son’s life. He was at the hands of my greatest enemy…and I was completely helpless, no stronger than I’d
been when the guards took him from me. God, what am I to
do? I said to myself. What has become of him?
I felt so torn, so conflicted. I didn’t know what to believe anymore. One moment I was ready to do anything for
revenge—no matter what the cost—while at others I
couldn’t bear the thought. I tried to reason with myself and
realize this was not what she would have wanted, but the
fight was futile. Turning to evil to avenge her would never
be her wish, but she loved Requiem and I so much that she
laid down her life for us. Would I do any differently? This
would be a sacrifice for love, wouldn’t it? I owed that to
her, if nothing else. I could not think of being sent to hell
for that, nor could I be certain if revenge was truly evil.
I hadn’t seen how the prophecy could be a part of all of
this—a part of who I had become, but suddenly I realized
that only one choice remained for me now. I would obey
Von Sabre, and have vengeance. He was my only chance.
There lived a burning desire in my soul now. With it,
every moment I grew madder and more furious, until my
260

Chapter Twenty-One
hope for peace no longer suppressed my lust for revenge.
Telling myself I’d soon be in heaven offered no comfort
when my son was at the hands of his mother’s murderer.
For them I had given in to the evil, the rage, the darkness—everything that begged I forget who I was in order to
put an end to this once and for all. After weighing the
options of leaving the world now, this way, or giving into
my hunger to settle the score…I lost my battle. She had
died because of my weakness, but she would be avenged
because of my strength.
“I know what I want,” I said. “I want to kill them!”
He said nothing and I waited for his answer, knowing
that—at any moment—the bitter silence would be broken.
“Von Sabre?” Again and again it echoed—my voice—
a dull cry. Alas, there was no answer.
I tried my best to look around, to see even the shadow
of the dimly burning torch across the room, or the rodents,
the bugs—anything to let me I know I was not alone again.
IT HAPPENED SUDDENLY. A cold, piercing pain
shot through the side of my neck, as though knives plunged
into my veins, and nearly reached my spine. I struggled to
get away when it happened, but soon lost control of myself
in the dizzying pain.
I tried to scream, but I couldn’t hear my voice. All I
heard was the deep, primal rhythm of my heart as blood
spurted from my veins, each throb awakening a new sense
261

The Nocturne
of faintness. I could hear it, and the idea of my life’s blood
leaving my body left me horrified. I fell into a sort of
trance, hearing the thoughts that raced through my mind as
icy beads of sweat rolled down my neck and my flesh grew
numb.
I fell backwards, thrashing against the stone. The moment went on and on, and it dragged me in further and
further until I wanted nothing more than death. I sobbed
and screamed to be released. Chills cascaded down my
body with the strength of a thousand waterfalls.
“Please,” I said, “stop! Don’t…don’t kill me.”
I began to feel even weaker. He placed one hand on my
shoulder while the other held my arm against the floor. He
pressed against my neck. And in no way could I escape his
grasp—he was on one side, and the wall was behind me.
Somehow I had to find strength in myself…I would
have no choice but continue the fight for my life.
The pain became sharper. Soon it was excruciating.
But my struggle to be freed from his grasp would not end. I
could scarcely breathe. I retched and choked as the pain
continued. But all of a sudden I felt I wanted to live. I could
not die like this. Yet within a moment the pain intensified…and as it grew, so did a strange urge—a hunger I had
never felt before, one that soon overcame me; and I was
breathlessly, desperately fierce with it.

262

Chapter Twenty-One
My breathing stung me. I felt as though my eyeteeth
were being ripped from my skull; and my entire body
convulsed in a series of spasms and twinges. Then another
severe pain stung my mouth, straight into my under-lip.
Suddenly I wrapped my arms around Von Sabre’s ribcage, clutching him with my fingernails as they grew and
grew, becoming twisted, jagged knives that cut my hands as
I struggled. Then I pushed him sideways as I turned my
head and sank my fangs into his neck. I heard flesh
splitting, just as I felt a small gush of something bitter and
cold in my mouth. I despised the taste, but no matter of
force could separate me from that strangely rich pleasure.
I wanted to end it, but I couldn’t break away.
I realized what Von Sabre was, and what I had become.
I was becoming a fiend who drinks the blood of human
beings! It could not be happening to me… I could not
believe in immortality. My God, no! It isn’t happening to
me…it isn’t destroying every bit of life and goodness that
are still a part of me. No, I cannot become such a monster.
I tried to take a breath, and as I did my chest felt as
though knives were being driven through my lungs. The air
felt cold to me. My entire body felt like ice all of a sudden.
My heart was slowing, and instead of a pulse, I could hear
blood streaming throughout my body, lifelessly. So I lay
there, without movement for several minutes. I couldn’t tell
where he was, but I heard him moving around the dungeon.
263

The Nocturne
I began to fight against the chains again. I felt strength
and muscle I had never before possessed. I lunged forward,
ripping the one of them from the stone, and fell to the floor.
“How could you!” I said. “How could you have done
this to me!”

264

Chapter Twenty-Two
Rainier

“HURRY,” Von Sabre said. “There isn’t much time.”
When we reached the doorway, he pulled on the locked
bolt, but found it had been sealed through all the channels.
A human could never break so many shafts of iron, but with
great ease he began to press his hands against the door,
looking for any sign of weakness. Then he grasped the latch
gently, and broke it half with only the faintest amount of
effort. His strength was incomprehensible.
Once outside the dungeon, we were in the lowerchamber of the gatehouse. I followed the stairwell to the
tower, came upon the gatekeeper and pulled him in from
the balcony. I silenced him with surprising ease by covering
his mouth with my hand as I forced him against the

The Nocturne
wall…and then I fed on his blood. It was like an elixir;
smooth, warm, suffusing me with the life I needed to gain
an inhuman strength. I tried not to enjoy this; I was fighting
against it the entire time, but something primal inside me
craved it, and I was powerless to refuse.
Afterward I put on my victim’s clothes: a tunic,
breeches and cloak. Then I sneaked down from the tower
and stepped outside, feeling and seeing the world for the
first time in weeks. It drove my senses wild.
There had been two guards at the doorway outside of
here, but thankfully Von Sabre had killed them while on his
way to find the keep, and before they had a chance to warn
the others.
WHEN I left the gatehouse, the winter air felt like a
thousand needles piercing my skin. It was so fresh and pure
at first—so different from the dank air in the dungeon, that I
took pleasure in breathing—but soon the cold set in, and I
thought of how dreadful it must have been for my son.
Time was running out, and I had no idea where to find him.
I was quiet and cautious in making my way across the
grounds, and fortunately able to avoid the guards who stood
watch at the gate. Behind a bank of carriages just past there
I found Von Sabre.
“I cannot enter the keep without you,” he said. “It’s
teeming with guards.”
“Then wait. Go the other way.”
266

Chapter Twenty-Two
“I have searched the front grounds—there is no sign of
him.”
“We must keep looking. I’ll search by the stables and
sheds, the other way—the west,” I said. “And if we don’t
find him here, lower the bridge; we will take their horses
and ride out.”
We took separate paths, scouring the grounds and
courtyards. I followed the trail from the gatehouse to the
gardens before the estate. There I searched frantically while
Von Sabre combed through the discards, walked every inch
of the passages, hideaways—all the way to where the
mountain road began.
I killed every guard I came across, though I’d yet to
recognize any of them. Everywhere I went I found to a
dead-end. But on my way to the serf’s village, I crossed
paths with Von Sabre at the archway in the court behind the
castle. He looked perfectly forlorn, genuinely sharing my
sorrow.
“Did you search behind the Servants’ Quarters?” I
asked, and saw him nod much too quickly. “And the
carriages?”
“No.”
I took two steps back, turning toward the garden. “Go
check them, and I’ll search the villages.”
With that he set off in the opposite direction, vanishing
as a shadow as he slipped through the wall yet again. I tore
267

The Nocturne
through the garden, finding my way down the path, over the
little stone tiers at the veranda, to the final battlement that
separated me from the outside world. I scaled the wall with
no effort, descending smoothly to the ground on the
opposite side.
I scarcely noticed my new eyesight, keen sense of
touch and smell, and strangely greater awareness. Everything was in perfect sight, yet not at all as it had been when
I was human; the world, though masked by night, seemed to
be glowing. It was more colorful than I ever knew; each and
every facet of nature was moving in perfect symmetry, with
frosty, swaying branches like prisms through which the
moonlight shone. I, too, had changed: my wounds were
healed, every hideous scar perfectly erased by radiant
immortal skin. My muscles were once again well-defined,
with the strength of steel and no fatigue no matter how fast
I ran.
At the end of the outer grounds stood a guard, keeping
watch over the entrance to the serf’s village.
I recognized him immediately. He had so brutally
beaten me and spilled my blood time and time again,
always finding a deviant pleasure in watching me suffer. I
knew this one all too well.
Seeing me as I moved forward he stood in a stupor, at
an absolute loss for how this could be—how I’d escaped. I
continued on, walking more briskly as he drew his sword.
268

Chapter Twenty-Two
And within seconds I heard him whistle for the nearby
guards. No luck in that—they were already dead. He caught
his breath, uttering my name and some foul curse. Just then
I struck, throwing him to the ground as I ripped the sword
from his hand and quickly pressed it against his chest.
He was helpless now. I could hear his heartbeat, blood
surging through his veins, tiny beads of sweat rolling down
his neck. For the first time I could smell fear, a scent like no
other, so darkly chilling and primal.
“My God!” he said. “How did you escape?”
I gripped the hilt and forced the tip of the blade into his
heart, tearing it ever-so-slightly for a prolonged yet certain
death.
“Look me in the eyes,” I said, leaning forward to press
my weight against the sword; “look at me. You and the
Baron took my son—where is he? What have you done
with him?”
He didn’t meet my gaze, for his guilt was much too
great. There would be no absolution, he knew, and to admit
his evildoing seemed far crueler than death. “Forgive
me….”
I reached down to turn his head to the side. I held him
there for a long moment without saying a word. Then I
stood with the hilt in my hand, ready to deliver the fatal
strike. “Tell me where he is, or I swear to God I will send
you straight to hell.”
269

The Nocturne
He writhed, feeling his pulse grow slower and weaker.
“My lord commanded it,” he said. “We left him in the
woods.”
“When?”
“Moments ago.”
Even though I’d been certain my rage had reached its
zenith, still it rose with fierceness I couldn’t bear. There
was the most horrific image in my mind now: my son, alone
in the cold…dying, if not dead already.
I wanted to torture this guard for hours. I wanted to
drink his very last drop of blood while swooning in the
wicked pleasure, but my child was waiting for me to rescue
him.
“Pray that you’ll have God’s mercy,” I said, taking the
hilt in both hands, “because you won’t have mine.” Then I
bore down with all my strength, plunging swiftly and with
unimaginable strength. As I backed away I caught glimpse
of the vast dark thicket beyond the moon-kissed field, and I
started down the path that would lead me to it.
After reaching the ridge, I leapt over mounds of jagged
stones, made my way through icy streams, past tors and
rocks until I reached the forest, struggling to find footprints
in the soil. But there were none I could see, as the wind had
covered them with fallen leaves.
It seemed unlikely the guards would have taken Requiem any great distance before discarding him. So I spent
270

Chapter Twenty-Two
most of my time going over the pathway, kicking aside the
leaves in hopes of finding what remained of their tracks to
guide me. The trail was lost, and in no time I gave this up
and proceeded straight ahead.
I heard something, a sound so faint and distant. It
came from the left, I thought at first but soon changed my
mind. No, it is to the right…or can it be straight ahead?
When I heard it again I whirled around, rushing forward
and onto the path to my right. My heart pounded so hard I
felt it would shatter; my chest ached from the ice cold air
and the effort it took to breathe while running so quickly.
I ran uphill, into the open forest, which was where I
found Annora’s body in the ditch, covered by a ragged old
cloth. All I saw from a distance was the rough shape of her,
covered by mud in places, with leaves, pebbles and pine
needles scattered all around. Her hand was visible, ashen
and limp in death, with dried blood around her fingernails.
I fought to tear my gaze away from her, but unwillingly
I stared, feeling a fury like no other rise inside until they
had overcome my every feeling. I kept reliving the moment
when I lost her, seeing that very same hand reach out to
touch our little baby, who wrapped his fingers around hers
in response. This woman was the love of my life, for whom
I would sacrifice body and soul—and she had been
carelessly cast out here to…I cannot bring myself to say it.
From the small depression in the mud I could tell the baby
271

The Nocturne
had been left in this very same place, between her side and
extended arm, before someone—or something—dragged
him away. Beside her were the shredded, bloody remains
of the cloak…and Raven’s body was gone.
The trees offered no shelter from the raging wind. The
ground was silver with frost, where they had left him to die.
The Baron knew, in his twisted soul, that he had murdered
Annora, just as well as he knew what she had gone through
to bring the baby into the world. It was impossible for him
not to see what this child meant to her…and he punished
him with unthinkable cruelty.
This should have never been my last memory of her. It
led me down a path no person wishes to follow: a road
straight into the deepest, darkest evil. I felt no mercy now.
My battle against my conscience concluded at that very
moment.
I finally found Requiem, lying in a muddy little ditch
quite a ways off the path, surrounded by banks of stones
and sludge. He kept still and quiet, so tiny and frail that he
could just barely kick. His skin had turned white, corpselike, and all his veins were visible. And his little lips were
blue.
I rushed to his side, slipping in the mud as I went into
the ditch and knelt down. I startled him when I did this,
though he was much too weak to cry and could do nothing
except whimper. First I touched him with one hand, slowly,
272

Chapter Twenty-Two
gently, as I whispered: “I’m here, son. Hold fast, I’ll help
you.” Then I gathered him in my arms, finding he was even
frailer than I’d thought—colder, too, if possible. His body
was nearly frozen-through, his skin like ice to the touch.
Knowing he needed my warmth before I could heal
him or take him to shelter…or anything else, I untied the
neck of my tunic, pulling it open as I brought him against
my bare chest. I pulled it back into place to keep out the
wind, and cuddled him so he lay directly over my heart,
with his hands touching my collarbone. In just seconds he
realized there was warmth so close—and he did his best to
draw nearer to it, resting his head on my shoulder, trying to
move his fingers.
I sat there and cradled him, sobbing because I knew, in
my heart, that I was losing him. The warmth of my body
was not enough to undue the damage of the cold. I tried,
desperately, to think of something else I could do for
him…but my strength with spells had yet to return, and I
had no idea how to use my powers as a vampire (if there
were any I had not discovered).
The moment came when I was certain I had lost everything; my last, remaining bit of hope was dying with the
baby. But then I looked up—and right before me stood the
white wolf I had seen so long ago, and had forgotten. She
watched me with the same keen intent as before…and then
she stepped closer, nudged the tunic aside, this time
273

The Nocturne
exhaling a steamy blue vapor over the baby. It lingered
around him for a second, and seemed to have been absorbed.
I didn’t have the faintest idea what was going on. Yet I
allowed her to come near him because, in some way I
understood she would help him. And she did, God bless
her. That quickly, she brought warmth to him, and eased the
pain of the cold; allowed him to breathe and cry.
I looked down at him, then back to her, to see her tail
wagging with joy and her paw extended to me. I took it in
my hand, so beside myself with amazement that I couldn’t
express what I was feeling. “I don’t know how to thank
you,” I said. “I wish I could tell you what he means to me—
what this means.”
“I see it in your heart. And I will be here, wherever you
are, to watch over him. Now go—you are fulfilling the
prophecy.”
I stood, and was utterly mystified to hear her mention
the prophecy. What was becoming of me? “What do you
mean?” I asked. “How did you know about that?”
She smiled (as well as a wolf can), and stepped backward. “I will find you again when it is time,” she said,
walking away. “And remember—she is watching over you,
too.”
With that she vanished into the night. I looked at the
baby once more, to see his skin color was perfectly pink,
274

Chapter Twenty-Two
and he was wriggling against me as well as any newborn
could.
I carried him back to the Baron’s estate, and entered
one of the servants’ quarters, where two young maids were
sleeping. When I walked in I startled them, naturally, and
they rushed to me, asking who I was and what was the
matter.
“My son,” I said as I lifted the sleeping infant from
beneath my tunic. “He needs warmth and milk. Can you
find a nurse for him?”
“Yes, yes,” one of them said, “of course, in the serfs’
village. I’ll go.”
“I can give you your freedom,” I said to the other, “if
you help me, and look after him.”
She took him into her arms. “What do you mean?”
“You will never serve the Baron another day; and can
go wherever you please.”
Once the baby was settled with the servants and a wet
nurse, I went to the keep to find Von Sabre. There was no
time to explain everything, but I told him that I’d found
Requiem and he was safe now.
WE SNEAKED into the estate, up the stairs, though
the upper-corridor and into the grand bed-chamber, where
the Baron was fast asleep. A single candle on the candelabra was still burning, delivering just enough light to see our
silhouettes as we crept across the room. There was a sword
275

The Nocturne
on the floor beside the bed, as well as a belt and several
daggers, which we didn’t hesitate to seize.
I picked up one of the daggers and held its blade over
the flame for a long moment, so it was hot, though not
unbearably so. Then I sat on the side of the bed, leaned
toward the Baron and touched the blade to his throat, which
caused him to awaken abruptly, shocked.
“Who—who are you?” he asked. “What’s going on?”
“I’m not dead,” I said; “I’m not rotting in the dungeon.
I’m your Reaper now.”
“No, that’s impossible! How did you get out?”
“Quiet!” I said, pressing the blade against his throat,
harder this time. “Get up, come on.”
As he stood I grasped his hands, took the belt that Von
Sabre had been holding, and tied it around his hands. “Now,
do you know what I’m going to do? I am going to make
you regret every second that you’ve ever lived; I’m going to
make you hate your life so much that you’ll rather you were
dead.”
He noticed Von Sabre, and seemed absolutely shocked
by his presence. “No, you’re dead!” he whispered. “How is
this happening? You’re both dead.”
Von Sabre ripped the collar of his shirt and pulled it
down, exposing what looked to be bruise, as it stood out in
varying shades of blue, with gray and some green. Yet
when I looked at it more closely, I could see just what the
276

Chapter Twenty-Two
bruise was…It was in the shape of a hand! His neck had
been firmly grasped for a great amount of time…
My gaze was quickly brought back to the Baron, to see
his expression—sheer horror. He tried to step back, but
when he did he found himself falling into Von Sabre’s
grasp.
“The bruise…,” he said.
“I imagine it brings back some memories,” Von Sabre
said, “doesn’t it? Remember when you forced me into the
river? Yes, you were the one who drowned me. You,
yourself, Baron Galtier, you drowned me for a crime I
didn’t commit. And let’s see… it was after that you
ordered me thrown into the streets with no burial at all.
Improper burial and death by drowning are certain connections to vampirism.”
The Baron’s suffering would be prolonged for as much
time as I could make him suffer and regret every moment of
his life. And of course, for some pleasure it was fascinating
to see the dreadfulness upon his features.
“But I saw to your death,” he said. “Your heart had
stopped beating…”
“Kindred magic,” he said. “Listen. I want you to understand this and remember how it all came to be. Neither
of us has wronged you. And you murdered Rainier’s wife
out of spite for him. No one else is going to die for you,
ever.”
277

The Nocturne
I grasped him by the shoulder and turned him toward
me. And, like Von Sabre’s strength, mine, too, was
unbelievable. “Murderer!” I said, pushing him against the
wall. “You murdered her and one of the babies! But that
was not enough, was it? No. You had to let me see her
suffering—and let her see me beaten and chained to the
wall. And then you stabbed her—you bastard!—you killed
her and you left me in her blood!”
Now he would suffer it, as God and every legion of
heaven and hell were my witnesses. Now he would die, and
I would avenge my wife and daughter.
We each grabbed him by one arm, took him down the
hall and to the banister, then began to push him over it,
ever-so-slowly. All he could see was the upside-down angle
of the great room, which was quite a distance from where
we were, in the middle of the upper hallway. It would not
be a survivable fall. But we didn’t wish to kill him yet. It
was far too soon, and with nowhere near enough torment.
He did not deserve such a swift death. “Please,” he was
saying. “You wouldn’t throw me off here.”
Laughing, we held him over the banister, slowly allowing him to nearly slip from our hands every now and again.
“It was your choice, remember?” Von Sabre said to
him, his voice rich with disdain. “Does that sound familiar?
I heard that when I was dying and begging for forgiveness…for a crime I didn’t even commit. Do you have
278

Chapter Twenty-Two
reasons, reasons why your life should be spared? I suggest
you tell us what they are.”
I let go of his arm, which caused him to sway even
further over the banister, as I whispered, “It must be painful
to be held up by one arm.”
“Is it painful, or is it not?” Von Sabre asked.
“And you think there are reasons you should live. And
remember…never forget my revenge.”
“I am…sorry,” he said.
“Are you?” Von Sabre said. “For some reason, I just
cannot seem to believe you. Perhaps if you beg for your
life, I will be able to sympathize…” He patted the Baron’s
back, mocking sympathy. “But I doubt it.”
I pulled him back, over the banister and threw him to
floor of the hallway. Then, as Von Sabre held him to the
ground, slowly drawing tears to his eyes, I kicked him, with
all my strength, in the side. But it wasn’t just once; I did it
again and again. After this went on for some time, we
dragged him to the top of the stairs—and as fast as we
could, we forced him down the steps. Head-first, he slipped
down to the entranceway, one step at a time. I stood back in
the hallway, watching, feeling triumphant as I heard his
muffled outcries fall further and further down. I looked
toward Von Sabre and I smiled, glancing back to the
staircase, then to him again. But we weren’t finished yet.
No, we were only beginning….
279

The Nocturne
We dragged him out of the estate. I tied a rope around
his feet, then tied the other end of it to a horse’s saddle,
rode into the thicket…and stopped when I reached the river.
Von Sabre rode along behind me, carrying the weapons
from inside the chamber.
I untied the rope from the horse, and dragged the Baron
closer to the river, until he was lying in the mud and could
feel the icy water rushing by. He protested the entire time,
fighting to get away, though we easily overcame him. I
ripped off his shirt, took two daggers in hand, and knelt at
his side.
When I stabbed him the first time, it was slow, easing
the blade into his side, for I didn’t want to kill him quickly.
This needed to drag on, and on, until I felt his suffering
matched mine and my family’s—only then would justice
have been served.
He let out an agonized scream. Then I twisted the
blade, and forced the other in, pulled it out, and did so
another time. I stabbed one of his lungs, so he would have a
true appreciation for what Annora went through in her final
moments of life. Blood was filling his lungs, drowning him,
and I went on, cutting here and there until I had nearly
exposed his insides—and by then he was too weak to fight
back. Then I reached in, twisted his innards with my hand,
and shoved him into the river.

280

Chapter Twenty-Two
“My wife was tortured and murdered, and my daughter
was stabbed,” I said, watching him sink into the icy-water,
“and there is another innocent little baby who almost froze
to death—all because of you. Remember that on your way
to Hell.”

281

Chapter Twenty-Three
Rainier

THAT NIGHT we buried Annora near a hill that led
north, to the mountains. There was a cemetery close by, but
I wanted for her grave to be separate, make it a shrine to
her. It was then I was made to realize this was it—this was
my wife’s tomb, her coffin being lowered into it, covered
by dirt. I would never see her again. She was right there, in
her eternal sleep, unable to hear or see me, unable to feel
my touch.
I sat there remembering all the times we spent together,
all the times I held her: when I ran my fingers through her
hair; when I looked into her eyes and saw my entire world
in the sweetest, most fulfilling way. When those memories
came into my mind, I felt tears in my eyes. I just…couldn’t

The Nocturne
hold them back, no matter what. Our happy times—the
memories I truly cherished—had begun to fall away
already. I wanted to remember the joy she brought to me,
the unforgettably magical moments we spent together, the
love we shared…but all I thought of was how she died and
what were her last words. I kept telling her to hold on, and
that I loved her, yet I never said what truly mattered: that
I’d give anything to be with her again, and in this life we
were saying goodbye, but it wouldn’t be forever.
I looked down, running my fingers over the rough
stone at the head of her grave as I read the epitaph I had
etched for her:
I WHO AM LAID BENEATH THIS MARBLE STONE:
Annora de Aaradyn, slain by the Baron Galtier;
Where I died in the arms of my husband
And was forced to yield my earthly soul.
Of my two children, I take a daughter and leave a son;
And fore’er may we be as one.
Reader, whoe'er thou art, thy prayers bestow
T'atone my sins and ease my pains below.
I stayed there most of that night, trying to fully understand what had become of my life. Inside me there was
hatred I longed to tear out; and it caused me to keep asking
myself: How could I have done this?
I couldn’t think that way now, I just couldn’t! My God!
I did not kill her! How, in all this world, could I blame
284

Chapter Twenty-Three
myself for such a thing? I didn’t know…but in a forbidden
place in my soul, lay the part of me that would make me
blame myself forever.
I had been fated to become what was written in the
prophecy: a sorcerer with hell-power of both legend and
magic. And in that, I had found a greater purpose in
life…but it seemed my sacrifice for the greater good had
been the very beginning of my destruction. And although I
could not bring myself to accept it, Annora’s death was, in
part, my fault. I found that I was thinking of so many
things—even the most miniscule things—I had taken for
granted. Everything seemed to matter to me now, and what
I once thought to be useless memories were now ringing
like chimes in my mind—the din of desperation, sorrow and
guilt. I remembered what I said to Annora when I returned
from the Baron’s estate after I had first been taken there; I
remembered telling with her about what I had done, and
how all would be well and I would protect her.
I heard the ravens and owls, just as I heard horses trot
around the pastures, their every movement causing my
body to quake. That night, though I knew I should have
been—as expected now—mercilessly killing for vengeance,
I lay here instead, sleeping, dreaming of what my life
should have been.
WHEN I AWAKENED, I turned toward where Von
Sabre had stood, but he was gone.
285

The Nocturne
Once I was on my feet, I tried to summon him; I cried
his name several times and was given no answer.
I am a vampire, I said to myself, and nothing else. And
there I stood, more lost than ever before. I had never
imagined death could seem as inviting as it did at that time
in my life. I wanted it more than anything as I longed to
forget the prophecy.
I left her gravesite, following the path that had taken
me there. I walked through that cold and miserable place, in
hopes of stumbling upon the truth about my destiny—you
know—something like the tales my brothers had shared
with me, but that would be truly meaningful. I thought
about finding them to explain what had happened…but they
must have known already, and I couldn’t face them now.
I returned to the village I once called home, the place
where I’d believed I was free from the prophecy and the
evil that fell in its wake.
Though it was long past nightfall, a number of workmen took the livestock to pasture while their wives and
children brought in the tanned hides and various other
things the day had yielded. I almost pitied them, for they
seemed so content and innocent…but, when I looked at
them, I was overtaken by hatred. There was a chance that, if
it had not been for such demands, such hatred from these
people, I would have still had such a life. Maybe, if it had
not been for them, Annora would have been able to
286

Chapter Twenty-Three
negotiate for me to be released. Maybe she would be here
right now, in my arms. There was neither man nor woman
nor child here who had not turned against me. Now I was
ready to settle the score.
I had just entered the village centre when I caught sight
of my perfect prey. Flanked by two young children, there
stood a woman. With great speed and dexterity I lunged at
her, pinned her against the wall. I grasped her neck, with
the messy little tendrils of her golden hair curling over her
shoulder, leaving every vein before my eyes. Certainly I
was not going to murder a woman, you might think. But I
couldn’t stop. I wouldn’t stop. She screamed, and I shushed
her. I spoke to her, quietly, assuring her that she would be
all right, while I drew her toward me and the children
dashed away, screaming. And I did not quit with just one
victim.
I moved through the shadows in the village—and of
course I was unseen. The devastation that followed me
would not be noticed until dawn. The village would awaken
and discover my wrath. Then, and maybe then they would
mourn my loss.
I had always been a kind, loving, caring person…until
that night. It was when my fangs sank into a child’s tender
flesh, when I saw I had been consumed by evil.

287

The Nocturne
Was I doomed to this? I wondered. Was it the Baron
who led me to become what I am? Or was I just not meant
to love?
I couldn’t help but think that perhaps it might have
been better if I had never met Annora. When I had pulled
her from Death’s grasp I had fated her to her death. It was
because of that moment—the fateful moment when I had
first seen her—that I became immortal, and was now
deprived of the love I sought more than life itself.
My existence depended upon my drinking mortal
blood, lest I fall to the fiery depths of hell. And as much as
death seemed inviting when I was tormented with memories, I could not release the bit of hope that remained with
me—the hope that, possibly, one day I would be reunited
with her and Raven. I admit, it was bleak… but it was all I
had left.
The Baron had murdered them—and it was all because
of me, because I was not in control of my own powers.
Annora and I both begged and pleaded with him, and yet,
he killed her right before my eyes. I knew she could see,
from whatever spirit world she was in, how I was suffering
without her, and why I made the choices I had thus far. And
I had done just as I had vowed.
My conscience had been destroyed. And when I
wanted to stop, to regain control of myself, I could do
nothing to calm the savage voice in my soul. Each time I
288

Chapter Twenty-Three
tried to realize I’d finally put an end to it—justice had been
served—I longed to use my darkest strengths more and
more. It was futile to resist the call of hell.
If Annora were somewhere in the heavens watching—
if she could see what I had become and what I was going to
do—would she be able to forgive me? But the people of
these villages had turned on us, had they not? Did they not
demand I be put to death? And was I wrong for wanting to
lay that part of my life to rest once and for all, for wanting
to destroy every life that tore mine apart? Maybe this was
evil in a sense, but was it not a settling of scores?
Now I was beginning to understand that I would live
forever. It was an awful feeling, a horrible thing to accept.
This guilt for what happened to Annora would be with me
for all eternity. And the only time I felt truly alive was
when I fed, and such rapture was not meant to last.
I made my way down the street, longing to see my old
house even though I knew I could not bear to go near it.
Hunger did not come upon me again for several hours. I
was still aching from the changes I’d endured. Besides, the
blood of two women would sustain me for the time being—
it brought color to my face, darkened my eyes to their
natural brown hue, warmed me and relieved the dull ache in
my muscles.
From the village I heard the ocean as it caressed the
moonlit shoreline, with ships rocking back and forth at the
289

The Nocturne
port. And I remembered the caverns, so quiet and romantic
with their jagged peaks, sandy floors and dark moist walls.
For a moment I thought I had found the courage I needed to
go there again—to see the places that meant so much to me
when I was human—but I hadn’t. Avoiding my house, I
walked along the backside of the village, where livestock
was either penned or tethered. The part of me that enjoyed
animal companionship had yet to change. I admired the
horses as I petted them…but the scent of fear in my
victims’
blood
made
them
uneasy.
I was in hopes I would find Samson, but I had no idea what
had been his fate. Yet by the work of irony, as I was
thinking of him, he found me. I paused, listening for
another sound …but my senses had deepened so greatly, I
was already moving toward him before I realized it. And
there he stood, tethered to a post with Kaeya at his side,
both of them perfectly forlorn and glassy-eyed.
I rushed toward him, trying to soothe him by running
my hand down his neck…but when I did, he let out a
piercing cry, nostrils flaring. “Easy, Samson,” I whispered,
gently touching his back while Kaeya was anxiously pulling
at the tether.
Then the scent of blood filled my head. I stepped closer
and touched his shoulder, causing him to jolt sideways and
lay back his ears. “Hold still,” I said; “let me have a look.”
When I lifted my hand and it caught the moonlight, not only
290

Chapter Twenty-Three
did I smell fresh blood, I could see it on my fingers, along
with a thick clear fluid. There were cuts and scratches all
over his body; deep puncture wounds in his chest, and a
great slash down his flank. I was horrified to see him like
this, to know he must have been suffering this way.
Now you might say: How can you feel so awful about
an animal when you murder your own people? The answer
is simple—I was murderous and seeking revenge, yes—but
this was my horse and we had a sort of psychic connection.
He had taken me to Annora…and that was something I
would never forget.
As I began to untie the tether, a pale beam of light
flashed from within the village. I stopped abruptly, hearing
footsteps come across the gravel. The light was moving
toward me as though it were suspended in the air, floating
like some great luminous firefly. I had yet to notice the
cloaked figure who carried it—the lantern, I mean—but
within a second I heard him shout for me to get away.
I did not fear him, of course, but I would have preferred not to have been seen right then. This is just perfect,
Rainier, I said to myself. Now you must kill him.
He rushed toward me. As you might expect he was
boisterous, calling attention to where I stood and what I was
doing. I tried to untie the tethers, but had no time...and in
my zeal to get out of here with Samson, I had failed to
notice there was also a chain that wrapped around the post
291

The Nocturne
and between the halters of these two horses. Then came the
noises, villagers searching for whatever weapons they could
find; while the approaching man—a short, thin fellow with
straggly brown hair—cried, “Get away from there, thief!”
I let go of the ropes. The horses stomped and reared.
The hood of my cloak cast shadows on my face, and if I
were to keep my distance from this man and others, I
wouldn’t be recognized. But I was forced to kill all of those
people anyhow
I no longer thought of the afterlife, for I was certain
that for a vampire, I was already living in it. Is there life
beyond this, I thought. It doesn’t end here, does it?
Eventually, I will die—somehow—I am just not sure of how.
But I know I will. I must.
Even though my heart could beat no longer, I knew it
still held my soul, my life, and my memories. My soul was,
at every moment, slipping into the grasp of the spirits that
loomed in my mind. My love for Annora did not lessen,
but the love for myself, and appreciation for the good deeds
I had done in my mortal life—was slowly dying as I felt
myself dying whenever I considered the fact that I was, in
part, at fault for her death. And thinking of it I became
furious all over again…and I would kill until the pain was
melted away, for the time being, by blood
The pain of Annora’s death continued to plague me,
and when it was coupled with the sorrow I felt for that of
292

Chapter Twenty-Three
my daughter, my grief was beyond any amount of words. I
cannot even begin to describe it. And I cursed myself for
being so senseless. Again and again I cursed my failure as a
sorcerer, my life, and my inability to protect them.
It was nearly dawn by the time I returned to the estate.
The moonlight had faded from the darkened skies, more
silver now than white. Nothing appeared alive to me
anymore; I dwelled in a barren world, stained with blood
and tears. There was no such thing as love anymore, nor
was there sympathy.
Tree branches occasionally swayed to and fro, letting
brittle, warped leaves fall and scatter across the dewy earth.
When I heard the clicking of the leaves sweeping across the
ground, I recalled in particular the night when I introduced
Annora to my brothers. The thickets looked almost exactly
as they had that night, though they seemed darker, of
course. I saw no beauty in anything, any longer.
A light haze hung in the air and seemed to create a barrier for the gentle breezes that crossed it. The air had a
fresh, clear smell—if the stench of death had not been on
my mind, and the world would have seemed pleasant. But
what could be pleasant when every single thing around you
saddened you, or haunted you with one memory or another?
Everything reminded me of the graveyard. I thought of the
cold, damp grave where Annora had been laid to their
eternal rest. The entwined branches above me and the new,
293

The Nocturne
emerald growth developing below them reminded me of the
life with my family, which was snatched from my very
grasp. But I assured myself that in time, they would all fade
away.
I made my way through the mist, letting my vampiric
senses guide me back to the estate, where Von Sabre and
Requiem awaited my return.
THE NEXT NIGHT, I did exactly the same thing. I
was merciless. I thought nothing of what I was doing or if it
mattered anymore; and not once did I pause to think, to
reason with myself and say this was cruel and would yield
no peace. But even if I had, it would have made no
difference. I didn’t care and I wanted nothing except
vengeance. That was the reason I was still here, still trapped
in my body in the human sense. If there would be an end for
me, I reasoned, this was it. Revenge was all that mattered. I
killed in ways I could have never dreamed: I set fire to
people’s beds while they slept; or I drank their every drop
of blood, and afterward I left the bodies in the road with the
word Murderers written in the dirt at their feet. I did the
wickedest and most despicable things imaginable, and it
gave me a sense of satisfaction I cannot put into words.

294

Chapter Twenty-Four
Rainier

NEARLY TWO YEARS PASSED, and I still saw
death at every turn. I felt its monstrous weight upon my
shoulders each time I returned to the estate, my clothes
stained by the blood of my victims, my heart filled with the
dark energy of their tortured souls. My future seemed so
bleak. I hated to think of the prospects of being a vampire,
for there was no beacon of light waiting for me, no solace at
the end of my time.
Come off it, Rainier, one might say; you have grieved
so much already…you must move on. I wish it were that
simple. I wish there had come a time when my life was just
a distant memory and all I loved had faded away. But love
did not allow me to forget, and happy memories soothed no

The Nocturne
pain. My love for Annora transcended life and death, and
not a single moment passed when I didn’t think of her. Let
me tell you: the clichés—“she will be in your heart,” “she
will always live in your memories,” and “think of what joy
she gave to you while she was here”—did absolutely
nothing to help me.
Not even little Requiem was able to ease my pain. I
loved him with all my heart—I had since long before he
came into this world, and I appreciated what a miracle he
was, but I couldn’t bring myself to grow close to him for
fear of another loss. Still mourning Annora’s death, my
mind and spirit were much too fragile to partake in the joy
of bonding with him. So during the first year of his life, it
was seldom I was near him, which was the only way I knew
to cope with this. But, as I began to see, he was all I had
left—the very last thing in which Annora lived; he was her
flesh and blood, with her personality and passion for life.
One night, after I hunted I returned to the Baron’s estate, stayed beside the bed and watched my son for hours as
he slept. Von Sabre sat nearby us, occasionally glancing at
me from behind the book he was reading by the light of a
candelabrum. “Don’t look at him that way.”
I tried to stay calm and not let him hear the pain in my
voice, but I’d reached my threshold for despair. “I can do
nothing else,” I said. “I’m so afraid I will lose him, too….”

296

Chapter Twenty-Four
He stood, tossing aside the book before he stepped toward me. Once at my side he laid his hand on my shoulder,
though the gesture offered me no comfort. “You are all he
has,” he said. “Make him comfortable, hold him.”
“Tell me why that seems wrong.”
“You know exactly why—you’re afraid. But being
kind to the baby doesn’t mean you love Annora any less.”
I thought revenge would be the conclusion of my destiny. I embraced it the very first time, reveling in every
second of its raw pleasure. I went on killing without a
single concern about what may become of me. Death was
not the fearsome force of pain and despair; I had already
known a far deeper suffering than that…and from the very
beginning of my journey as a vampire—when I didn’t care
whether I lived or died—I realized my ultimate destination
would be hell. Yet I thought nothing of it, selfless enough
to put aside my freedom for a higher cause—deliverance
and peace for Annora’s soul. I could not leave her death
without vengeance, nor could I surrender after she had lost
everything for my liberation. I didn’t want to do this
forever; I wanted to be a decent person and let go of my
rage…but each night it consumed me, luring me into the
rush that for a while slaked my lust for revenge. Soon I
would not have the will to resist at all. I would do whatever
was bade to me by the very heart of evil, for I’d be
powerless against it. I had already made the transition
297

The Nocturne
between life and death; I crossed from light to darkness in
one moment—and I did so because there was no other
choice.

298

Chapter Twenty-Five
Rainier

SEVERAL NIGHTS LATER, just after dark I perched
on an oak branch that outstretched on two sides from the
trunk, simply sitting there, looking over the thicket. It was
at a height that no human could reach. My back was against
the limb that adjoined the right branch. I sat halfway up, my
legs resting on the knotted limb. The hellhounds lay just
beneath me, my faithful guardians. I felt as though I was
cradled in the tree, and the mixture of brown and green
leaves concealed me almost perfectly.
My senses captivated me as I listened; absorbing all
that went on in the village beneath me, as I deciphered
words, thoughts and movements with a limitless amount of
senses I had not discovered when I was human.

The Nocturne
Then the scent of blood caught my attention—and even
that brought warmth to my body. Then I heard a mortal’s
heartbeat—quick, uneasy. Suddenly the hellhounds rose,
but before I could call out to them, or jump toward them,
they broke into a rapid gallop, and disappeared into the
darkness. I heard their paws thump against the earth as they
transitioned back into Hell.
I could feel the mortal drawing near, approaching my
forest. Not one of his steps faltered. There was no increase
or decrease in speed; his pace remained steady.
I rolled onto my stomach, where I crawled to the end of
the largest branch adjoining the trunk that had, until then,
cradled me. It is remarkable how weightless I felt, like
some mysterious creature, waiting for my unwary prey to
come close enough for a swift kill. Finally, my victim-tobe, had drawn near to me, and there he stood, stock still in
the middle of the pathway, glancing back and forth,
frontward and backwards, though never upward. I wanted
to make my presence apparent before I would deliver the
kill, but I didn’t.
I slid to the end of the tree branch, and onto another.
Then I jumped down, and took cover behind the tree, and
waited there to observe his movements.
He was dressed in a peculiar manner, which is the only
way I can think to describe it. His clothing was of dark
shades, and fit him slackly. I could not see his face because
300

Chapter Twenty-Five
he wore a hooded cloak, as I had when I was mortal. A bow
and quiver were strapped to his back. And he wore a belt
loop and bracers that was decorated with an array of blades
of varying lengths and contours and sharpened shafts of
wood….and then I knew what he was—a vampire hunter!
A sensitive and keen look searched the branches, the
spaces between leaves blending with the black night behind
them, but I thought he could not see me. His eyes darted
about frantically as a bird would, fluttering if trapped. The
bow and quiver suddenly dropped from his back. An arrow
was quickly assembled with the bow, and then pointed
towards me.
He fell back as I lunged forward. Just as I began, and
as my fangs curved to their snakelike shape, the arrow was
released from the bow, aimed directly at my heart! I
watched it flying toward me, and in a split second I
recoiled, wrenching sideways. Yet, even with my remarkable speed, the arrow had grazed my upper arm. I felt no
pain from the wound, but I had been injured by…a mortal
had injured me! I felt like such a failure. I was ashamed of
myself, of how I’d been hurt.
Impossible, I thought. Impossible!
This was no ordinary mortal; his skills were beyond
any I had encountered before. I decided to learn more about
this vampire hunter before our paths crossed again, so I

301

The Nocturne
disappeared into the dark as the hellhounds had done. I
went back to the estate, and would hunt no more this night.

302

Chapter Twenty-Six
Rainier

ONE NIGHT, not long thereafter, I awakened with an
understanding for my newfound strengths, and some degree
of control over the evil that had run rampant in my heart. I
longed to learn the secrets of which Von Sabre had nearly
spoken, so many times. There had been hints that would not
be noticed except by the most perceptive mind. But my
mind could be very discerning, especially in regards to my
beloved Annora.
I had, for the time being, gained control over my rage;
and I used every moment I was free to question Von Sabre.
“You know more of Annora’s death than you tell me,”
I said. “I can feel it.”
“Perhaps.”

The Nocturne
“I must know.”
We walked along a path beneath the frosty glow of the
winter moon, en route to the village I had once called home.
I knew little of where we were going or why…but it didn’t
matter. I was trying to lose myself in the world’s beauty, its
serenity – everything that was now part of my kingdom.
Odd that. As a mortal, I had never been able to truly
appreciate the beauty of the darkness, though I had always
fancied it.
The hellhounds trotted alongside us.
Here I ravaged nearly every night. Without mercy I
drained the blood of those who turned against me when I
needed them the most. And now it was they who would lie
sleepless, quaking, and unable to defend themselves.
The entire village lived in terror of me now, and I marveled in every minute of it.
“The Baron never planned to release you,” Von Sabre
said. “Annora did not know that, of course, when she came
to make an accord for you to be released.” His hand graced
the back of the largest hellhound, Abaddon. The tension in
his voice was palpable, even though he whispered almost
silently. As he described to me, in painfully vivid detail, the
events that took place right before Annora’s death, I
envisioned it as though I were watching it happen. And the
lurid details were ripping me apart, while at the same time
they brought to my mind what I’d long needed to learn.
304

Chapter Twenty-Six
Perhaps this was what could change me, what could
mend my broken heart.
We stopped in the open forest. I wandered between the
trees as icy winds flew through the coppice, and ran my
fingers across an old oak tree, where Annora and I had
carved our names in one of our romantic little havens near
the lake. I loved this place, and I remembered everything
about it: how passionately Annora and I had kissed and then
together carved our names in a place we promised we
would visit one day when our son would be of age to
appreciate it.
VON SABRE CONTINUED telling the dark tale. But
I could not stand in one place, nor look at him directly as he
said such things…it was too painful. His voice was
drowned out by my vision of it as though it was happening
at that very moment…
…Freezing and soaking wet, Annora arrived at Baron
Galtier’s estate. The sun failed to rise to the grayish skies,
shrouded by black clouds and rain. Her entire body ached
from hunger, sleepless nights, the sobbing that kept her
awake, and traveling miles and miles, completely alone.
She knew she had put her son’s life at stake. As she
had been told by all who opposed her quest to save her
husband, there was a chance of death to both she and the
child she was bearing. Her heart was ripped in half at that
thought. She had shed every tear her eyes would allow
305

The Nocturne
through the morning hours she spent quaking and crying as
she desperately tried to figure out what to do in order to
protect her family. Although it was excruciating, Annora
faced the decision she had made with ten times the courage
of any man, for there was no sacrifice too great for love.
Annora dismounted from her mare’s saddle, leaving
her and Samson tethered to an oak tree near the path that
led to the estate. She glanced around nervously, fearful of
who may be nearby, as she walked toward the entranceway.
She took delicate steps to avoid the clicking sounds made
by the heels of her boots, for she knew this would draw
attention to her arrival. And when she neared the doors of
the estate she was awestruck by its magnificence, but
agonized by the fact that her husband had been there for so
long, undoubtedly being tortured. And she couldn’t bring
herself to forget what he had told her about the first time he
had been taken to this place. Yet with undefeatable courage
she cast all her fears aside.
She had not been able to think things through carefully.
It had been her intention to devise a plan for how she would
go about negotiating for her husband’s release, but her mind
had gone numb by that point.
She stepped into the courtyard in front of the grand
entranceway, breathing sharply as she looked toward the
flower path in the centre where the path rounded a perfect
circle. She saw no one, heard not a sound, though was not
306

Chapter Twenty-Six
unnoticed. She came to a halt as two guards who had been
standing alongside the two pillars at the entrance to the
Estate, jogged toward her.
“Halt! Stop there,” a stern male voice shouted in the
brusque, yet monotone way that guards usually speak.
Startled, she stood immobile for a moment. If she were
to oppose them, she would be killed… but that didn’t stop
her from protesting when they grasped her by her arms and
dragged her through the doorway. Raising the volume of
their voices to ring out over her protests, the guards
summoned the Baron.
She had been able to make it inside the estate, though
that was not what crossed her mind as she lashed out and
protested frantically.
“You may release her,” Baron Galtier said, stepping
down the staircase; and they wasted no time in letting go of
her. “Now leave us.”
As he neared the steps closest to where Annora stood,
he spoke yet again. “Who might you be?”
“Annora,” she said.
He stepped toward her, extending his hand in a helpful
gesture, it seemed. “’Tis my pleasure,” he said. “I am—”
“Baron Galtier,” she said tersely, disdainfully, to say
the least. “My husband—you have had him under arrest for
weeks.”

307

The Nocturne
“Your husband? On what charge have I detained him?
What is his name?”
“For the death of a werewolf,” she said. “But Rainier
is not a murderer! I promise you that…and please, will you
free him?”
“That bastard,” he said. “Absolutely not. He killed my
son!”
She took two steps toward him, and he still refused to
face her. “Please. You must release my husband. I need
him! Please, Monsieur, I beg you!”
After a moment he turned toward her, striking her
cheek with an open hand. And his voice was stern, unyielding, without even the slightest fragment of compassion. “He
will never be released.”
She was jostled backward, holding the side of her face
as blood rushed it with a searing pain. She was close to the
door and to her own freedom, but she could not leave
Rainier behind. There was absolutely no way she could
leave him at the hands of the Baron.
“But I assure you, my husband is not a killer!” she said,
wiping away her tears. “I beg you to free him!” Every
muscle in her face continued to sting, and fear nipped at her
mind. “I have ridden all this way in my condition to plead
for his release. – He has a family! Please, Monsieur, find
the mercy to forgive him. I ask this of you.”

308

Chapter Twenty-Six
“How would you feel if your child were to die right
before your eyes? Would you have mercy for the one who
killed it?”
He grasped her by her arm, dragging her into the great
room. She knew better than to protest now. “You say he
saves lives, heals children?” He began to pull her forearm
sideways, turning her wrist with every second of silence
that passed.
“Yes,” she cried when her wrist was wrenched even
further, no longer able to withstand the pain.
He released her, and blood rushed to the throbbing
wound, spiraling through her.
“Please. Monsieur,” she said. “I am begging you! My
husband is innocent!” She trailed off as the Baron began to
speak:
“I summoned him because of his reputation,” he said.
“But he killed him.”
“No,” she cried. “No. That cannot be!”
She gripped the table as her back leaned against it,
searching for something she could use to defend herself. A
knife…a candleholder…a small iron rod—anything she
could use to defend herself.
He turned and walked toward the entryway, muttering
inaudibly. And as his gaze left her, Annora seized the
opportunity – quite possibly her last chance to escape. She
had been able to feel the dagger that lay upon the table,
309

The Nocturne
almost touching her lower back. Grasping it, as she kept a
steady watch upon the Baron, whose back was still turned
to her, she sliced into backside of her skirt, inserting the
blade into the fabric; it slid against her leg, and as secure as
though it were tied to her thigh. Only the handle protruded.
“Grant my husband amnesty,” she said. “Free him in
exchange for me.”
“Amnesty,” he said. “He is going to suffer, and if it
involves you, then so be it.” He took slow footsteps from
the entryway, into the great room. But what was she to do at
this moment? Was it in her best interest to kill him swiftly
with the knife she had just obtained, and then attempt to
find where her husband was held captive? Or was she to
dash out the door at the moment she saw fit? No matter
what she considered, all her choices were frightful, most
likely impossible, and unquestionably perilous.
“Please. Please!” she said. “Find the compassion to
release my husband.”
He pushed her back, against the table. The pain of his
fingernails in her sides, and the piercing wooden corner
splitting through her back was agony she could no longer
endure.
“Please let me go,” she said, her voice thick with pain.
“I beg you, Monsieur…free my husband and I. This baby is
all I have! Don’t hurt him, don’t hurt my baby….”

310

Chapter Twenty-Six
When it was too late, she realized that she had made
the wrong choice. After struggling and fighting with
courage she could narrowly comprehend, Annora had come
so close to escaping when it was a single stab wound that
changed everything…
Is immortality worth such a sacrifice?

311

Chapter Twenty-Seven
Rainier

AFTER I hunted one night I readied myself for sleep in
one of the upper-chambers in the estate. There was an open
window beside the bed, with curtains waving and blowing
about with the breeze. I was nearly asleep when I heard a
voice, a familiar one, which was feminine, agreeable and
accented British. I opened my eyes, seeing Béja as she
stood at my bedside…and she startled me.
“What are you doing here?” I asked.
“You must come to one of the Temples,” she said,
“now, as soon as you can.”
“What Temple? Why?”
“I need your help,” she said, pawing at one of the
chains around her neck. “Look at this—do you see this

The Nocturne
jewel? It is from the rose at your wife’s grave. It means the
prophecy is coming true.”
I was too stunned to speak.
“And you are the key,” she went on, “to saving the
Lamps. Do you remember them, in the tomb when I found
you? Now it’s time—we need you.”
I, of all people, should not have thought it strange that
the wolf wanted something of me now, after we had met
twice. Yet it was too dreamlike, too fantastic to believe.
“How do you know I am the one you need?” I asked,
sitting up in bed.
“The Gods have chosen you. There is a red mark on
you, isn’t there?”
I was silent, trying to understand why the Blood Amulet and I meant so much to her. I must say, when she spoke
of so many things which involved it, I could not help but
wonder, by some chance, if it was part of my fate. But that
was much too farfetched, was it not? What if it was truly
magical?
I looked straight at her, and saw she had the most
amazingly colored eyes—crystal-blue—like shattered ice.
“I’m sorry,” I said, and then turned toward the entry, “but
how can I help you.”
From what I had noticed, the more questions I asked,
the more she changed the subject or carried on, insisting I
yield and go with her to the Temples. I pushed apart the
314

Chapter Twenty-Seven
curtains and stepped back without offering another word to
her. I was curious to see her reaction, in hopes it would help
me to realize her purpose and mine.
After pondering for a moment, Béja trotted after me.
And cheerily she said: “I will bring you right back afterward! What do you say to that?”
“Tell me why it is so special to you,” I said.
“Are you going to help me?”
This could go on forever. I decided to humor the wolf,
tell her what she wanted to hear. “Fine, you have my word.
Now, I want to know all about this—the amulet and why
you’re here.”
“What do you know of pyramids and temples?”
“A little.”
“Do you know of the Gods?”
I laughed nervously, anticipating what she would ask
me next. “No.”
“Well, there are the Guardians of The Spirits,” she
said, “and we help them. We watch over the Lamps and
protect them.”
It seemed hours went by as I listened, taking in a vast
amount of secrets of ancient kingdoms. I could have drifted
into a deep dreamlike state, with the vivid imagery of a
thousand years’ time flowing through my thoughts until I
realized what immortality had nearly taken from me: I was

315

The Nocturne
a part of a prophecy, a long-foretold fate toward which my
love for Annora continued to take me.
Béja explained about the people of ancient Egypt and
of Rome, the mystifying tale their hieroglyphs told…and
the hidden magic within the tombs. The people in past
centuries spent their entire lives preparing for death, for
immortality; and, with the light to the spirit worlds at their
fingertips, it was possible.
“In the tombs, there are paintings of wolves in battle,”
she said, “fighting alongside your kind. People say they
aren’t wolves—they’re men in wolf armor. But we are spirit
guardians, and you can find us as you can find temples and
pyramids. ”
She went on to tell me nearly everything about her
kingdom, the Island of Seven Cities, where great palms
towered high above and lush green meadows were home to
wolves, humans and megalithic statues. There were
hieroglyphics as well, each telling another chapter of the
legends and tales of the ancients.
I had made an accord with her, because by then I knew
what power the Blood Amulet had—and that it was
something to do with me. I was not going to let her go
without me.
The wolves’ beliefs seemed absurd to me, but I was in
no position to offend any gods or spirits, so I kept quiet.
They believed in far more than God and the Devil, heaven
316

Chapter Twenty-Seven
and hell…they were concerned with pleasing the lesser
deities. It made no sense, but there was something about
what Béja said—and thinking of earth’s gods and goddesses, spirit guardians, rebirth—made me see, once and for
all, that this was my place to find my answers.
I had fought plenty of wars already—all my inner conflict, my battle between darkness and light, finding where I
belonged—and the last thing I wanted was to defend a
cause I didn’t even understand. But the wolves needed me, I
realized, and without the Eternal Lamps there would be no
way to reach an afterlife of any sort, save for hell, with a
certain place in its deepest inferno waiting for me. I didn’t
care about their reason for needing me or why they guarded
the Eternal Lamps. I could care less about where they came
from, their pagan gods and rituals, and why they battled the
demons. Make no mistake, it was interesting, I admit, but
this was my time to be self-seeking; I cared about the
prophecy, and I wanted to know if I could ever escape it. I
wanted answers. And more than anything else, I wanted
inner-peace.
In a way, I wished to do as they asked, help them win
their war, but part of my soul told me: I don’t need to do
this; it isn’t my fight; why worry about it. Let them go,
Rainier; you have your own troubles. I had a sort of
allegiance to hell by then, and when I thought of opposing
it, the demons quickly brought shadows over me—a feeling
317

The Nocturne
of such worthlessness, that I wanted nothing except to do
their work, to keep killing. The hellhounds had come to
earth to seduce my soul, to offer me a nonexistent sense of
comfort. And several times I felt myself nearly give in….
Caught in the middle of this, unfortunately I had something to do with the Blood Amulet—the key the demons
fought for so desperately. I could end this war once and for
all—summon the hellhounds and rip apart every single
temple, every shrine and tomb to find the Eternal Lamps,
and take them back to Satan; sell my soul for the ultimate
power. I alone had such strength. But I wanted a much
different victory than that. I understood what I needed to
do—and by no means did it involve any more evildoing.
Although, the thought of saving myself from hell seemed so
wondrously fulfilling that my fate mattered a great deal less
than before. I considered it, wondering if I needed no more
answers now—if my curse no longer mattered, if my
sacrifice would yield joy in the end. Ah, well, that is
pointless just the same, I thought. If I turn against these
wolves, I will have only fallen deeper into hell. I will have
made a pact with Satan…and there goes my vision of
reuniting with my family.
The demons were still fighting inside me. It took tremendous mental power to overcome them, and with every
fight they seemed to strengthen. But with great perseverance I went on, holding them back, not allowing myself to
318

Chapter Twenty-Seven
see their horrid images: the eyeless ghouls, the bloodied
tormenters, the hellhounds with their venomous fangs. Not
thinking about life after death. Never truly knowing whose
side I was on.
Béja’s eyes flashed, and for a second I felt as though
her thoughts were coming to me; but I had not the power to
take them in, yet. Then she said, “We need you to help us
fight the demons.”
Suddenly I remembered: demons—the creatures from
my dream so long ago. Oh, now I knew, if I had not known
before, I am connected to this.
Now my mind was racing. “Demons?” I said, entranced. “You fight them?”
“I plan to. We need to read the scripts, and then I will
be able to battle. Without that I won’t know what is going
to happen.”
“But…why should I help you?”
She stood, drew closer to me, and then she bowed once
again, extending her right foreleg to the floor and pressing
her face against it. There must be something you would
like to know or see, in the Temples.” Then, suddenly she
jolted back as a soft howl rung through the night air. It was
somewhere in the distance, but her keen hearing and mine
caught it before it had a chance to resonate off the stone or
wood, before it could be heard within twenty miles of here.
“The Alpha calls,” she said. “Come with me, hurry.”
319

The Nocturne
Béja insisted I follow her. I did so, grudgingly at first.
Yet when I thought of the life I had now, I accepted the
challenge with some distant hope that, maybe there was still
a chance I could change my fate…redeem myself.
I walked with her for miles, it seemed, until we came
upon a glade, where there was a slight hill, from which a
monstrous old oak stood towering overhead. The moon
waxed in the grayish sky, until tiny shards of light flickered
between the trees and into the clearing. A soft breeze came
up, and for the first time since I had become a vampire, the
crisp essence of winter was not at all unpleasant. In fact, the
air was lovely; sweet as all the gardens in the world.
She brought me before her king, a wolf which was
perched on the flat sprawling limb of a tree at the crest, so
elegant and poised, looking down at me with the most
intense yellow eyes. He seemed catlike, almost, being the
size of a tiger, with a long, muscular body and the plushest
black fur one can imagine. Spiraling bands of silver, brown
and white encircled his neck and chest, blending smoothly
together, all the way to the crown of his skull, and to the
white spot at the centre of his chest. Even his paws were
massive, bear-like; and his tail was so long it touched his
hind paws. On his hind legs and underbelly were thick tufts
of cream-colored fur; and, stretching outward from his back
was a pair of feathery black and silver wings.

320

Chapter Twenty-Seven
Flanking him were the two guardians, Tierney and
Murdock, like statues with gemlike eyes, quietly keeping
watch over their king. What I hadn’t realized until then was
that, Béja, too, had wings—they all did, except they weren’t
visible when tucked against their backs.
Mathias’s voice was deep, husky, commanding and
noble, accented British. “Greetings,” he said, jumping down
to a graceful landing before me. “I am Mathias; and you
must be Rainier.”
“Yes,” I said. “But what do you want of me? I know—
the Temples, the Lamps and all—but what, exactly? I have
no idea what I’m doing here; all I know is what Béja wants
and that she told me to come with her.”
“It is nothing to do with me!” she said, sounding disgusted. “It is about doing what is right. But you wouldn’t
understand that.”
When I began to speak, she had already galloped into
the forest. I searched every one of my feelings for something I could say to put her at ease, to help her…but nothing
came to mind.
Tierney looked at me, shaking his head in disgust.
Then he turned to Mathias, who was now seated regally on
a stone slab beside the tree, neck arched, shoulders tense,
tail twitching occasionally. “She’s wrong,” Tierney said.
“She wants to believe everything she hears or thinks.”

321

The Nocturne
Mathias’s eyes became cloudy. And his fur, like downy
feathers, rippled with the breeze. “But she is trying. She just
goes about things the wrong way.”
“I’d not think she was ‘trying’ when she brought us a
vampire. If I were you, I would be right furious. We cannot
even trust him.”
“What choice do we have?” he said. “Pray to the gods,
he can help us.”
“But it is not his will. He does not want to be here…or
there”—Tierney lifted his paw, gesturing to the path”—or
anywhere else with us. Come off it! We are wasting our
time. Let him go.”
“Go; fetch Béja.”
“But he—”
The king leapt off the rock, exposing his fangs as he
toppled the scrawny wolf over a nearby tree trunk. “Do as I
say.” Then he turned to face me, giving a slight incline of
his head as Tierney trotted away in shame for having
challenged him.
I stepped forth. “Yes, my lord….”
“The gods and demons are fighting for you,” he said,
“as they fight for our Lamps. All I ask of you is to go with
us so we will have our answers.”
“You want me to fight,” I said, “because I am your
debt to your gods.”

322

Chapter Twenty-Seven
“Whelp, we need your powers to keep hell from coming here.”
Several moments later Tierney returned with Béja trailing along behind, her head hanging in shame. Mathias
watched as she approached, and all were silent.
“Well, gentlemen”—Tierney smiled, seating himself
beside the king—“what have I missed?”
“He wants nothing to do with it,” Béja said. “He’ll not
go with us.”
Their gazes fell on me, everyone awaiting my answer.
Either I could go with them and sabotage this entire
thing…or I could simply agree to help win the war, neither
of which would put me at peace. I needed time to figure out
exactly how to go about saving my soul, escaping from my
life as a vampire without falling to hell. It seemed impossible for me to prevail no matter which path I’d choose, and
heaven knows how much time I had to do it. But I’d been
left with no choice except to go to the Temple.
“Very well,” I said. “I’ll go with you.”
Mathias agreed to lead me to the Temple, while the
others would follow. I rested my hand on his neck, leaning
in as I pulled myself onto his back. I bent my leg as I swung
it over his side, struggling to find my balance when he
stood. I held his fur for support, but his movements made
me feel as though I would slide off at any second. His body
seemed leaner and longer than ever, his muscles in an ever323

The Nocturne
rippling motion. Béja and Tierney were standing by.
Mathias lifted his wings, stretching them as he turned his
head to the side to ask me, “Are you ready yet? We should
get a move-on.”
“Yes.”
“Do you see those mountains, out ahead?” he asked.
“You’ll need to hold tight as we go over them—the clouds
are close.”
When he began to trot across the field I found that his
gait was much different than that of a horse, for he moved
in a rolling, rhythmic stride so different from that of a
horse. I felt him rising from the ground, very slowly, as
Béja raced alongside him and bounded upward with her
wings outspread. And we followed right behind her.
His speed was very similar to that of a falcon or eagle—his wings moved in long, powerful strokes that
propelled him smoothly through the sky. And he navigated
merely by the direction of the wind, finding a gap between
the upper and lower gusts. Before I knew it, we were
soaring above the forests and the snow-capped Alpes. I
could see the world in its slumber from here; and the
people, the plumes of smoke and raging rivers vanished
beneath the cloak of night. The moon seemed close enough
for me to grasp, and the clouds around it were like swirling
feathers just above us. I closed my eyes and felt the
heavens.
324

Chapter Twenty-Seven
WHEN WE REACHED THE TEMPLE, I was in control of the demons inside myself. I had overcome them for
the time being. This place was not a great deal different
than the one that Lucan and I had visited so long ago; in
fact, the hieroglyphs and cave-like chambers beneath the
Temple were nearly identical to those we had seen before.
It sat, nestled between two jagged snowy mountains.
Everything that surrounded it was completely white, with
neither rock nor tree nor path in sight.
“I will stand watch,” Mathias said. “Béja, lead him.”
From the first room, she and I made our way through
the narrowest passageways and down several stairwells
before we reached the main corridor. I walked to the very
end of the channel, found there were walls on all sides, no
doors, and tiny air shafts along the ceiling.
At first I withheld my urge to touch the hieroglyphs,
but as soon as I drew near the wall, I could not help but
glide my fingers across it. I touched thousands of years of
history: the rough texture of the carved stone, with tiny
grains of sand crumbling beneath my touch; the berry juices
that colored the wolf’s body and armor; and the thick black
dots that were his eyes. Fascinated, I stepped closer, gazing
at the amulets and their bands of color that touched the
painted sun.
“What do you see?” Béja asked. “Can you read them?”

325

The Nocturne
I shook my head, and then stared at the painting, separating the colors in my mind.
“The ancient ones thought there was a god for each
color,” she said. “So they made sacrifices and built the
temples and amulets as keys to keep the demons out.” She
stepped backward, and then she began to carefully nudge
the stones along the wall, pausing for only a moment before
trying it once again. As you might expect, I assumed there
was some sort of hidden door here. “This is the only way
we can win the war. And I need you to help me”—she
pawed at another stone—“you need me to help you. Then
you can leave.”
“I cannot help you fight,” I said. “I don’t even know
whose side I’m on.”
She paused, looking at me; sadness in her eyes. “But
you said you wanted to change. Why do you deny it?”
“It’s exactly that,” I said; “I must be reunited with my
wife…but I belong to hell. If I betray it, she’ll be gone
forever.”
My gaze shifted back to the painting. I was awestruck,
no question—but I also felt an eerie chill in my bones. It
made my spirit uneasy to be in or near a tomb; and again
came the distant shrieks and calls of my fellow troubled
souls, who taunted me by saying, “What are you?—a
ghost? No. A man? No.” Or: “You don’t belong in any
sacred place. You ought to be burning in hell for what
326

Chapter Twenty-Seven
you’ve done!” All too many times I had heard such things.
For the most part, the voices were faint and garbled; but
there were times when they rang like church bells inside my
head, on and on and on—whining—crying—screaming
until I was so certain I’d gone insane, that I was simply
waiting for it to all come to an end. But when I was
rational I would want nothing of that. Death would mean
my spirit could go to hell, where I belonged…and my fear
of losing my family forever was so great that, no matter
how painful life was, it would be worth living as long as I
had a distant hope of liberation. Maybe I could redeem
myself, renounce vampirism, never kill again. Maybe I
could forsake all the hatred in my soul, all the darkness and
misery…and surrender. Could I? My God, I hoped. I
needed to look deeper inside myself. I needed to find the
answers that were left behind by her death; to my own
satisfaction I needed to make peace with my soul. I would
always be a vampire, but there was still a chance I could see
Annora one last time. I wanted only to tell her I love her; I
am sorry for what happened; and that everything I did
anymore—whether it damned my soul or not—was out of
love for her. And I wanted to hear her voice, see her
face…if just once more.
We nearly crawled through the next passageways, and
came to a stop at a door that opened onto a ledge, from
which a crisscrossed walkway led to a short pillar at the
327

The Nocturne
centre, where a glowing orb-like lamp burned. Opposite
where I stood, there was a towering statue before the
farthest wall.
As soon as we stepped in, one of the stones under
Béja’s paw wobbled, triggering the door behind us to shut
and lock. On all sides of the walls except the doorway were
long bony spikes. And below us was some great well, in
which icy shards floated round.
Carefully following the ledge, we made our way to it. I
was not exactly sure what was expected of me, so I waited
for her instruction.
She had just begun to look over the inscription on the
orb when suddenly the tomb shook, as though boulders
were crashing into it from the outside. Seconds later,
another sound echoed deep within the well, the pedestal
quivering ever-so-slightly with tiny pebbles rolling off the
planks. I wanted to get out of here…but I quickly remembered there were no doors that led from here to the outside.
I tried desperately to figure out how to reach the doors
or shafts on the second level. I was not so brave as to walk
up these walls, as they still quaked intermittently and the
passageways were impossible to reach.
When I began to speak she looked at me, her ears
pressed against her skull and her face robbed of everything
except horror.

328

Chapter Twenty-Seven
“What is it?” I asked, stepping toward her. “What did
you see?”
She swallowed hard; and shivers were moving up and
down her spine, causing her hair to turn to thousands of tiny
barbs. “The end.”
“Of what?”
“It says two will defend the treasure,” she said. “This
prophecy will save magic from its destruction. And one will
make the sacrifice.”
I tried to reel in everything she had read to me. This
was too great a shock. And just when I’d thought it was
finally over I learned that if I did not do right by the wolves,
I would most certainly find myself in hell.
The tomb seemed to be spinning round and round,
planks shaking and crisscrossing over the well. There was a
great undulating force beneath my feet, jostling me against
the wall as soon as I rose.
“Come here, quickly,” she said, glancing at me and
then the pillar.
I gripped the wall for support, then stood and cautiously made my way across the planks and to the centre of
the tomb. I moved with catlike precision, looking straight
ahead until I reached the pedestal. “What is it?”
She laid her paw on the slab beneath the orb, saying:
“Look at the pillar—see the wolves fighting demons…and
the fire between them?”
329

The Nocturne
I stared at the text, trying to understand it, even though
I already knew what it was going to mean, how it related to
me. This was the last riddle of the prophecy—and I would
soon put an end to it.
“Yes,” I said, “but what does it have to do with me?”
“You are what will end the war—you control the fire.”
When I looked at the hieroglyphs more closely, I saw
weapons buried in the wall of fire and strong gusts of wind
bringing them toward the wolf armies. Demons fighting
wolves in war torn fields, temples falling to the ground, and
nonstop bloodshed beneath a black sky, it was hell in a
whole new sense. I had been expecting to see my true fate
ever since I began to believe the prophecy. I’d known for a
long time that something of great mystery and significance
awaited me. It was not at all unanticipated but certainly not
my desire, considering the path it had chosen for me. I
didn’t want to be any sort of conqueror or become a
spiritual relic whose name would be etched in these very
walls someday.
This…battle—whatever you wish to call it—was by no
means my idea of a finale. But it seemed I had no choice,
and I would do nothing to let myself fall any closer to hell.
I will have to fight—and pray I will be able to help the
wolves save the Eternal Lamps…or never have a chance to
see my family again.

330

Chapter Twenty-Seven
There came a quake again, the walls shaking as she
lunged forward to grip the pedestal. Her claws were
grinding against its surface, her eyes bright with fear. I had
no time to be afraid.
All of a sudden it felt as though the temple would sink
into the ground. Icy water splashed onto the walls—and like
a spring it came upward, drenching the planks and filling
the air with a dark mist. Lamps fell from the sconces around
the room, a thick silver fluid oozing over the crumbling
stone slabs. Ancient gems and treasures ground against
bones in the sarcophagi. Vases spilled their precious
contents across the floor, and the walls in the burial
chamber were collapsing as I struggled to hold on.
I crept blindly through the mist, feeling for the edge of
the plank as I shouted Béja’s name. Then I listened, but I
heard nothing except the roiling water in the well. I tried to
stay calm, but the fear and excitement filled me with a rush
I’d not felt since I became immortal. I was desperate to
figure out how I would get out of here. And, being utterly
furious and confused, I readied myself to meet any
challenges.
Another quake rocked the temple, jostling me so close
to the edge of the plank I felt the misty touch of the water.
It splashed more furiously now, twisting this way and that.
I made my way to the centre, and when I reached it I
climbed onto the pedestal in hopes of finding her….But
331

The Nocturne
there was nothing except darkness below. The pillars were
giving way to the pressure As the temple shook, the roof
began to collapse; stones were crashing to the floor like a
meteor shower, followed by giant shards of ice that drilled
straight through the walls. We had caused an avalanche…and in a matter of seconds this entire temple would
sink into the earth. I was scarcely able to avoid the falling
rocks, and dashed as far away from there as I could,
stopping where a great towering statue would keep the wall
from descending upon me. And then, Béja emerged, only to
slip back, her wings hooking on the spikes that protruded
from the wall. Then she began to bleed as she fought to
break free. By the time I saw her fall and reached for her
she had leapt forward, her claws etching the plank.
“I won’t let go of you,” I said, taking hold of her paws
as I tried to bring her to safety. “Try to pull yourself up, I’ll
help you.”
She inched toward me, but lacked the strength to climb
up the ledge. I gripped the fur on her shoulders and did my
best to drag her onto the planks, but it was no use. The
temple was turning to ruins: rocks were cascading down,
narrowly missing us both, and in the other chambers, walls
were giving way every few seconds. I heard the snow
rushing in, breaking down a path with a thunderous crash
through each corridor and burial chamber.
“I can’t move my legs,” she said, “or my wings.”
332

Chapter Twenty-Seven
I shouted for Mathias, though I knew he would never
hear me through all the commotion. “Mathias, get us out of
here! Someone, help me!”
She took in a deep breath, raised her head and let out a
deafening howl.
There was a rather wide opening in the roof now, letting in the filtered light of the moon. From there, a giant
fissure was forming across the entire length of the temple,
slithering along like some massive serpent.
Béja was letting go of the ledge, as her claws began to
slip from it at a more rapid pace. I planted my feet just
slightly in front of me, using them to brace myself as I
pulled back with all my strength. But then, through the
opening, Mathias hurtled downward and pulled me up, so I
was able to grab onto his back and bring myself up on his
shoulders.
“Help her!” I said, pointing to Béja. “Let me pull her
up.”
He shook his head, suspended in the air, wings flapping. “There’s no way.” And then he sprung forward and
up, gaining speed as he dashed through the opening, soaring
miles above the avalanche. I turned to look back, and saw
snow and falling rocks engulf what remained of the
Temple, swallowing it all at once.
“Go back!” I said. “We can’t leave her! I’m not finished!”
333

The Nocturne
“I know that,” he said. “We’ll go back for her when the
time is right, and you can finish then. Her fate was not
written by the gods—yours was”
He was quiet, carrying me back.
Having reached the countryside, he landed smoothly on
a rock, high above the estate, from which I could see all the
forests and fields nearby. Once I stepped down I glanced at
him, to see tears in the corners of his eyes; and from the
way he was carrying himself—with a downcast gaze and
his shoulders slumped forward—I knew he felt about Béja’s
fate as I did.
“Go, now,” he said, “go back to your son, and wait for
me to return for you.”
I began to step down from the rock, onto the hill upon
which it sat, when he said, “Rainier, wait. There is one
thing I haven’t told you: it was Béja’s secret.”
“What?”
“Your daughter…,” he said, “do you remember when
she died?”
The sudden rush of memories caused me to shake my
head in hopes of ridding myself of them. After that I
nodded. “I’ve tried to forget it. Why?”
“When they cast her and the others out, Béja waited for
you and watched over your son. And she said she heard the
baby girl crying. When she went to her, she was healed.”

334

Chapter Twenty-Seven
“I don’t believe that,” I said. “How could—how would
she? She was dead, I know…I tried to help her.”
He gazed forward blankly. “She healed herself, as you
did before. But she did it at birth—she is far more powerful
than you already; she is stronger than all of us together.”
“Then what happened to her?” I asked anxiously. “The
cloak was ripped up and she was gone.”
“Béja took her to safety; I cannot tell you where—I
was sworn to keep the secret.”
“Why keep her from me and not Requiem?”
“Because she was too strong already. We didn’t know
what would happen if she was left with you. Please, try to
understand—we did it for her sake.”
“So you kept her from me,” I said, “all this time? I
have been grieving…and suffering, while she was alive
somewhere and you knew it?”
He stepped forth, drew back his lips to expose his
fangs. It was not an invitation to a challenge; rather, it was a
warning. “With your fate as it is, yes.”
“Tell me where she is.”
With a fierce snarl, one that was so loud it was nearly a
roar, he leapt onto the rock and glared down at me. Then in
a low, seething tone he said, “Know that she is alive, and
she is the key to your fate.” With that he vanished, neither
flying nor walking away from me; he was simply…gone.

335

The Nocturne
I didn’t find him after that, but when he disappeared he
left certain visions in my mind—memories, if you will—of
the beginnings of Raven’s life….
HE TOLD ME, it happened two days before Annora
was murdered. She paid a visit to the marketplace. I could
have never imagined what would be revealed that day. Not
even Annora could bring herself to believe it, for it was too
great a shock. You cannot conceive of how it felt to learn
this once disaster struck. I had already lost everything...yet I
saw this as though it were happening now.
I wanted to always feel as though Annora’s presence
would, in a way, continue to exist. Much like what I said
when I was in the dungeon: the trickery of madness would
have been a blessing by this point. And to be perfectly
honest with you, I didn’t care where this memory came or
why; I wanted just to learn what Annora struggled to tell
me with her very last breath. Now I knew.
She had just entered the marketplace when she paused
to rest for a moment, with Kaeya at her side, laden with
sacks and saddlebags as though she were a pack mule. As
Annora was going from one booth to another, she never
took notice of the strange little old woman—a witch, to be
precise—who was following her. The old woman so keenly
watched Annora’s every move…just waiting for the
opportune moment to speak.

336

Chapter Twenty-Seven
“I beg your pardon, miss,” the witch said, peering out
from beneath her hood. “Might I have a word with you?”
Startled and uncertain what to say, Annora turned to
face her. “I—I….Oh yes”—she drew away from the
booth—“yes, of course.” She paused as a sense of uneasiness came over her.
The witch drew closer. Then she pulled back her hood
to reveal what was once light brown hair that had become
silver and wispy with age, and was wound tightly into a
bun. “Your name, dear?” she asked, extending a ringadorned hand. “I am Catherine Morreaux.”
Still finding the situation to be most curious, my wife
was not pleased to introduce herself, and did so tentatively:
“Annora de Aaradyn.”
“Well,” she said, smiling faintly, “‘tis a pleasure.”
“What do you want of me?”
“Nothing,” she said. “I want only to warn you. Come
along, will you? Please. It will take just a little.”
The sense of uneasiness grew over Annora, until she
knew: the witch was a messenger of something dark and
devastating. “Warn me of what?”
She waved it away, gesturing for her to come to a quieter, more secluded area—an alleyway—where passersby
would not be such a nuisance. “Come along and be quiet. I
will tell you.”
Annora shook her head.
337

The Nocturne
This was madness, stress she didn’t need. Yet she
wanted to know what it was…and the old woman’s strange,
evasive nature demanded an explanation. If there was
something worthy of this—of approaching someone she
had neither seen nor spoken to before—it must have had a
point.
“Can I not be told here?” she asked in little more than a
whisper. “Tell me. If you will not, I must go.”
“I cannot stay here much longer,” she said. “But, while
I am, I will be near the marketplace—you can find me
here.” Annora re-adjusted her saddlebags, loosening the
straps around her horse’s middle.
The witch stepped backward, slowly fading into the
bustling progression of horses and carts, with the occasional
man and woman who carried pails at their side. “I can tell
you about your baby.”
Her blood ran cold. Everything that was going on—
what she had thought, what had just been said, how eerie
the words that lingered after the witch vanished into the
mêlée—seemed perfectly dreamlike.
“Wait!” Annora said. “Please...” Hastening through the
street once again, she was in a desperate search for the old
woman, who soon beckoned her to a small quiet alleyway.
“Why did you do that? What about my baby?”
“I have your attention. Now, I haven’t much time—”
“Why did you mention it?”
338

Chapter Twenty-Seven
Without question, this was puzzling. My wife had not
the faintest idea what to think—and I would have been just
as lost—perhaps more so—if I had been there. But I would
have demanded answers…and been given them, one way or
another. She was much different, much less skeptical.
She wanted Annora’s attention, fear and curiosity all at
once. She needed to capture her with intrigue—and did so
cunningly.
“I can see through you—not as you might think—but
in a way,” Catherine said. “It is a boy.”
Astonished and troubled, Annora struggled to think of
an answer. All along she trusted her instincts, the senses
that had, over the past few months, become a mother’s
intuition; and she had sensed we would have a son. “How
can you—. Is that…all you know of him?”
“No, I am afraid not.”
“Please, I must know.”
The old woman made no efforts to avoid the truth, no
matter what it might have been. She never hesitated—not
even paused to gather her thoughts. “Promise me that you
will not be angry with me. I only see things—I do not make
them what they are.”
She was slightly confused and still reeling in what she
had just been told. But she nodded in agreement.
Catherine was quiet for a short moment, glancing outside the alleyway to make certain no interruptions would be
339

The Nocturne
made. Her voice faded to a whisper. “It is about your
daughter.”
My wife’s face paled, all her joy washed away by
shock. “My daughter?” she said. “I have none.”
“But you will.” She stepped forth to take Annora’s
hand in her own. She seemed so detached when doing
this—revealing such a wonderful thing. It seemed as though
she was devoid of emotion, knowing neither delight nor
regret, neither pain nor pleasure. Annora, on the other hand,
endured a multitude of feelings—from disbelief, to
happiness, to fear and anger—everything imaginable was
going through her mind. “Listen to me. There is not one
baby in your womb—there are two.”
Her body quivered with excitement, even though she
had not the faintest idea what to believe “Twins?!” she said.
“No, that’s impossible.”
Catherine waved her hands nervously, then pulled her
further into the alleyway. “Shush! Do you want the whole
village to know about it? Be quiet!”
“No! No, I cannot.” She took a deep breath and leaned
against the wall, lost in the whirlwind of questions and
feelings. She envisioned our life, the future she and I had
both planned and dreamed, which was nearly gone by
then—and by no stretch of her imagination did it involve
twins. But of course, that would be wonderful, she thought,
and could not help but smile. Twice the joy. Could it be?
340

Chapter Twenty-Seven
Was it too much to hope for? She was perfectly delighted
with the idea of this, and could not wait for me to know
about it.
“Can it be?” she asked, wistfully gliding her fingers
over the amulet she was wearing. “I will have twins?”
“Yes, you will…but I fear that’s not all.”
“What more?”
“There is more about her; but this is not the place to go
about it. Come”—Catherine moved forward, gesturing to
her—“follow me.”
She had no permanent home, but for the time being she
lived in a small ramshackle house on the outskirts of the
village, where the pathways ended and silky emerald
meadows began. It was quiet there, with few horses and
carts passing by—and without the hourly ringing bells of
the church or the noise of the marketplace.
Annora seated herself at the table, gazing curiously at
the rows of clay pots and glass bottles—potions, herbs and
elixirs that lined every shelf. Storage chests lay open;
charms and tiny bones spilling onto the floor. A frothy grey
substance boiled over the lip of a blackened cauldron,
causing smoke to billow in the hearth.
As Catherine sat at the opposite side of the table, Annora asked: “You take all these things with you?”

341

The Nocturne
“I take what I can,” she said. “The witch-hunters would
find me if they knew who and where I am, so I burn what I
cannot carry.”
“It must be awful,” Annora said, placing her hands on
her knees. “My husband is a sorcerer—”
“I know of him.” The old woman tapped her fingers
against the table, and was quiet for a moment. “The one
who went to prison.”
Annora couldn’t hide the fact that this offended her,
and was simply quiet.
“I fear for her,” the old woman said tensely. “I do not
mean to ruin your joy; but please listen to me. She is
troubled.”
“I don’t understand. What do you mean—troubled?”
“There is evil in her.”
Her voice caught in her throat. “No, I don’t believe it.
How could she be?”
“I know you must be afraid,” the old woman was saying, “but please hear me. She is evil—she will do terrible
things. I know she will.”
When Annora began to wipe the tears from her cheek,
she couldn’t help but sob. After a moment she looked up,
sounding frightened and hurt as she said, “It can’t be!
That’s not possible.”
Catherine stood, then walked across the room. “Satan
is destroying her, as he will destroy your husband.”
342

Chapter Twenty-Seven
Annora paid no attention to the fact the old woman
knew things she shouldn’t have—and I am not speaking of
the twins—but evil being a part of our daughter. She knew
exactly what to say and when to say it, to evoke the deepest
fear in my wife, to confuse her to such a degree she was
afraid to believe anything but those words, and she was too
naive to realize it.
Annora stood quickly. “How can you say that? I don’t
believe it.”
She said nothing and continued to evade my wife’s
gaze.
Annora grasped the old woman’s shoulder, frustrated
and wanting answers. “You can see so much, you know
these secrets…why, if she is evil, can I not feel it?”
Finally, Catherine looked at her. “If I had not told
you,” she said with the faintest hint of irony, “what would
happen?”
“I would be happy, not upset!”
“She is going to hell. When the curse begins, there will
be no way to stop it. But for your sake and your son’s, you
must know this.”
Annora felt her heart in her throat. I think that is when
it all began to make sense; that was the beginning of the
end. Certainly it was impossible to think we were going to
have an evil child—that something conceived by our love
343

The Nocturne
could be stolen by the Devil…but she remembered the
prophecy and all the things I had done without knowledge
or intent: the hellfire, the way I had saved her, the power I
didn’t fully understand. Everything made sense now.
“I don’t believe a word of it,” she said. “I don’t believe I am bearing twins.” She stepped toward the door,
frightened, angry and still in tears. “You…do not dare to
come near me ever again!”
She recalled the day I’d saved her—that I’d done
something no one else could do. No, it couldn’t be, she told
herself. Yet she still could not bring herself to tell me, for
fear if by some chance, it was true and if anyone should
know, they would take away the little girl when she was
born. The people in this village were brutal, and if someone
thought a child to be evil or cursed, it would be destroyed.
The curse was in Raven’s blood, without question
…but it was in mine just the same. And now I knew she
was alive, going on about her life somewhere, quite
possibly with no idea that her brother and I existed.
Then I saw a fleeting glimpse of what would be—how
my children would look during their childhood and young
adult years—but everything seemed almost dreamlike. Both
were slender, rather tall, fair-skinned and dark-haired.
Requiem had a sort of rugged charm—a charismatic smile,
pale grey eyes and rich feathery brown locks that framed
his face. Raven was gorgeous, with long and straight black
344

Chapter Twenty-Seven
hair that cascaded over her shoulders, eyes the color of sea
foam, and the faintest freckles across her nose and cheeks.
That moment it hit me: they were both alive—there
was still hope, while here I was, on the same ill-fated
trajectory with no idea how to redeem myself. And there
was nothing to preserve my memory or to remind anyone of
who I used to be. I would have to change it, no matter what;
for Annora, for my children, for Béja and Mathias—all of
them.

345

Chapter Twenty-Eight
Rainier

I REACHED the estate, furious beyond all reason and
belief. I was, yet another time, free-falling into madness,
straight toward the desolate void of grief and confusion.
What was I going to do? The life was just beginning to
build and understand—my life with Requiem—was taken
from me that night. Now the wolves were dependent on me;
and Béja, my only savior and friend, was deserted and left
to die. It was all because of me, I thought; if I had been
stronger none of this would have happened. And Raven
survived? How? And where was she taken to safety?
The evil within me was so devastating that I felt myself
grow weak with it, as though spiritually I was dying once
and for all. What would survive were my long-forgotten

The Nocturne
memories of who I was….and even then I would be too
consumed by hatred to see them.
When I returned my brothers were waiting for me inside the estate; and the scent of fear was fiercely powerful
around them. I sensed it the second I stepped in and saw
them standing there, as I had not in more than two years.
“Why did you come here?” I asked without much emotion.
“To reason with you,” Lucan said. “We know what
you’ve done, what you will keep doing.”
I walked past them, into the great room. I had not been
there for more than a moment when the door of the
bedchamber in the first hall slowly opened and Requiem
stepped out, then rushed to me as fast as he was able. I
gathered him up and held him so that his legs rested on
either side of my hip, and he was close enough to snuggle
against my shoulder, which he loved to do. He was fighting
off sleep, barely able to keep his eyes open; though he
wanted, more than anything, to be with me as often as he
could—and for me to hold him.
They both stared at him, as though to ask, Who is this?
“Requiem, look,” I whispered and pointed to my brothers. “These are your uncles. Say hello.” He glanced at them,
lifted his hand ever-so-slightly in acknowledgement, though
he was too shy and tired to do anything more.

348

Chapter Twenty-Eight
“He’s beautiful,” Braden said, though the same awkwardness continued between us. “He looks just like his
mother.”
I didn’t want to hear what they had to say; I simply
wished to know why they were here, though instinct told
me when I first saw them that night. Something wasn’t
right; they were not here to talk to me or reason with me.
There was a darker motive at hand, I could feel it.
“I need to put him in bed,” I said as I walked toward
the bedchamber. Requiem fought against me, as he hated to
go to sleep alone. The moment he realized where he was
going, he clung to my side, begging me not to leave him
there.
“I’ll come right back, son,” I whispered, laying him on
the bed and arranging the blanket so it covered him. I kissed
his forehead, and he giggled before returning the gesture.
“As soon as I tell your uncles to go home, I will come back
for you, I promise.”
“No,” he said breathlessly, “no, Papa, stay! Stay….”
“Requiem, listen,” I said: “if you close your eyes and
relax, it will make me come back sooner. And then we’ll do
whatever you like, how is that?”
He smiled and nodded. “Tell s—story?”
I stood and stepped toward the door. “Of course.
Hurry, close your eyes so I can come back faster.”

349

The Nocturne
Loving this game, he did just as I said, and I slipped
out of the room, quietly.
When I returned to the great room, Lucan and Braden
were standing there, exactly as they had been. Yet as I
walked past them, through the entranceway, out the door
and onto the porch, suddenly there was this…white-hot
sensation in my back, as though a series of knives was
plunging into it with tremendous force. I turned around,
finding that same vampire hunter standing behind me,
holding a wooden stake in his hand, with blood dripping
down its tip.
“No, wait!” Braden said to him as he rushed to my
side. “Don’t.” Then he turned to Lucan, with a fiercer rage
than I thought I would ever see in him. “You said you
wouldn’t! I told you to make that promise!”
“Leave us,” he said to the vampire hunter, and he did,
reluctantly.
“Keep your promise,” I said. “Finish it, go ahead. I
have nothing to live for.”
Braden took a step closer, motioning at the chambers in
the corridor behind me. “Does your son mean nothing to
you? All that you told me—what Annora went through to
give birth and what you had to do…how could you leave it
behind like this? How could you forget?”

350

Chapter Twenty-Eight
We kept our voices low, so as not to disturb Requiem,
though our simmering anger and hatred could be heard all
the same.
“I’ve not forgotten,” I said, raising my voice and
hands. “Let me tell you: you have no idea what I have seen,
what I have been through. Don’t you try to remind me of
what happened. Do you think I can ever forget it? She died
in my arms! And she told me her last wish: to save him, and
I did; I cut her and myself opening her womb—for both of
them—not for anyone else! Everything I’ve done has been
for them, so don’t use that against me. Don’t tell me I have
given up fighting for her, because it will never end. It will
never be over!”
“Oh, that merits a medal,” Lucan said. “The killings,
the bloodshed—what is that for, then? Is that for her, too?
Or is it for the baby, do you drink blood for him? No, you
kill for pleasure, some sick pleasure. I will put an end to it
if you cannot.”
There was such disdain, such hatred in my voice, that it
consumed everything within me that was still human.
“Coming from you, the biggest pleasure-seeker of all. Go
ahead, put an end to it. Kill me, right here. If you had the
guts you would. Go on. It will make us all murderers, and
let history remember that.”
“My cause is noble,” he said, “it has always been. How
long have I stood back, Rainier, how long? I wanted for you
351

The Nocturne
to come with us and learn, but she stood in the way of it.
Had you gone, maybe things would be different now. But I
tried to be understanding, I tried to listen to what you
wanted. I’ve not said a word for more than two years.”
Caught in the moment, my deepest grief overtook me.
With one quick movement I ripped the curtain from the
window, tossing it aside. I tore apart everything nearby,
furious and raging. “So you knew, all along, what would
happen—and you did nothing. You betrayed me….why?
Why did you not help me, if you knew?”
“I didn’t say that,” Lucan said. “You knew everything
we did. There was nothing more.”
“And there was no way to tell what would happen,”
Braden was saying. “Come now, be reasonable! You were
satisfied, being a healer and all. You didn’t want more
power, or use it in a bad way. We didn’t know what to
expect—no one did.”
“What about our parents, then? I begged both of you
for years. All I wanted to know was what happened to
them, and you”—I came closer to Lucan, gesturing at him
with wild nervous motions—“you denied me.”
He pushed past me, walked to Braden and stood beside
him, in a united front against me. “Maybe we were trying to
protect you.”
“Oh, I am supposed to believe that. How can I believe
a word from either of you?”
352

Chapter Twenty-Eight
“Years from now,” he went on, “when your son is
older and asks you why he doesn’t have a mother, what will
you tell him? Will you give him all the gory details—that
she was pregnant, got stabbed and kept suffering when you
ripped him out of her? Of course not! You will tell him that
she is gone, and leave it at that. Why?—because it’s best
left unknown. It is the same with our parents; I was sparing
you the horror we went through.”
“Look at you,” Braden said: “you’re wickeder than all
of hell; you put Satan to shame. Can’t you see what you’re
doing? The reason you did it makes no difference—you are
still a killer, and there is a child involved. Without you he
has no one. Is that what you want for him, to be an
orphan?”
I spoke without thinking, without stopping to reason
with myself or to realize what an awful thought had just
passed through my mind. “Then Annora shouldn’t have
died and left us this way. I never asked for any of this to
happen!”
The looks on their faces were, simply, absolute shock.
Lucan was more furious than surprised, while there was
sadness in Braden’s eyes that I’d not seen in the past.
“I can’t believe you,” he said; “I cannot believe what
you just said. What would she think if she could see you
now? She would regret giving her life for you, I am sure of
that. She wouldn’t even know you.”
353

The Nocturne
“All she can see is her grave!” I said, choking back a
sob. “That is it: her coffin; dirt, water, the earth. She has no
eyes anymore, because there is nothing left of her. Nothing.
And I wish that we—all of us—the baby, too—were dead
and rotting with her!”
“If you wish that on yourself,” Lucan said, “I’ll do it.
You don’t deserve to have that child. He ought to have a
chance to live a normal life, and you will never give him
that. I’ll say it: I never liked Annora; we both wanted
different things for you, but my God, she loved you.” He
paused, catching his breath. “When she got pregnant I
thought it was a mistake, because she wanted even more of
your time to get ready for the child. You put everything
aside for it. But, even as I felt about the whole thing, I could
see what it meant to both of you.”
We spoke in quieter tones now, hinted with sorrow and
the simmering anger that willed us on.
“Then why did you quit speaking to me?”
“I went my way, you went yours. You had what you
wanted. But now, here you are—a killer—and here is her
baby, on his own, more or less forgotten because you’re too
in love with yourself.”
“He is my flesh and blood,” I said. “I gave him life, I
brought him into the world…I will raise him. I don’t need
any help from either of you. The time for you to help me
was years ago—but you didn’t.”
354

Chapter Twenty-Eight
I fell apart with the realization of what I had done and
said. I staggered backward until I touched the wall.
Then I slumped down with my hands on my head, able
to cry for the first time in two years. I was having the most
serious breakdown one could imagine, trying to pull myself
from the world that had, for so long, consumed me. As I
fought it, my old memories—my happiest moments—came
to mind: I was reliving my wedding day; I could see
Annora, as though she was standing before me now,
smiling as she always did; and then I went on to the day
when she told me we were going to be parents, with all the
sweet sentimental moments thereafter…and I remembered
watching the baby grow, feeling him, and talking to him
even though he couldn’t hear me. These things snapped
through my memory, one after another, in a series of events
that led me to this day. But it was not madness—I wasn’t
cracking up—I was, with great pain and effort, coming
back to my old self, the one who was loving and gentle, and
who would do anything to protect his family.
So when I thought it was completely over—that my
lifelong battle and my struggle for vengeance had come to
an end—I was given a final chance to redeem myself. I
could be liberated, and on some level, find redemption.
There was still a chance for me.

355

The Nocturne
At that moment I made a decision I thought I’d never
live to see. This was my judgment day. Fighting the malice,
hatred and evil inside me, I would finally seize whatever
peace there was going to be. It was too late for me to escape
immortality, but I could set things right in this life and do
everything in my power to put Annora’s soul to rest. I could
renounce evil, make the most of my time with my son, and
go on to the afterlife with a clear conscience. And, with
God as my witness, I was ready to do this.
Braden approached me, extended his hand and waited
for me to take it. I stood, wiped the tears from my eyes and
took a deep breath. I’d managed to calm myself, though it
was slight; and Lucan, the stern one, now seemed to have a
deeper understanding of me.
“Greater things are going to happen,” he said, “and
there is no way to stop them. But you can have another
chance. What if something could be done?”
“What do you mean?”
“First tell me if you would. Renounce this, start fresh,
find a new beginning.”
I was silent, going over this with a myriad of questions
I couldn’t answer. Why would my brothers be willing to
help me, if at all? Why would Lucan ask such a thing? And,
above all, can I still be saved?

356

Chapter Twenty-Eight
“You can,” Braden said with renewed hope. “Remember how you loved Annora, who you were. Think of going
there again, living it.”
“But I can’t.”
Lucan eyed me, not ready to surrender his position, not
ready to quit opposing what I did. “Tell me now, what is
your answer. Would you give up these powers?”
“You aren’t the first to ask me.”
Then he surprised me with the answer, “I know. Tell
me, so we can end it.”
Neither of them had the faintest idea what decision I
had made or what may be the outcome. I felt more awful
then than I had moments ago. The weight of the things I
had said began to weigh down my thoughts, and with them
came the most dreadful sense of guilt. I didn’t mean what
I’d said about wanting to die or about wishing death on my
son as well, nor had I meant any ill will against Annora…but I felt like the most despicable person on this
earth just the same.
My brothers were right—I did have something to live
for: my dear little boy, who thought the world of me and
loved me unconditionally. Annora lived on in him, in more
ways than he would ever know. But it was going to end that
night. I would never again do wrong by my family. In a
way, he saved me, for it was my love for him that made me
357

The Nocturne
remember who I was and who I should become. And
Lucan, who spent his entire life in search of power and
greatness, did not have the heart to kill me…and instead
drew me away from darkness.
“Rainier, please tell us,” Braden said.
“If all is forgiven,” I said in my soft-spoken tone from
long ago, “then yes. I am with you.”
“For all time,” he went on.
“Then I suppose I should tell you now,” Lucan said.
“Annora’s grave is not the end for her.”

To Be Continued…

358

