In The
King's Service
KATHERINE KURTZ
With Love and Thanks to
Andre Norton,
Great Lady of Many Wondrous Tales

In The King’s Service
Prologue
"Set not thy heart upon goods unjustly gotten;
for they shall not profit thee in the day of calamity."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 5:8

I

HEAR that you have a son at last," Dominy de Laney said to
Sir Sief MacAthan, as she settled beside him at the heavy,
eight-sided table in the Camberian Council's secret meeting
chamber. "Congratulations are surely in order."
Across the table from them, Vivienne de Jordanet was
absently twirling a dark ringlet around one forefinger as she
read over the shoulder of the man to her right: Lord Seisyll
Arilan, one of the Council's two coadjutors. Both of them
looked up at the other woman's comment, and Vivienne gave
the new father an indulgent smile.
"Well done, Sief."
Sief’s face brightened, a boyish grin creasing his still
handsome features as he basked in this affirmation of his
male potency. After nearly thirty years of indifferent
marriage, four living daughters, and a sad succession of
stillborn or short-lived sons, he had all but given up hope of
a male heir. This birthing had been difficult, for the child
was large and his wife was no longer young, but the new
babe was hale and lusty, if disappointingly unlike Sief in
appearance. Of course, most infants were inclined to look
like wizened little old men so soon after birth. Hopefully, the
pale eyes would darken—and as yet, the babe had too little
hair to tell what color it would be.
"I must confess that I am pleased," Sief allowed. "I've
decided to call him Krispin. There was a Krispin MacAthan a
few generations back. His sisters adore him already. I
suppose it is a natural reaction of young girls, anticipating
children of their own."

Dominy de Laney smiled and patted his hand, kindly
mirth in the sea-green eyes. "Young boys, as well, Sief. In
truth, most children seem to like babies. My own are
constantly begging for another sister or brother. And well do
I remember when Barrett was born. I've always wondered
whether our poor parents had him to achieve some respite
from me and my sisters. Especially after Cassianus died, we
were determined that there should be another boy for us to
pamper later."
The comment elicited a chuckle from Vivienne, who sat
back in her chair just as the great doors to the chamber
parted to admit the scarlet-clad subject of Dominy's
comment, one of his graceful hands resting on the arm of
Michon de Courcy for guidance. Barrett de Laney's hooded
robes were those of a scholar at the great university of Nur
Sayyid, but his emerald eyes gazed into eternity, sightless—
not through any infirmity of age, for he was only two-andthirty, but through blindness, incurred when he was hardly
grown to manhood, willingly accepted in exchange for the
freedom of several dozen children.
Those who had taken his sight had intended to take his
life as well—a probability Barrett had been well aware of,
when he submitted to the hot iron that bought the children's
release. In memory of that day, he still wore his thinning
hair sleeked back in a soldier's knot: faded red, where it was
not streaked with white. He had not expected to leave that
place alive, or that another would lay down his life instead,
to secure his escape.
The man who guided him now, of his father's generation,
had fostered him as a child of promise, helping to hone his
natural talents, and had taught him to adjust to his lack of
physical sight—a task made far easier by the powers they
shared in common with the others in the chamber. For all of
them were highly trained Deryni, members of that longvilified race of sorcerers and wise men who must coexist with
mortals not so gifted, in whom fear and perhaps even
jealousy bred intolerance that often killed.
Even other Deryni did not know the composition of this
elite and highly secretive body now gathering under the
purple dome of the Council's meeting place, though most
with any formal training had at least some inkling of its
existence and the policing function it carried out for the good
of all their race. A few individuals were believed by some to
have the Council's ear, but none would ever confirm or deny.
Only rarely did it intervene directly in the affairs of other
Deryni, and even less often were its rulings challenged.
Mostly, its guidance was more subtle: the hidden hand in
the glove of another's apparent action, quietly exerting
pressure behind the scenes to discourage and hopefully
prevent wanton use of Deryni powers. And while rigorous
discipline and the mutual intent of its members gave it
access, as a body, to power not generally available to any

single individual, the Council's greater power lay in the
speculations of other Deryni about what the Council might
actually be able to do, and apprehension regarding what
force it could bring to bear to enforce its rulings and to
discipline those who strayed from responsible behavior.
For the Deryni in Gwynedd were few, and always had
been, regarded by the much larger human population with
varying measures of wary fascination, suspicion, and
outright fear—which, in reaction to Deryni abuses, whether
real or imagined, could shift all too swiftly to active hostility
and murderous rampages. Once that occurred, sheer
numbers could overwhelm even the mightiest of magical
defenses— and had done so, far too many times.
It had not always been thus. Early in the previous
century— and still, in many of the lands neighboring
Gwynedd, especially to the east—humans and Deryni had
cohabited in relative peace, mostly to the mutual benefit of
both races. But there had always been those who harbored
an uneasy mistrust of the Deryni and their sometimes
startling abilities, and feared the possible misuse of powers
not accessible to ordinary men. Some said that such powers
were too near to that of gods, or at least of angels—or devils.
Others were convinced that such powers could only be
demonic, corrupting not only the wielders of those powers
but those touched by them.
Such hostility, born of fear of what was not understood,
had finally come to a head early in the previous century,
triggering a period of persecution akin to a religious crusade.
Many had died as a result. A rigid and repressive code of
laws now regulated the existence of those remaining,
excluding known Deryni from many occupations and barring
them from holding public office or even owning property
above a certain value, under pain of fines, imprisonment, or
worse. Most odious of all was to be discovered using one's
powers, even with the most benign of intentions, for such
folly was apt to trigger a killing rampage by frightened and
irate humans—an act given legitimacy by human law.
With care and cunning, such laws could be
circumvented, as all the members of the Camberian Council
were well aware, but even those who lived beyond the
borders of Gwynedd mostly maintained a low profile, for
magic could make one a target as well as giving one a tool or
weapon. Those resident within Gwynedd were extremely
careful. Of the seven members of the Council, only Sief had
managed to carve out a secure public position within
Gwynedd itself, at the king's court in Rhemuth, as had his
family for many generations. Seisyll, likewise, had achieved
modest prominence among the king's courtiers, though he
and his extended family lived outside the capital. Neither
was known to be Deryni.
Michon, for his part, kept mostly to his modest holdings
far to the west, though still within Gwynedd, only venturing

to court when duty required: Twelfth Night, always, and
usually several more times each year, when the king
summoned various of his vassals to attend him. The others,
through choice or circumstances, dwelt outside Gwynedd's
borders, where those of their kind could live more openly,
though even they were circumspect. Barrett, perhaps, had
the greatest freedom, being currently in residence at one of
the great Torenthi universities. The remaining member of the
Council resided not far from where the Council met, but had
sent apologies for non-attendance, being currently occupied
with business concerns away from Portal access.
But six were more than enough to transact informal
business; five of the seven would have been sufficient to
uphold any serious ruling of the Council, though no capital
matter was under discussion on this night. When possible,
the Council met fortnightly, to brief one another on affairs in
the areas where they lived. In the past three decades—longer
than any member's span of service save Sief himself—there
had been no truly serious demand on the Council's powers
of arbitration. Though all of them were well aware how
precariously still stood the plight of Deryni in Gwynedd, slow
gains had been made in the past several generations, and
the future was beginning to look hopeful.
"We should begin," said Seisyll Arilan, when Michon had
led Barrett to his seat between them and taken his own.
"Doubtless, Sief will wish to return to his new son. My
congratulations," he added, inclining his head in the new
father's direction. "Your lady wife is well?"
Sief gave a nod, still looking pleased. "Weakened
somewhat, which is to be expected with an older mother, but
I am hopeful that the child will show more of its paternal
heritage than its maternal. I never forget that she is the
daughter of Lewys ap Norfal."
"You did agree to marry her," Michon pointed out.
"It was that, or have her killed," Sief said lightly, though
all of them were aware that he meant precisely that. "We
could not have trusted Lewys's daughter to a nunnery."
"Yet you have trusted one of her daughters to a nunnery,"
Dominy de Laney reminded him.
"She is my daughter as well," Sief replied. "And each child
is different. "But I would have smothered Jessilde at birth,
had she shown the wayward potentials of her grandfather—
or her mother."
Vivienne rolled her eyes heavenward, then glanced at
Dominy, a mother like herself.
"Let us please have no more talk of smothering babies,"
she said emphatically. "Especially not Deryni babies. It's bad
enough that poisonous priests like Alexander Darby
continue to spread lies about us. Have any of you actually
seen that scurrilous piece of tripe that he published at

Grecotha last year? De Natura Deryniorum, indeed!"
"Scurrilous or not," Sief said, "I hear that it's to become
required reading at every seminary in Gwynedd."
Barrett was nodding, fingers steepled before his sightless
eyes. "It's been making the rounds at Nur Sayyid. Well
written, they say, but utterly lacking in scholarly integrity."
"Lacking in scholarly integrity?" Dominy blurted. "Is that
all you can say? Barrett, the man's a monster!"
"Yes, and he's a monster with a growing following," Seisyll
said sourly. "And I can understand why. I heard him preach
a few months ago. A very persuasive speaker, and a very
dangerous man."
"I've heard him, too," Michon said. "It's a pity that a
timely accident can't be arranged. A fatal one. Actually, it
could. But given the public profile he's already established, I
suppose the authorities would quickly draw the right
conclusion regarding who was responsible, at least in
general terms—and that would spark the very kind of
reprisal that we try to avoid."
Seisyll Arilan gave a disgusted snort. "We should have
taken care of the problem long ago. Now it's too late for the
more obvious solutions."
"It is never too late to stamp out pestiferous vermin,"
Vivienne said coldly. "I'm sure one of my brothers would be
happy to oblige."
"No, we'll not risk losing one of them for the sake of the
likes of him," Michon said.
"Sometimes risks are necessary," Sief pointed out. "You
are aware, I trust, that the bishops already have an eye on
him?"
"For what, chief inquisitor?" Seisyll muttered.
"Actually, for a bishop's miter," Sief replied. "I have that
directly from the Archbishop of Rhemuth. Unless Darby puts
a foot seriously wrong, it will happen, mark my words."
"But—he was only ordained last year," Dominy said,
sounding scandalized.
"True enough," Seisyll said patiently. "But keep in mind
that he is hardly your typical green young priest. He's
something of a scholar, yes—though he draws all the wrong
conclusions. But he also lived in the world before he took
holy orders. He trained as a physician, and they say that he
has all the arrogance that sometimes comes of both
disciplines. That's a dangerous enough combination in a
priest who also hates Deryni. In a bishop—"
He shook his head, heaving a sigh, and the two women
exchanged troubled glances.
"He isn't a bishop yet," Michon said, in a darkling tone
that suggested the matter might not be the foregone

conclusion everyone else was assuming.
Sief shot him a sharp glance, but his reply was
unexpectedly mild.
"No, he isn't. And it won't happen tomorrow, or even next
week. But whatever happens to Alexander Darby, there must
be no trail that leads back to any of us. Just keep that in
mind."
Michon gave a noncommittal shrug, and Sief went on.
"In the meantime, we have more immediate matters to
discuss. I gather that all of you are now acquainted with the
recommendation regarding the young Duke of Corwyn?"
He jutted his chin toward the document lying between
Seisyll and Vivienne, who both glanced at it with some
distaste.
"He isn't the duke yet," the latter said, looking faintly
disapproving. "Not until he turns twenty-five, and has
proven his loyalty to Donal of Gwynedd." Her fair brow
furrowed. "Are we really proposing that he be fostered to the
Duc du Joux? And would the king allow him to go?"
"I believe he could be persuaded," Sief replied. "And what
better haven for a known Deryni who is destined for a ducal
coronet in Gwynedd?"
"It's true," Seisyll agreed. "Besides, Gwynedd has no other
Deryni of high rank—and the current Duc du Joux has
spent a lifetime cultivating the perception that he is the most
harmless of Deryni. He would pass that survival skill to
young Ahern—as he did to Morian ap Lewys," he added, with
a nod to Sief. "I daresay that your wife's brother would not
be where he is today, a trusted officer of the Crown of
Gwynedd, if he had not learned to be circumspect regarding
what he is."
"Morian also has his father's intelligence and gifts,"
Michon pointed out. "Say what you like about Lewys ap
Norfal, but he was one of our best and brightest—alas,
lacking in self-restraint."
"Are you suggesting that young Ahern de Corwyn is
similarly gifted?" Sief asked.
Michon shrugged. "I do not know. Stevana de Corwyn was
very much cast in the mold of her father and grandfather.
Keryell went against our instructions in seizing her, in
marrying her by force, but he, too, carries a strong bloodline.
Once Ahern has come into his inheritance, I would hope to
see him spend some time at Nur Sayyid, perhaps—or even at
Rhanamé or at Djellarda with the Knights of the Anvil. But
he is only eleven now. Time enough for that."
"Indeed," Barrett said. "Where is he now?"
"Back in Coroth, since Twelfth Night," Michon replied.
"Keryell sent him and his sisters to the Orsal's court for
several years after their mother died. You'll recall that

Sobbon is cousin-kin to Keryell's mother. Among all those
von Horthy children, I doubt Sobbon much noticed three
extras."
"Was there not a prior marriage," Dominy said
thoughtfully, "and a son by that marriage?"
"Cynfyn," Vivienne supplied promptly. "His mother was a
daughter of one of the Torenthi dukes. But he died young,
leaving Keryell without an heir—a riding mishap, while
returning from his knighting."
"Which was what impelled Keryell to go seeking a new
bride and a new heir," Michon supplied, shaking his head.
"Unfortunately for us, his loss coincided with the passing of
Stevana's grandfather, Duke Stiofan—and the rest, as they
say, is history."
"What of the daughters?" Vivienne asked, a frown
furrowing her fair brow.
Seisyll shrugged. "After Ahern, the eldest—Alyce is her
name—is heiress presumptive to Corwyn—though I'm sure
that Keryell has set aside dower lands for her, in her own
right. Her brother will be the next duke, when he turns
twenty-five."
"Unless, like Keryell's previous heir, he suffers a fatal
mishap," Barrett pointed out. "These things do happen."
"Aye, of course they do," Seisyll said. "Which is why the
king will have a say in whom she—and her sister, too—
eventually wed. He will not gamble with the fate of a duchy
so rich as Corwyn, in case Ahern should not inherit." He
swept them with his gaze. "This means that the king must
approve their eventual marriages—which eliminates any
suitor from Torenth, for Donal would never consent to
Corwyn lands passing into Torenthi control. One of the
Forcinn states, perhaps."
"He could always pack them off to a convent," Sief
murmured.
Dominy glanced at him frostily. "With your Jessilde,
Sief?"
"It was her choice," Sief shot back.
"As if you gave her any other!"
"Peace!" Seisyll interjected. "We have often done things we
would rather not have done. Never forget that we serve a
higher cause than our own desires."
His admonition left a tense silence in its wake, only lifting
as Michon cleared his throat.
"On a more constructive note, I suggest that we return to
the recommendation regarding young Ahem," he said. "His
position, when he comes of age, will be of immense
importance— but only if he can, indeed, convince the king
that he is worthy to take up the title of his great-

grandfather."
"And pray that it no more passes through the female
line," Seisyll muttered. "I, for one, shall be greatly relieved
when he's grown and married and has an heir. At least
Stevana had a boy, God rest her, and blood is blood...."

Chapter 1
"Is it not a grief unto death,
when a companion and friend is turned to an enemy?" ECCLESIASTICUS 37:2

F

AR from where the Camberian Council sat in secret session,
crafting their careful, deliberate plans for the future of their
race, the wife of one of its members lay propped amid the
pillows of their curtained and canopied bed and waited for
the nurse to bring her infant son for feeding. Two days after
his birth, Lady Jessamy MacAthan was feeling far stronger,
but both the pregnancy and the delivery of this latest bairn
had taken more out of her than any of her previous children,
even the stillborn ones.
Of course, she was older than when she had birthed any
of the others—past forty now—and with a growing history of
miscarriages and stillbirths. She had not even been certain
she could conceive again, much less carry a child to term.
But this child was important, destined for a secret but
very special role in the future unfolding for Gwynedd and its
kings to come. It was too soon to tell precisely what young
Krispin's magical potential would prove to be, but his
parentage ensured that he would be no ordinary boy.
The nursery door opened, and Mistress Anjelica brought
in the fretting, wiggling bundle hat was her son, shushing
and cooing over him as she laid him in his mother's arms.
"He's very hungry, milady," the woman said, as Jessamy
put him to her breast.
"Yes, I can see that," Jessamy replied, smiling. "And
greedy, too. He's like a wee limpet. Thank heaven he hasn't
any teeth! But you needn't sit with me. I know you must
have things that need doing. Are the girls asleep?"
"Yes, milady."
"Good. I'll call you when we're finished."
She readjusted the child in the hollow of her arm and
settled back to let him feed as the nurse retired, allowing the
sweet lethargy of his suckling to drift her into idle
remembrance, wondering what Sief would say, if he were
ever to penetrate past her shields to learn the truth—though
Jessamy would resist him to the death, were he ever to try.
She had never wanted or intended to marry Sief, who was
sixteen years her senior. But her mother had died when she
was but ten, and the loss of her father the following year had
left her in the hands of guardians who insisted on the
match: powerful Deryni, who had feared what Lewys ap
Norfal's daughter might become, and had sought to minimize

the danger by seeing her safely wed to one of their own.
Though she had never come to regard Sief with more than
resigned acceptance, she loved the children he had given
her; and she had learned to live with the arrangement
because she must, and to wear the façade of a dutiful wife,
because outward compliance allowed her at least an illusion
of freedom here at the court of Gwynedd—if only Sief knew
how free. Her love of her children was one of the honest
things about her life, as was her affection for the queens she
had served here in Rhemuth for the past thirty years.
By now, memories of any other home had mostly receded
to a distant blur, dangerous though it was to be Deryni in
Rhemuth. Even before Rhemuth, her parents had never
stayed long in one place, lest their Deryni nature be
discovered—and Lewys ap Norfal had never been good at
hiding what he was for long. Had they lived in Gwynedd
those early years, she now thought it unlikely that Lewys
would have survived long enough to sire any children. Even
so, he had been notorious among his own kind, and had met
his end attempting magic usually deemed impossible, even
among the most accomplished of their race.
Putting an end to that nomad existence, Sief had brought
her to Gwynedd's capital immediately after their hurried
marriage, giving the care of his frightened child-bride into
the hands of the king's daughter-in-law, the gentle and
sensitive Princess Dulchesse, who had been the wife of thenCrown Prince Donal Blaine Haldane.
That pairing, at least, had prospered, for the two women
had liked one another from the start. Dulchesse, but oneand-twenty herself and already six years married, had yet to
give her husband an heir, but she had gladly taken the
orphaned Jessamy under her wing and assumed the role of
elder sister and surrogate mother, giving her the fierce
protection of her royal station as the still-hopeful mother of
kings. Indeed, in all but name, the princess had been
functioning as Gwynedd's queen for all her married life; for
Roisian of Meara, King Malcolm's queen, had withdrawn to a
convent the same year Dulchesse came to court. The rift had
come the previous year, after Malcolm was obliged to lead an
expedition into rebellious Meara and execute several
members of Roisian's family. One of them had been Roisian's
twin sister.
Alas for Sief, placing his young bride in the household of
the crown princess had not turned out at all as he expected;
but by the time he realized that he had become the victim of
feminine solidarity, it was too late to change his mind.
"You may be certain that I shall school her to a wife you
may be proud of, my lord," Dulchesse had told the
disbelieving Sief, on learning that he planned to allow
Jessamy but a year's grace before consummating their
marriage, "but you shall not touch her until her fourteenth
birthday. She's but a child. Give her the chance to finish

growing up."
"Your Highness, she is a woman grown," Sief had
protested. "She has begun her monthly courses—"
"Yes, and if she should conceive so young, you are apt to
lose, both wife and child. You shall wait."
"Your Highness-"
"Must I ask the king to tell you this?" she retorted,
stamping her little foot.
Before such fierce determination, Sief had been left with
no recourse but to bow before the wishes of his future
queen.
Accordingly, Jessamy had been allowed to spend those
stolen days of extended girlhood as a pampered pet of the
princess's household, acquiring the skills and graces
expected of a knight's lady and carefully beginning to craft
the façade that she hoped would protect her in the future.
For Sief had warned her, on that numb journey from Coroth,
that her very life would be in danger, were it to be discovered
at court that she was Deryni.
"The king will guess," he had told her. "I know he has
surmised what I am, though we have never spoken of it
openly. But others will not be so tolerant, should they even
suspect what we are."
"If it is so dangerous," she had replied, "then why do you
abide in Rhemuth?"
"Because my work is there."
When he did not elaborate, she had dared to lift her chin
to him in faint challenge.
"Did they order you to serve the king?"
His cold appraisal in response had caused her to drop her
gaze nervously, pretending profound interest in a strand of
her pony's mane.
"Jessamy, I shall say this only once," he had finally said
in a very low voice. "I know that your father set certain
controls in place to protect you, as I—and others—have also
done. But to protect you fully would be to leave you helpless.
"Therefore, I must trust you in this, and trust in your
good sense and the training you have received. I know it was
not your wish to marry me, but I cannot think that you
resent that enough to wish me dead, and yourself as well—
which would very likely be the outcome, were we discovered.
You know that I tell you only the truth. This is for your
protection as well as my own."
Indeed, there could be no doubt that he did speak the
truth—her powers confirmed that—and it never, ever
occurred to her to betray him, little though she cared for her
situation. Nor was she ever tempted to unmask any of the
other Deryni who passed through the court from time to

time— though, as her affection for the crown princess
grew, she came to realize that she would act against even
her own kind, should they pose any danger to the royal
family.
But for better or for worse, most of the other Deryni she
detected were old acquaintances of her father, a few of whom
had even been present in Coroth on that fateful night.
Instinctively, she gave them wide berth. The ones who came
to worry her far more were the ones she could not detect.
Recognition of this deficiency in her abilities made her
determined to rectify it, though she dared not go to Sief for
the training she knew she needed. Fortunately, her studies
with her father had been sufficiently advanced that she was
able to shield her true intentions from Sief and begin
formulating her own plans for the future, though she knew
that she needed to know more. Unfortunately, she was still a
child, albeit an exceedingly well-educated one for her age
and sex. But at least Sief mostly left her alone for those next
three years.
Once she had settled into the routine of the royal
household, she had begun looking for ways to further her
education—at least the conventional part of it. When she let
it be known that she possessed a fair copy hand and read
and spoke several classical languages, she soon found
herself being summoned to the royal library to assist in
cataloging the king's manuscript collection. There she came
to the especial attention of Father Mungo, the aged chaplain
to the royal household, who was taken with her learning and
her willingness to learn (and most assuredly did not know
that she was Deryni), and soon began giving her private
tutorials.
She shortly discovered that both the king and the crown
prince frequented the library on a regular basis—and
thereby gained permission to spend time there whenever her
duties permitted. Further honing of her esoteric talents
would have to wait until she could figure out a way to gain
access to teachers, or at least to texts, but in the meantime,
Father Mungo's lessons and her own explorations in the
royal library filled the time and gave her more tools for later
on.
But she had known that her reprieve must end. On the
day of her fourteenth birthday, on a sunny morning in early
autumn, she was obliged to stand with Sief before the
Archbishop of Rhemuth and reaffirm her marriage vows, in
the presence of Malcolm and his new queen, the Lady Síle,
Donal and Dulchesse, and all the royal household, for Sief
was well regarded at court, and all agreed that he had shown
remarkable forbearance in waiting three years for his bride.
Reassured by Dulchesse, and gently briefed regarding what
to expect when Sief finally came to her bed, Jessamy had
endured her wedding night with reasonable grace.
She had conceived within months, shortly after the new

queen was delivered of a prince christened Richard. Her
own firstborn, a boy also named Sief, would have been a
playmate for the new prince, but the infant died hardly a
week after birth. Jessamy had not yet turned fifteen.
More pregnancies had followed at barely two-year
intervals after that: a succession of mostly healthy girls,
stillborn boys, and early miscarriages. The ones who did not
survive were allowed burial in a corner of the royal crypt, for
the childless Dulchesse began to regard them as the children
she would never have. Queen Síle had also come to mourn
Jessamy's losses—and Dulchesse's barrenness—and buried
several children of her own, in time. The three women had
visited the little graves regularly until Queen Síle's death, the
same year as King Malcolm's. Dulchesse, finally queen at
last, had died but two years ago. Now Jessamy laid flowers
on the other women's graves as well as those of the children,
sometimes in the company of the new queen, Richeldis, who
had quickly borne King Donal his long-awaited heir.
For Jessamy herself, there had been only a few
pregnancies after the birth of Jesiana, her nine-year-old, and
only one brought to term until Krispin: yet another girl, now
four, called Seffira, whom Jessamy loved dearly. Though Sief
was mostly indifferent to his daughters, his desire for a son
was still strong, and he continued to visit her bed on a
tiresomely regular basis, despite the apparent waning of her
fertility. Sometimes she wondered whether her own
antipathy had kept her from quickening—especially when
this latest child had been so easy to conceive. Young Krispin,
however, had been greatly desired—though not in the sense
that her husband supposed.
His very begetting had been profoundly different from any
of the others—no resentful and resigned yielding to marital
duty, but welcome fruit of a well-planned series of quick,
focused couplings that were timed to the most propitious few
days of her monthly cycle, accomplished quite
dispassionately amid briefly lifted skirts in a shadowed
upper corridor of the castle, where others rarely went—or
bent over a library table, or braced against a hay bale far at
the back of the royal stables, surrounded by the warm,
dusty fragrance of lazing horses. Her pulse quickened at the
very thought of those days, though it was the daring of what
she had done rather than lust that excited her.
Within days she had known she was with child, and
thought she could pinpoint exactly when conception had
occurred, though she let Sief think that it had come of their
usual, more conventional conjugal encounters. The memory
stirred a pleasant aching in her loins, quite apart from the
soreness after birth, intensified by the sweet suckling of the
babe at her breast.
A tap at the room's inner door announced the intrusion of
the babe's nurse, white-coifed head ducking in apology as
she eased into the light of the candles burning beside the

curtained bed.
"You have a visitor, milady," the woman said. The king
has come to pay his respects. Shall I take the baby?"
"No, show him in," Jessamy replied. "Then leave us."
"Alone, milady?" Anjelica said, looking faintly scandalized.
"Anjelica, he's the king."
"Yes, milady."
The woman withdrew dutifully, unaware that her
compliance had been encouraged by Jessamy's deft
reinforcement. Very shortly, the king peered around the door
and then entered, closing the door behind him and grinning.
Jessamy smiled in return, inclining her head over the baby's
in as much of a bow as could be managed from a mostly
reclining position. As she looked up, she saw a flicker of
pleased amusement kindle behind the clear gray eyes.
He did not look his age, though she knew that she looked
hers, especially after the rigors of late pregnancy and
childbirth—and she, more than a decade his junior. Now
past fifty, Donal Blaine Aidan Cinhil was still the epitome of
Haldane comeliness, fit and dashing in his scarlet hunting
leathers. Gold embroidery of a coronet circled the crown of
his scarlet hunting cap, and a white plume curled rakishly
over one eye, caught in place with a jeweled brooch. While
his close-clipped beard and his moustache were acquiring
decided speckles of gray, hardly a trace of silver threaded his
black hair—unlike her own once-dark tresses. The loosely
plaited braid tumbling over one shoulder was decidedly
piebald.
He took off his cap as he came farther into the room,
tossing it onto a chest at the foot of the great bed with easy
grace. He had been born in the halcyon years shortly
following Gwynedd's costly victory at Killingford in 1025, the
only surviving son of Malcolm Haldane and Roisian of
Meara, whose marriage was to have cemented a lasting
peace between the two lands. Instead, it had spawned a new
dispute regarding the Mearan succession—and launched the
first in an ongoing series of Haldane military incursions back
into Meara.
The succession, even in Gwynedd, had remained
precarious in the years that followed, for Donal was the only
male heir Malcolm had produced by his first marriage,
despite several children by assorted mistresses, the known
ones legitimated shortly before his death but without
dynastic rights. Donal's half-siblings had made good
marriages and served him loyally, and Malcolm's second
marriage to Queen Síle had produced another true-born
prince in Duke Richard— Donal's heir presumptive until the
birth of Prince Brion, little though Richard aspired to the
crown. Though trained from birth to rule after Donal, if need
be, none had rejoiced more than he when, within a year of

his brother's new nuptials, Queen Richeldis had
presented Donal with his long-awaited son: Prince Brion
Donal Cinhil Urien Haldane, born the previous June.
"Good evening, Sire," Jessamy said to the father of that
prince, as he moved closer beside the bed. "How fares the
son and heir?"
"He flourishes," Donal replied, smiling. "When I put a
sword in his hand, he doesn't want to let go. I expect he will
be walking soon. He pulls himself up already. And how fares
your son and heir?"
"He suckles well. He knows to reach out for what he
wants. His father has reason to be proud of him."
"May I see him?" Donal asked, craning for a closer look.
"Of course."
Gathering the infant's blankets around him, and carefully
supporting the tiny head, Jessamy held out the bundle to
the king, who took the babe in the crook of his arm and
proceeded to inspect him thoroughly.
"He appears to have the correct number of fingers and
toes and other appendages," Donal declared. "And those are
warrior's hands," he added, letting the infant seize one of his
fingers and convey it to the tiny rosebud mouth. "He will be
a fitting companion for a prince."
"One had hoped that would be the case," Jessamy agreed
good-naturedly.
"Brothers—that's what they'll be," came the reply. "He's
perfect. His hair will be like yours, I think," Donal went on,
gently cupping the child's downy head. "But those are not
your eyes, or Sief’s."
"No," was all the child's mother replied.
Chuckling softly, Donal let himself sit on the edge of the
bed, and was carefully giving the child back into its mother's
keeping when the bedroom door opened and Sief entered.
"Ah, and here's the proud father now," Donal said,
twisting around to greet the newcomer. "I'd come to
congratulate you, Sief, and to inspect the new bairn. And to
cheer the mother in her childbed, if the truth be known. My
queen tells me that a new mother appreciates such things.
Not that she speaks to me overmuch, of late. The morning
sickness is a trial she would liefer have foregone for a few
more months."
Sief found himself smiling dutifully in response to the
king's boyish grin, though he could not say why he found it
unsettling to find Donal here.
They had long been friends beyond mere courtier and
prince. He had served Donal Haldane for most of his life—
had been assigned by King Malcolm as the prince's first aide,
when Sief was a new-made knight and Donal but a lad of

ten—and been his confidant and brother-in-arms through
many a campaign and court intrigue. It had taken most of a
decade for the young prince to guess that Sief was Deryni.
By then, Sief had come to realize that Donal possessed
certain powers of his own that were somewhat similar,
somehow related to his kingship. Malcolm had possessed
them as well, and perhaps had also recognized Sief for what
he was, though they had never spoken of it.
Sief had never spoken of it to the Council, either, though
privately he had intimated to Donal that certain of his not
inconsiderable powers were at the prince's service. After all,
part of the reason for the Council's very existence—and for
Sief’s placement in the royal household—was to safeguard
the Haldane line on the throne of Gwynedd; for the Haldanes
knew, as other humans did not, that the Deryni, properly
ruled, posed little threat to the human population.
In practice, Sief’s direct service to the king as a Deryni
had been limited, and extremely discreet. Those of his race
were able to determine when a person was lying—a talent of
undoubted use to a king. In addition, a trained Deryni could
usually compel disclosures when a person attempted simply
to tell part of the truth, or to withhold it. With care, the
memories of a person subjected to such attentions could
even be blurred to hide what had been done—though such
investigations were always carried out in private. The court
was only aware that Sir Sief MacAthan was an extremely
skilled interrogator. More often, he merely stood at the king's
side and observed, only later reporting on the veracity of
what had been said.
Over the years, such attention to nuance of truth and
falsehood had become second-nature when in the king's
presence. Why, then, were Sief’s senses suddenly all atingle?
Surely it was not at the prospect that the queen was once
again with child.
"Then, the palace gossip is correct," Sief said tentatively.
"Palace gossip," Donal said, standing up with fists set to
hips. "Surety you don't pay any mind to that.'"
"I do, when it may pertain to the welfare of the kingdom,
Sire," Sief replied. "Prince Brion is still shy of his first
birthday. It is still very early for a new pregnancy for the
queen. Self-restraint, my lord," he added, trying not to sound
self-righteous.
"A king needs an heir and a spare," Donal said breezily,
"and good men to guard them and guide them as they grow.
You know the heartache of losing sons, Sief. I must make
certain that Brion has brothers."
Suddenly Sief caught just a flicker of subtle evasion: not
a lie, but a truth not fully divulged. To his consternation, it
sparked a dread possibility that had never come to mind
before, but which might make sense of several things in the
year since the prince's birth; but he put such thoughts aside

as he forced an uneasy chuckle.
"Just now," Sief said, "methinks Prince Brion needs his
mother more than he needs brothers. At least have a care for
her, Sire. People would talk, were you to take a third queen."
Donal shrugged, and his next words again left Sief with
the impression that all was not being said.
"People will always talk about kings. I little care, so long
as the succession is secure."
"There is Duke Richard, if all else were to fail," Sief
pointed out.
"True enough. But my brother Richard aspires to a
warrior's fame—and he has the sheer ability to excel at it. He
little cares for the finer diplomacies of the council chamber—
or even of marriage, at least thus far," Donal added with a
shrug. "Besides that, he is the fruit of my father's loins; not
mine."
"Aye, but blood is blood, Sire," Sief said, echoing the
words of the Council not an hour earlier. "Richard is as
much a Haldane as you or the new prince."
He thought he saw Jessamy stiffen slightly at those
words, though her gray-streaked head was bowed over the
infant in her arms.
"Indeed," the king said mildly. "I trust you aren't
presuming to instruct me in my duties as a husband?"
Sief raised a placating hand, hesitant to even consider
pursuing the subject; but Donal's manner seemed
increasingly evasive, making Sief wonder whether he had,
indeed, stumbled on something he would be happier not
knowing.
He ventured a cautious probe, but Donal was tightshuttered against even a surface reading. That was hardly
unusual for the king, for Sief had long ago realized that
Donal had shields as good as any Deryni’s—though whether
they would stand up to any serious attempt to force them
remained an unknown question. What alarmed him was that
Jessamy likewise had retreated behind shields far stronger
than he had believed her to possess.
Chilled, he turned to look at her sharply—and caught just
a hint of something in her eyes....
With a little sob, she turned away from him in their bed,
shielding the infant Krispin behind her body. In that instant,
in an almost blinding flash of insight, Sief knew what more
she was hiding—and Donal, as well.
"You!" He whirled on the king, fury and betrayal in his
dark glare. "He's yours, isn't he? You've made me a cuckold!
Was it here, in this very bed?"
Even as he said it, his clenched fist lifted and he lashed
out with his powers, fully aware that he was threatening

violence against the king to whom he had sworn fealty—
and not caring, in his rage. To his utter astonishment, Donal
Blaine Haldane answered with like force: potent and
altogether too focused for what Sief had always imagined
was the limit of the king's power. Before he could pull back,
power slammed against his own closing shields and
reverberated to the deepest core of his being, forcing a
breach and starting a tear in his defenses that gaped ever
wider, the more he tried to seal it.
With that realization came fear and pain—more pain than
he had ever experienced in his life or even imagined he could
feel. It began in his head, exploding behind his eyes, but
quickly ripped downward to center in his chest, like a giant
fist closing on his heart. At the same time, he felt his limbs
going numb, losing all sensation as his legs collapsed under
him and his arms flailed like the arms of a marionette with
its strings cut. Through blurring vision, he could just see
Donal, right hand thrust between them with the fingers
splayed in a warding-off gesture, and Donal's lips moving in
words whose sense Sief could only barely comprehend.
"Listen to me, Sief!" Donal's urgent plea only barely
penetrated the scarlet agony blurring his vision. "Don't make
me kill you! I need the boy. I need you!"
Lies!" Sief managed to whisper from between gritted teeth,
as the child— Donal's bastard!—started wailing. "Faithless,
forsworn whoreson! I'll mind-rip you!—kill the bastard!—kill.
. . you . . . !"
Enraged beyond reason, Sief tried again to launch a
counter-attack against this man—his king!—who had
betrayed him, bucking upward from his slumped position
and dragging himself to hands and knees, clawing a hand
upward to help him focus—but to no avail. To his horror and
dismay, the other's might was crushing him down,
smothering the life from him—but he was too proud to yield,
and too stubborn. All his life he had been so careful in how
he used his powers, taken such pride in his abilities. He had
always known that the Haldanes had powers that were akin
to his own, but now, in extremis, he had not the strength or
the abandon to turn his own powers to the wanton response
that might have saved him.
He could feel his mind ripping under the onslaught of an
attack he wondered if Donal even comprehended. (Where
had he gotten such power, and the knowledge of how to use
it?)
Hardly a whimper could he manage to force past his
lips— nor could it have been heard, over the child's
bawling!—but he could feel himself being dragged toward
oblivion, all too aware that the damage only worsened as he
struggled—and he couldn't not struggle! But somehow he
had known, from that first flare of Donal's mind against his
own, that there was neither any turning back nor any
defense against this.

His last coherent thought, just before the darkness
claimed him, was regret that he would leave no son from this
life—for Krispin was Donal's son.
Yet still he tried to cling to that final image of the infant's
puckered little face before his vision—the son that should
have been his—as pain dragged him into an ever-darkening
spiral downward and the last vestiges of awareness trickled
into oblivion.

Chapter 2
"Remove not the ancient landmark,
which thy fathers have set."
-PROVERBS 22:28

T

HE king could feel the pulse pounding in his temples as he
made his outstretched fist unclench, face averted from the
sight of his friend sinking into death, but he knew that he
had had no choice, once the deception was discovered.
He had feared it might end this way if Sief found out. He
knew Sief’s jealousy, and something of the chilly relationship
between Sief and Jessamy; he well remembered when
Jessamy had arrived at court as Sief’s reluctant child-bride.
That had been over thirty years ago. It had been clear
from the beginning that the two cared little for one another,
though in time they appeared to have achieved a reasonable
coexistence. Sief had shown a decided aptitude for
diplomatic work, and had proven himself increasingly
invaluable to both Donal and his father; and Jessamy, when
she was not attending on a succession of Gwynedd's queens,
had spent much of her time in child-bearing—though Donal
knew that she had never departed from her marriage vows
before Donal approached her.
Donal himself could not say the same, though he had told
himself that it was different for men, and for kings, and that
his first queen's failure to provide an heir justified his
occasional trysts with other ladies of the court—though
never, until Jessamy, with the wife of a friend. The several
children that had come of such liaisons at least reassured
him of his own virility, but there had been no true-born heir
until the passing of Queen Dulchesse had allowed his
remarriage with the Princess Richeldis, followed by the
arrival of Prince Brion.
And none too soon, for Donal was no longer young. The
child crown prince was thriving, and Donal was honestly
enamoured of his new wife, but a king in his fifties might not
live to see his heir grown to manhood—even an heir with the
potential to wield the mystical powers of the Haldane royal
line.
Unless, of course, that heir had a powerful protector: a
Deryni protector. The very notion was dangerous—and
Donal had never considered Sief himself, who might have
other aspirations than merely to serve his king and, besides,
was no younger than Donal. But what if a Deryni could be
found who was bound to the young prince from a very early
age? What if the protector himself was a Haldane, as well as
carrying the powerful Deryni bloodline? It meant, of course,
that such a child would require a Deryni mother....
It could be done—and had been done. Donal told himself

that it had been no true betrayal of Sief, for he had not
taken Sief s wife out of lust or even covetous desire; it had
been an affair of state, in the truest sense of the word.
But not in Sief’s eyes. Whatever his original intentions in
marrying Jessamy, Sief would have regarded royal poaching
on his marital prerogatives as, at very least, a breach of the
feudal oaths that he and the king had exchanged. Donal
regretted that.
Jessamy, too, had betrayed Sief, though undoubtedly for
very different reasons than Donal's. At least on some level,
Donal sensed that she had seen this service to the king as
one that she herself could render to the Crown of Gwynedd,
beyond the reach of whatever arrangement had bound her to
Sief other than her marriage vows. One day, when the shock
of what he had just done was behind them, he would ask her
what hold Sief had had over her. He suspected that it had
something to do with both of them being Deryni, though he
wasn't sure.
But from childhood, he had surmised what Sief was—
though he couldn't explain just how he had known—and he
had sensed Jessamy's true nature soon after she arrived at
court. In neither case did he feel either frightened or
apprehensive, though he also took particular care not to let
anyone else know, especially not any of the priests who
frequented the court. Donal's father had never been
particularly forthcoming about what it was that made the
Haldanes so special, that they could wield some of the
powers usually only accessible to Deryni. But he had made it
clear that this was part of the Divine Right that made the
Haldanes kings of Gwynedd, and that justified extraordinary
measures to protect said kingship. So far, Donal Haldane
had committed both adultery and murder to keep it.
"Is he—dead?" came Jessamy's whispered question,
putting an end to the tumble of speculation that
momentarily had held the king apart from his act.
Donal let his eyes refocus and glanced quickly around
him. He had sunk to one knee beside the big bed, at the foot
of which Sief sprawled motionless, apparently not breathing.
Jessamy was lifting her head from over the infant clutched
tight to her breast, her face white and bloodless as she
craned forward to see. Krispin had stopped crying.
"Donal? Is he ... ?"
"I think so," the king said, a little sharply. He crawled on
hands and knees to press his fingertips to the side of Sief's
neck, just beneath the ear, but he could feel no pulse. The
eyes were closed, and when Donal peeled back one eyelid,
the pupil was fixed and dilated. But he had already known,
in a way that had something to do with his Haldane
kingship, that Sief’s essence was fled beyond retrieving, the
quick mind stilled forever.
"Jesu, I didn't mean for this to happen," Donal whispered,

sinking back onto his heels. "But he'd guessed the truth.
He turned on me. He was beyond reasoning."
"I know," Jessamy said softly, burying her face against
the blanket wrapped around her child—their child.
"We shall say that it was his heart," Donal said dully,
dragging himself upright against the side of the bed. "No one
else need know otherwise. His heart stopped. That is the
ultimate cause of all death, after all."
Jessamy slowly raised her head to look at him.
"You must not allow any of your nobles to inspect the
body," she said.
At his questioning look, she went on.
"There are Deryni in your household whom you do not
know. What you have just done—leaves certain signs that
can be read by those who know how."
"There are other Deryni in my household!" Donal
repeated, incredulous. "Besides yourselves. And you did not
tell me?"
"I was not permitted to tell you," she replied. "I was
physically incapable of telling you. I still cannot tell you
certain things."
The king's face went even more ashen, if that were
possible, but indignant question was already stirring in his
eyes.
"They mean you no harm, Sire," she whispered, still
clutching the child to her breast. "There are ... those who
have long been charged to watch over the House of Haldane,
and to report back to ... superiors. I am bound not to reveal
their identities. They—have other obligations as well, an
agenda of their own, which Sief served. It was they who
required my marriage with him, after my father passed
away."
Donal simply stared at her for a long moment, finally
bestirring himself to draw a deep breath.
"Other Deryni," he murmured. "Why did it not occur to
me before?"
When she said nothing, he slowly got to his feet, his gaze
drifting back to Sief’s body.
"Is your brother one of them?" he said quietly, after a
pause.
"You know what he is, Sire," she replied. "And you know
that he has always served you faithfully. More than that I
may not tell you."
"How dare—" He had started to answer her sharply, but
broke off and took a deep breath, glancing again at Sief.
"Jessamy," he whispered very softly, "you must help me
in this. What we have done, we have done for the guarding of

Gwynedd. But my guarding is incomplete, if I do not
know as many of the dangers as possible. I must ask you
again: What other Deryni are here at court?"
"I cannot tell you," she said, very softly. "I wish that I
could—but I cannot."
She was silently weeping by the time Donal summoned
help and men came running from outside Sief MacAthan's
suite of rooms, in the part of the castle where the king's
most trusted advisors were privileged to lodge. At that time,
only the king himself was to know that the widow's tears
were tears of relief, to be free at last of Sief’s long tyranny.

T

HE Camberian Council learned of Sief’s death the following
day, shortly after the news began to disseminate within the
court at Rhemuth, for Seisyll Arilan attended on the court
nearly every morning. Seisyll had been surprised to hear it,
since Sief had seemed in good health the previous evening,
but he dutifully set in motion the usual mechanism by
which the Council was summoned outside their normal
schedule of meetings, and continued to gather what further
information he could, until time came for them to meet.
"It seems to have taken everyone by surprise," Seisyll told
his fellow Council members early that evening—now only five
of them, for their missing member had yet to regain Portal
access. "I'm informed that the king's own physician was
summoned immediately, but there was nothing to be done."
"You weren't able to see the body?" Barrett asked.
Seisyll shook his head. "Not yet. There was no way I could
manage it without calling attention to myself. Besides,
they're saying it was his heart. He was about sixty, after all—
the oldest among us."
"But not that old, for one of us," Michon said quietly. "You
and I are hardly a decade younger, Seisyll."
Seissyl merely shrugged as Dominy de Laney cocked her
head in Michon's direction.
"Surely you don't suspect foul play," she said.
"No. It's curious, though, that the king was with him. It
would have been late. Did anyone hear him mention that he
planned to see the king after he left us?"
The others at the table shook their heads.
"That wouldn't signify, if the king came to him,” Barrett
pointed out. "He wouldn't necessarily have known that the
king would seek him out."
"Are we reaching for some connection between the king's
presence and Sief’s death?" Dominy asked. "Because I don't

see any. What motive could there be, if there were? From
all accounts, Sief had an excellent relationship with the
king."
Seisyll nodded. "They had been friends for years. So
had..."
Speculation kindled in the blue-violet eyes as his voice
trailed off, echoed in the expressions that began to animate
the faces of the others with him.
"I see," said Vivienne, "that I am not the only one to
wonder whether we must worry again about Lewys ap
Norfal's daughter."
Dominy shook her head, though the vehemence of her
denial was at odds with her troubled expression. "What
possible worry could there be? Surely you aren't suggesting
that she had a hand in her husband's death?"
"Such things have been known to happen," Vivienne said
dryly.
"Then, it appears that further investigations should be
made," Seisyll replied. "And since I'm the one most regularly
at court, the task obviously falls to me."
"What will you do?" Dominy asked.
"Try again, to have a closer look at the body," Seisyll
replied. 'The funeral will be from the cathedral tomorrow
morning, so he lies tonight in a side chapel there. It is
known we were friends. It would be remiss of me not to pay
my respects."
"The funeral is tomorrow?" Vivienne said. "Does that seem
over-hasty to anyone besides me?"
Seisyll shrugged. "All the more reason to satisfy our
curiosity tonight."
"And if others interrupt your visit?" Vivienne asked. "Even
if others of his friends do not come, the brothers of the
cathedral chapter will keep watch through the night."
"The brothers can be induced to doze at their devotions,"
Seisyll said lightly. "If Michon will accompany me, we can
certainly accomplish what is needful."
Michon inclined his head in agreement, his gray eyes
glinting with faint amusement. "Audacious, as always; but I
shall rise to the challenge."
Dominy de Laney gave a genteel snort, and Barrett raised
one scant eyebrow.
"I suppose it's pointless to tell you to be careful," Vivienne
said sourly.
Even Seisyll chuckled at that, for though Sief’s death left
him and Michon as the Council's senior members, both now
past the half-century mark, the pair owned a long history of
daring exploits on behalf of their race; Vivienne alone would

reckon them reckless.
"Darling Vivienne," Michon said with a tiny, droll smile,
"we are always careful."

L

ATER that night, as the city watch cried the midnight _hour
and most of Rhemuth slept, Sir Seisyll Arilan summoned a
servant with a torch and made his way quietly down the
winding street that led from the castle toward the cathedral.
As a trusted royal courtier, he was often abroad at odd hours
on the king's business, so the occasional guard he passed
gave little response save to salute his rank and ensure that
his passage was uneventful.
As expected, the cathedral was deserted save for a pair of
monks keeping watch beside Sief’s open coffin, there where
it rested on its catafalque before the altar of a side chapel.
Tall candles flanked the coffin, set three to either side, and
the prayers of the kneeling monks whispered in the stillness,
offered up in antiphon. After a glance to assess the situation,
Seisyll drew his servant back into the nave and bade him
kneel in the shadow of a pillar not far from the chapel
entrance.
"Keep watch here, and pray for the soul of Sir Sief
MacAthan," he whispered, also laying a hand on the man's
wrist and applying a compulsion to do just that.
Satisfied that the man would not interfere, Seisyll made
his way silently toward the door to the cathedral sacristy,
which lay in the angle of the nave with the south transept.
The door was locked, but it yielded quickly to his Deryni
touch.
Inside, he closed the door behind him and summoned
handfire to augment the light of the Presence lamp burning
above the tabernacle behind the sacristy's vesting altar. By
their combined light, he could easily make out the design set
into the tessellated pavement covering the center of the floor.
Stepping onto it, he composed his thoughts and focused his
intent, visualizing his destination.
In an eye-blink, he was standing in the Portal outside the
chamber where the Camberian Council met. Michon was
waiting just outside, dressed all in black and looking
uncharacteristically sinister.
"All's well, I take it?" Michon murmured.
Seisyll nodded, also inviting for Michon to step onto the
Portal with him.
"Two monks praying in the chapel where they've put Sief’s
coffin," he replied. "I brought Benjamin to light the way. He's
settled to keep watch outside the chapel while we do what

needs to be done."
Merely grinning, Michon turned his back on Seisyll and
allowed the other to set hands on his shoulders, eyes closing
as he opened his mind to the other's direction. A moment's
vague disorientation as the link was made—and then they
were standing in the still-deserted sacristy at Rhemuth
Cathedral. Quickly the pair glided to the door, scanned
outside, then made their way back among the shadowed
columns to where Seisyll's servant kept watch outside the
mortuary chapel.
Seisyll said nothing as he set a hand on the servant's
shoulder, probing briefly for an update. No one had come,
and the monks had not ceased their chanting.
With a glance at Michon, Seisyll started into the chapel,
making no attempt at stealth as he headed toward one of the
monks, aware that Michon was advancing more silently on
the other while attention was turned toward Seisyll. Within
seconds, both monks nodded deeper in prayer, oblivious to
their surroundings. With a glance back at Benjamin, who
now would intercept anyone heading toward the chapel and
give warning, the two Deryni turned their attention to the
coffin where lay the mortal remains of Sief MacAthan.
He lay silent and pale in his funeral garb, a gauzy veil
drawn across his face. As Michon ran the flat of one palm
above the dead man's chest, Seisyll started to lift the veil for
a closer look. In that instant, a forlorn sob barked across the
length of the chapel from where Benjamin knelt just outside:
his signal that someone was coming.
Hastily Seisyll drew back his hand and crossed himself to
cover the movement, keeping his head bowed, at the same
time sending instructions to the entranced monks to resume
their formal prayers. Michon likewise bowed his head,
withdrawing his hand. Seconds later, several more monks
came into the chapel: obviously the relief for the ones still
kneeling to either side of the coffin, who were blinking in
surprise and a trace of guilt at having dozed at their posts.
No words were exchanged as the monks changed places,
but Seisyll sensed that any attempt to remain longer would
lead to questions best unasked and unanswered. After
crossing himself again, he bowed to the new monks and
headed out of the chapel, Michon silently following. With the
first set of monks loitering in the nave to see where they
would go, the pair had no choice but to leave, beckoning for
Benjamin to join them. Outside, as they followed the
servant's torch back toward the castle, they spoke mind to
mind as they revised their battle plan.
Poor timing, Michon sent.
Aye, I would have preferred a bit more leisure.
There was time to sense a first impression, came Michon's
reply. He did not die easily.

A rebellious heart can be a treacherous thing, Seisyll
answered. Are you hinting that it was something more?
I don’t know. I need a closer look.
Seisyll's violet gaze swept the shadows as they continued
climbing the castle mount. Difficult, he sent after a moment.
They plan to bury him in the cathedral crypt.
At least we'll not have to contend with pious monks,
Michon retorted. And it will take a few days or even weeks to
prepare the tomb.
Risky, still.
But needful, Michon replied. I did not like what I sensed.

Chapter 3
"Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and shall remain in
the tomb."
-JOB 21:32

G

IVEN that the deceased had been one of the king's most
senior ministers, no one thought it unusual that he was
accorded a funeral all but semi-state in its dignity. Indeed,
as a single muffled bell tolled its summons in the cathedral
tower the next morning, a sizeable segment of the court
came to pay their respects to the king's good servant, Sir Sief
MacAthan, cruelly betrayed by a treacherous heart while still
rejoicing in the birth of his long-awaited son.
His widow led the mourners on behalf of that son, along
with three of the dead man's daughters who knelt like stairsteps beside the coffin now closed and covered with a heavy
funeral pall: the two little ones, Jesiana and Seffira, and an
older girl christened Jessilde but now called Sister Iris
Jessilde, whose rainbow-edged white veil and sky-blue robes
proclaimed her a novice nun of the royal Convent of Notre
Dame d'Arc-en-Ciel, just outside Rhemuth.
The fourth and eldest of Sief’s surviving daughters was
not present: Sieffany, who lived many days' ride to the west
with her husband and young family. Contentedly wed to a
son of Michon de Courcy, Sieffany might have heard the
news by now—Jessamy had caught a glimpse of Michon
himself, as she entered the cathedral. But even if Sieffany
knew, her attendance at the funeral would have been far too
dangerous even to consider; for only through Deryni
auspices could she have learned of the event so quickly, and
only by the use of a Portal could she have reached Rhemuth
in time. In the prevailing climate regarding Deryni, it was
best that humans were not reminded that such things even
existed.
That had not deterred some of those now assembling.
From where Jessamy sat behind her daughters, blackgowned and heavily veiled, she was able to single out several
whom she recognized as being friends of her father's, all
those years ago, some undoubtedly come by way of Portal—
little though the rest of the mourners would realize that. She
knew of several Portals in and around Rhemuth. One lay
within the precincts of this very cathedral.
Strangely enough, she found that the presence of these
men no longer frightened her the way it once would have
done. She wondered whether she still frightened them. For
her own part, she found that with Sief’s death had come a
lightening of many of the constraints by which he had bound
her—or by which she had felt herself bound—and her status
as a grieving widow would give her added protection that had

not existed while Sief still lived. Let them think what they
liked—that she was the renegade daughter of a renegade
Deryni—but she would take many secrets to her grave, just
as her husband was taking his secrets to his.
The muffled bell ceased its tolling, the last strike lingering
on the silence. At the thud of a verger's staff on the floor in
the west, the congregation rose as the king's council and
then the king himself entered the cathedral, all of them in
black, the black-clad queen and her ladies also in dutiful
attendance. Following them came the cathedral choristers,
who began the solemn chant of the introit: "Requiem
aeternam dona eis, Domine, et lux perpetua lucent eis. ..."
Then the processional cross and torch-bearers, a thurifer,
and finally the celebrants for the Requiem Mass now
beginning, the archbishop himself to preside.
Jessamy waited until the king's party had reached the
transept crossing before tottering to her feet. Having risen
from childbed to be present, she was content to let observers
think she was weaker than she was, affecting to lean on the
arm of the maid who had accompanied her. She had become
a consummate actress during her long years at court.
Now she played the role of grieving widow as befitted her
dead husband's rank and station, meekly kneeling with her
daughters for their father's Requiem, confident that her
façade of grief would not be broached by any of the other
Deryni present. Indeed, the grief of her daughters was
genuine, in varying degrees, and would reinforce her own
illusion.
Jessilde's was well contained, already being channeled
into the serenity and acceptance come of convent discipline,
though her pretty face within her rainbow-edged veil was
pale and drawn. Seffira, the four-year-old, was hardly old
enough to understand that it was her father who lay in the
coffin before them, but Jesiana, the nine-year-old, wept
inconsolably, for she had been the apple of her father's eye.
When Mass was ended, both Donal and his queen
accompanied the procession down into the cathedral's crypt
as Sief’s coffin was carried to its final resting place, destined
for honored interment in a vault very near the tombs of
Donal's own ancestors—for the king had made it known that
he regarded Sir Sief MacAthan as a friend as well as a loyal
servant of the Crown, worthy to lie near the Haldanes in
death as he had served them in life. The place was also very
near the final resting place of several of Sief’s children—
fitting enough, Jessamy supposed, but it also meant that
she would have to pass his tomb every time she came to visit
the little ones.
In the meantime, in the days until the stonemasons had
finished their preparations, the coffined body would lie atop
the table-like tomb-slab of another long-ago good servant of
the Haldane Crown: Sir Ferrol Howard, slain with King Urien
more than fifty years before at the Battle of Killingford. A

tattered banner from that battle hung above Sir Ferrol's
tomb, honoring his sacrifice, and its edge trailed over the
floral tributes now laid atop the polished oak of Sief’s coffin,
after the pall was removed. Before leaving, Jessamy had
offered lilies on behalf of her absent daughter, and a single
red rose for the infant Krispin, who would never know the
man whose name, but not blood, he bore.
Afterward, up in the cathedral narthex, she and her
daughters lingered briefly to receive condolences from a few
of those who had come to pay their last respects—though
not many showed such fortitude. While mere association
with Deryni no longer carried quite the stigma it once had
done, most deemed it prudent not to attract unwelcome
scrutiny from those less tolerant of such associations.
Archbishop William was known to be one such individual,
though he had chosen not to offend the king by declining to
celebrate Sief’s Requiem Mass; but even the power of a king
might not be enough to protect those who fell into the
archbishop's active disfavor.
Both king and archbishop were standing on the cathedral
steps as Jessamy and her daughters emerged through the
great west door, the queen and her ladies already heading
down to the horses waiting in the square below. Maintaining
a façade of meekness, Jessamy paid her respects to the
archbishop and followed, the king trailing behind with
several retainers when he, too, had taken his leave.

T

HAT night, while Jessamy cradled her infant son and
pondered his future—and hers—and the king likewise
considered what might come of what he had done, two men
of whom both of them had cause to be wary were making
their way back to Rhemuth Cathedral. The pair's mission
required that neither of them be seen, so they came by way
of the Portal in the cathedral's sacristy.
They arrived after the last of the night offices, when the
monks of the cathedral chapter were likely not to be about
again until Matins, several hours hence. The cathedral was
deserted, as they had hoped it would be after the day's
obsequies. Racks of votive candles in the various side
chapels spilled wavering patches of illumination across the
cavernous darkness of the nave as Seisyll Arilan and Michon
de Courcy made their way silently back to the mouth of the
stairwell that led to the royal crypts. There, while Michon
kept watch, Seisyll used his powers to shift the tumblers in
the lock that secured the gate to the stair, stilling any sound
it might have made as they swung it open far enough to slip
through.
Quickly they ghosted down the worn steps, their way now

dimly lit by the faint violet glow of handfire that Seisyll
conjured for that purpose. He kept it small, and shielded it
with his hands as best he could, for brass grilles pierced the
ceiling of the crypt to admit air and light from the nave
above—and would also betray their presence, if anyone
entered the nave and noticed light from below. But some
light they must have to make their way among the tombs to
where Sief’s coffin lay.
Threading their way between the tombs of generations of
dead Haldanes, they came at last to the side vault where
Sief’s coffin awaited proper interment. Here were no ceiling
grilles to betray them, but the scent of the wilting floral
tributes was strong, and Seisyll found himself stifling a
sneeze as he and Michon eased to either side of the coffin.
He was already pulling a pry bar from his belt as Michon
began moving the flowers to one side. They had known the
coffin was sealed, so they had come prepared.
You can put a damping spell on this, while I pry? Seisyll
asked, as Michon laid his hands flat on the coffin's polished
top.
Give me a moment, came Michon's reply.
The pale eyes closed. A slowly released breath triggered a
working trance. Soon a faint, silvery shimmer began to crawl
outward from Michon's hands, gradually covering the lid of
the coffin and then spilling down the sides. After another
slow-drawn breath, Michon opened his eyes, moving his
hands apart but still touching the coffin lid. At his nod, eyes
vaguely unfocused, Seisyll applied his pry bar and began to
work the nails out of the oak.
There was no sound save Seisyll's increasingly labored
breathing as he prised each nail free. Michon collected them
as they were removed, dreamily laying them beside the
flowers on a nearby tomb-slab, keeping the muffling spell
intact until the coffin lid moved under their hands.
Together, he and Seisyll slid the lid partway toward the
foot of the coffin, exposing the shrouded body nearly to the
waist. The waxed linen of the cerecloth had molded itself to
the dead man's profile, and retained something of its outline
as Michon reverently peeled it aside. A whiff of beginning
corruption joined the stink of wilting flowers and the dank
tomb-scent of the vault, and Seisyll drew back a little in
distaste.
You're welcome to go first, he whispered in Michon's mind.
Michon merely gazed on the dead man's face, obviously
still deep in trance. In repose, Sief’s features were sunken
and yellowed, bearing little resemblance to his appearance in
life, but Michon's touch to the dead man's forehead was
gentle. Again his pale eyes closed.
For a long moment, only the gentle whisper of their
breathing stirred the silence of the tomb—until a little gasp

escaped Michon's lips.
“Jesu!" came his breathy exclamation, quickly stifled.
What is it?
Read with me on this, Seisyll, Michon ordered, shifting
back into mindspeech. There isn't a great deal left, but I'm not
liking what little I'm seeing.
Without comment, Seisyll put his repugnance aside and
laid his fingertips beside Michon's on the dead man's
forehead, extending his Deryni senses for a deep reading.
His first impulse was to recoil, for Sief had been dead for
several days, and physical decay had left little in the way of a
matrix to hold his memories to any coherence. But he
mastered his distaste and made himself delve deeper,
following the pathways already broached by Michon's
probe—and began touching on fragments of memory that he
liked no better than Michon had done.
For images from the time of Sief’s death showed
disturbing glimpses of Sief’s wife and her infant son—and
the king's presence, as well—and harsh words exchanged
between the two men, though Seisyll could not pin down the
sense of them.
Far worse was to follow. Harsh words had quickly
escalated beyond mere anger. The clash had never reached
the point of a physical exchange, but the result was just as
deadly—and unexpected. Little to Sief’s credit, he had
started to lash out at the king with his magic—and was
answered by Donal's response in kind, summoning magical
resources of a magnitude they had not dreamed him to
possess.
Very quickly the king's reaction had pressed beyond any
merely physical defense both to rip at Sief’s mind and close a
psychic hand around his heart. Nor had the king relented,
even as the damage went beyond the level of any possible
repair, dragging Sief through an agony that was at once
physical and psychic, down into unconsciousness and then
beyond, into death, until the silver thread was stretched to
the breaking point—and snapped.
Seisyll was gasping as he surfaced from the probe,
turning blank, unfocused eyes on Michon, reeling a little in
backlash from what Sief had suffered.
"That isn't possible," he whispered, lifting shaking hands
to look at them distractedly—and shifting back to
mindspeech. Donal did it? He has the ability to mind-rip one
of our own number? A member of the Council?
Apparently he does, Michon returned. Setting aside the
question of How, the further question is, Why? The presence
of Jessamy, and the fact that she apparently made no effort
to interfere, suggests that she condoned the attack—or at
least had cause to allow it.
Shaking his head, he drew the cerecloth back over Sief’s

face and began pulling the coffin lid back into place,
Seisyll belatedly assisting him. The nails he drove back into
place with his mind, silently, letting his anger and horror
defuse with each one.

Y

OU'RE certain of what you saw?" Dominy asked, stunned,
when Michon had reported back to the Camberian Council
later that night.
"I am certain of what I saw," Michon replied. "I am not
necessarily certain of what it means."
Oisín Adair, their previously absent member, drummed
calloused fingers on the ivory-inlaid table, blue eyes
animated in the darkly handsome face. His eyes were a
startling sapphire hue above a neatly trimmed beard and
somewhat bushy moustache, the night-black hair drawn
back neatly in the braided clout favored by Gwynedd's
mountain folk. By his attire, clad in oxblood riding leathers
and with a whiff of the stable about him, he had come but
lately from the back of a horse.
"It would appear that the canny Donal Haldane has
gained access to the powers anciently attributed to his
Haldane forefathers," he said quietly, the soft burr of the
north softening his words. "Can none of you venture a
reasonable surmise as to who might have helped him?"
"The daughter of Lewys ap Norfal," Vivienne said, venom
in her tone.
"We don't know that," Barrett reminded her. "There is
always the possibility that it was someone else entirely, in
which case, we have a far greater problem on our hands
than we could have imagined—though the thought of
Jessamy following in her father's footsteps is sobering
enough."
"Which 'someone else' did you have in mind, dear
brother?" Dominy asked. "Given that it's unlikely to have
been Sief, that leaves only four other Deryni with regular
access to the court of Gwynedd—and I believe we can
eliminate the two sitting at this table."
"And I point out, in turn, that both of those remaining are
the children of Lewys ap Norfal," Barrett said.
"Yes, and we began grooming Morian ap Lewys well before
his father's death," Seisyll said sharply. 'That was before
some of you were out of leading strings, but I assure you
that our predecessors did not take this responsibility
lightly."
The grudging silence that met this declaration was
broken by Michon clearing his throat.

"It appears I should remind everyone that Morian was
squired to the court of Gwynedd at the age of ten, even
before the death of his father. Never has he put a foot wrong,
in all the years since then. I can, of course, bring him in for
examination, if that is your wish, but I assure you that his
loyalty has never been in question, to the crown or to his
blood."
"I think that none of us question either loyalty," Oisín
said. "Where is he now?"
"In Meara, on the king's business, as he has been for
most of the past year," Seisyll supplied. "In truth, he has
never spent much time at court—or in his sister's company.
I think it highly unlikely that Morian was involved, or even
knew."
"Which brings us back to his sister, who perhaps has had
more access to the king than the rest of us combined,"
Vivienne said coldly.
"That does appear to be the case," Oisín said. "I find it
disturbing that she was present when Donal killed her
husband. There can be no doubt that she is of a powerful
bloodline, whether or not she shares her father's
aberrations. That should have given her the ability to protect
Sief, even from a Haldane. Unless, of course," he added
thoughtfully, "unless there was some other bond between
Jessamy and the king that was stronger than her duty to her
husband, the father of her . . . children…"
These last words fell into a sudden, deathly silence. After
a moment, it was Barrett who dared to voice the suspicion
that had begun to take shape in all their minds.
"It would not be the first time that a king has sired a child
on a woman not his queen," he said. "His father did it. More
than once."
"So has Donal," Seisyll whispered, chilled. "I know of
several others."
"You're suggesting that Krispin MacAthan is actually the
king's bastard," Dominy said flatly, not wanting to believe it.
"I believe we are suggesting," said Oisín, "that the
prospect certainly bears further investigation. If the child is,
indeed, Donal Haldane's by-blow, and Sief found out, I think
we need look no further for a motive for his killing."
"That still doesn't explain how Donal acquired the power
to overcome a fully trained Deryni mage," Vivienne said.
"I think that much is clear, if the rest is true," Barrett
replied. "Jessamy must have helped the king to enable his
full Haldane powers—whether before or after the conception
makes little difference."
"It makes a difference if she did it in the hopes that he
would kill her husband for her," Vivienne pointed out. "She
knew Sief's temper. She must have guessed how he would

react, if he found out her child was not his. I think we
can all imagine his rage when he discovered that his longawaited 'son' was not his son at all."
"Poor Sief," Dominy murmured after a moment. "And he
would have had no inkling that the king had powers to
match his own."
"To exceed them, apparently," Barrett retorted.
"He does seem to have been taken by surprise," Michon
said quietly. "And circumstances do suggest that the king
was responsible—though I think it may have been a reaction
of the moment, when Sief guessed the truth of his 'son's'
paternity. But I saw nothing to suggest that Jessamy had
any direct part in her husband's death."
Seisyll slowly nodded. "I agree. And I very much doubt
that there was premeditation on the king's part. He can be a
devious man—a king must be—but I have never known him
to be a murderer."
"A passion of the moment, then, on Sief’s part," Barrett
ventured, "a reflex reaction to the shocking truth of the
child's paternity, that escalated into a murderous attack—
and self-defense to counter it."
"That would be my guess," Michon said with a nod.
"We cannot merely guess," Oisín said. "We must know.
And we must know the truth about the child."
"Dear God," Vivienne whispered, "not only a grandson of
Lewys ap Norfal, but a Deryni-Haldane cross. The notion
doesn't bear thinking about!"
"Unfortunately, we must think about it," Michon pointed
out.
Seisyll gave a nod. "I shall endeavor to meet privately with
Jessamy," he said.
"An examination of the child might prove more useful,
and more immediately possible," Dominy replied.
"I shall keep both options open," Seisyll agreed. "And I
shall exercise extreme caution in the king's presence. In the
meantime," he glanced around the table at all of them, "we
must give immediate consideration to Sief’s replacement. If
the king has sired a Haldane bastard on the daughter of
Lewys ap Norfal, we must be certain that we are operating at
full strength."

Chapter 4
"If children live honestly, and have wherewithal,
they shall cover the baseness of their parents."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 22:9

D

ESPITE Seisyll Arilan's intentions, he could find no
immediate opportunity to speak privately with Sief
MacAthan's widow or to examine her son. Within days, a
border incident near Droghera caused the king to send him
on an embassy to Meara, to observe and report on
negotiations going on between the royal governor and
increasingly militant partisans of Mearan separatism. As he
set out on the road to Ratharkin, the Mearan capital, it
occurred to him to wonder whether the timing was
coincidental—whether Donal was, in fact, sending him from
court because he feared he was under scrutiny regarding
Sief’s death.
Except that the Mearan situation was nothing new. Both
Seisyll and Sief had been part of that last expedition into
Meara with Donal's father, which had claimed the lives of
several of the old queen's Mearan cousins. Perhaps Sief had
even revealed or at least intimated to Donal that Seisyll was
Deryni—or Jessamy had. But the balance in Meara had long
been volatile; and Seisyll was one of the king's most skilled
negotiators.
Accordingly, it was Michon de Courcy who contrived to be
present at the christening of the widow's son, a week after
Seisyll's departure. Though Michon had not actually been in
residence at court when Sief died, he had explained his
presence at Sief’s funeral by a chance coincidence of
business in the capital: a matter at law, concerning one of
his properties in Ardevala. The pretext now served to justify
remaining in Rhemuth while he carried out discreet
investigations on behalf of the Council. Given that he was
related to Jessamy by marriage, his attendance at the
christening was not inappropriate. He knew, however, that it
would put her on her guard.
And probably for good cause, Michon decided, when he
learned that the ceremony would take place in the chapel
royal of Rhemuth Castle, and that Queen Richeldis had
agreed to be one of the child's godparents. That, in itself,
was not unusual—that a member of the royal family should
stand as baptismal sponsor to a child of a favored lord.
Indeed, the child's mother was one of the queen's closest
friends; and Sief had faithfully served the royal house for
many years. Under the circumstances, even the venue might
be regarded as a fitting tribute.
Michon did find it disturbing that the king allowed the
priest, Queen Richeldis's own chaplain, to use the silver
christening basin customarily brought out only for the

baptism of royal princes, as the boy was christened
Krispin Lewys Sief MacAthan. And afterward, the king let it
be known that the widow, her younger daughters, and her
infant son should have a home at court for as long as they
chose.
"I shall miss both the counsel and the companionship of
Sir Sief MacAthan," the king declared, when Father Angelus
had finished welcoming young Krispin into the family of God.
'This is the least I can do, as a mark of my continued
appreciation for a family that has served me so loyally and
for so long. Young Master Krispin shall be educated
alongside Prince Brion and the child my lady wife now
carries beneath her heart, and the Lady Jessamy shall
continue in her service of the queen.
"As for these two demoiselles," he added, indicating the
widow's young daughters, "you both shall have proper
dowries when you are ready to wed—which will also give you
the choosing of just about any of the young squires at my
court, I think. Does that please you?"
To the good-natured amusement of the court around
them, Jesiana gave the king a shy smile and dropped him a
charming curtsy; the four-year-old Seffira merely hid her
face in her mother's skirts, too young to understand the
significance of this sign of the king's favor. The child's
innocence elicited a pleased chuckle on the part of the king
and a smile of obvious approval on the face of the queen, as
Jessamy graciously inclined her head and murmured words
of gratitude. Nothing rang false on the part of anyone
present, but Michon still found himself wondering whether
all was as it appeared.
Instinctively, he avoided approaching the king or
exchanging more than the most perfunctory of courtesies
with him. Though he did not think Donal suspected he was
Deryni, he was reluctant to test that belief until he had
sounded out Jessamy—who, if she had been the one to
empower the king, might well have discovered how to override the prohibitions set in place by her father and her late
husband regarding the identity of the Camberian Council—
and might well have warned Donal that Michon was Deryni.
He already found it worrisome to have learned that the king
possessed hitherto unsuspected powers, and of a magnitude
sufficient to have overcome Sief, whatever the provocation.
But he had resolved to speak with Jessamy, at least, and
contrived to drift into the castle gardens with the others,
after the ceremony. He had hoped for a closer scrutiny of the
child in her arms; but as he approached her, standing with
her daughters and the queen amid half a dozen of the
queen's other ladies, she handed the boy into the keeping of
the queen herself, excused herself with a curtsy, and came
to meet him before he could join them. Her expression was
composed beneath the black wimple of recent widowhood
that she wore, but he thought he detected wariness in the

deep violet eyes. The marriage of her eldest daughter to
his son, like her own marriage to Sief, had been arranged
and required by the Camberian Council.
"My Lord Michon," she said coolly, offering him her hand.
"Your presence honors this gathering. I caught a glimpse of
you at my husband's funeral, but there was no opportunity
to seek you out among the other mourners. How fortunate
that you happened to be in Rhemuth when he passed away."
He knew she would be aware that his presence had owed
little to mere fortune, then or now, but he made a courtly
bow over her hand, unsurprised to find his cautious probe
casually deflected and even dissipated by the odd, fuzzy
shields that characterized Lewys ap Norfal's line. So far as
he could tell, she did not seem to notice.
"Fortunate, indeed," he murmured. "And you have borne
up bravely, through all of this. What a cruel irony, that Sief’s
heart should fail him when he finally had a son."
She withdrew her hand and inclined her head, faint
challenge in her eyes. "Fate often does deal in ironies,
doesn't it?" she replied. "Pray, what keeps you here in
Rhemuth?"
"I have business interests here, as you know," he said
neutrally. "They are nearly finished now." He glanced at the
knot of women cooing over the infant Krispin, who had set
up a wail. "Your son seems a lusty bairn. Does he resemble
you, or his father?"
"I couldn't possibly say. Both of us? Neither?" The answer
was truthful but ambiguous, as Michon was certain had
been her intention. "When they are this age, I have always
observed that one baby looks remarkably like the next."
Michon allowed himself a tiny smile. "Indeed. Well, I shall
be certain to render a glowing account of his christening to
his sister and her children back in Rhondevala. No doubt
she will be relieved to hear of his Majesty's generous gesture,
in inviting you and his other sisters to remain in the royal
household."
Jessamy inclined her head with prim graciousness. "I am
a poor widow now, my lord, with no means of my own, so I
am grateful that I and my children shall continue to have a
roof over our heads and food in our mouths. And for Krispin
to be educated alongside Prince Brion is a great honor—as is
the dowry the king has promised his sisters."
"You are, indeed, fortunate," he said. "Clearly, faithful
service to the king is very rewarding."
A hint of what might have been uncertainty briefly
flickered in her eyes, but she did not lower her gaze.
"Both Sief and I have served the House of Haldane for
many years, my lord," she said carefully, "so I hope that I
and mine shall always remain their Majesties' good

servants." She glanced back at the women surrounding
the queen and the fretting Krispin. "You must excuse me, my
lord. Sometimes only a mother's arms will serve to soothe a
baby's crying. I pray you to give my devotion to my daughter
and grandchildren."
"My lady."
He bowed to her back as she turned and hurried back
toward the queen and her ladies, reviewing their exchange
and considering all possible interpretations. Later that night,
he recounted their conversation to the Camberian Council.
"She was very careful, wasn't she?" Barrett said, when
Michon had finished.
"Methinks that she had reason to be," Michon replied.
"Then, you believe that Donal is the boy's father?"
Vivienne asked, looking decidedly scandalized.
Michon shrugged. "I cannot be certain without examining
the child, of course—or subjecting Jessamy herself to a
proper interrogation—but I would say that it's entirely
likely."
"Might it be possible to bring Jessamy here for
questioning?" Dominy said.
"Not of her own accord. And I doubt she could be brought
against her will without it coming to someone's notice."
"What about examining the child?" asked Oisín.
"That will be very difficult. I gather that he's to live in the
royal nursery, apparently to be raised alongside Prince
Brion—which is also suggestive of his true paternity."
Barrett sat back in his chair with a perplexed sigh. "Then,
it appears that, at least for the nonce, we cannot resolve this
question."
"I would have to agree," Michon said. "But if we're dealing
with a Haldane by-blow—and a grandson of Lewys ap Norfal,
as well—he's still an infant, only weeks old. It will be years
before he could become any kind of serious threat— plenty
of time to consider our options. Meanwhile, we have a vacant
seat to fill on this Council. Has anyone had a change of
heart?"
When no one spoke, he gave a nod to Oisín, who rose and
went to a side table, where he pulled a drape of deep violet
velvet from a fist-sized amber crystal set on a simple wooden
stand. Shrouding his hands with the velvet, he picked up
crystal and stand and carried them back to the table, setting
them before the chair of the absent Seisyll. The drape he laid
across the arms of that chair before taking his own seat
again, to the right of Seisyll's.
"Is it late enough to be certain that he's asleep?" Vivienne
asked.
Michon, to her left, gave a knowing chuckle.

"The governor's court at Ratharkin is not known for its
scintillating night life, especially in these troubled times, and
the negotiations being carried out by day will have been
tedious, if not exhausting. I have little doubt but that Seisyll
will have retreated to his bed by now. Nor, I think, could he
long ignore our summons, amplified by Oisín's wee bauble."
He nodded toward the crystal and laid his open palms to
either side in invitation. "Shall we get on with it?"
The smiles of the other four acknowledged Michon's
observation concerning the court of Meara, and they likewise
laid their open hands to either side, each turning the left
palm downward to overlap the neighbor's open right hand.
Those flanking the empty chair called Camber's Siege
stretched slightly to bridge the gap, and those to either side
of Seisyll's chair lightly set their fingertips to the crystal,
completing the circle.
"Now we are met. Now we are one with the ancients,"
Michon murmured.
"Benedicamus, Elohim," Oisín responded.
His long-drawn breath and whisper of a sigh set the
trigger for all of them to begin settling into trance. Some of
them briefly closed their eyes, each centering in his or her
own way ... stilling, focusing, shifting into another mode of
consciousness. As a silence that was almost palpable settled
on the room, every gaze gradually turned to the giant shiral
crystal set before Seisyll's place, each one's concentration
melding with the crystal.
At length a faint spark seemed to kindle within its amber
depths, flickering and then flaring to a glowing heart that
throbbed with a pulse-beat like a living thing—erratic at
first, but then steadying as the heartbeats of the five settled
into synchronization. It was Michon who then set the call,
reaching out for the mind of their absent member and willing
him to respond. After a moment, a mist began to form
around the pulsing flame, swirling and then coalescing into
the face of Seisyll Arilan.
I am here, came Seisyll's focused declaration. What is
your wish? The handsome face was still and tranquil, the
violet eyes dreamy and unfocused.
We have agreed on a candidate, if you concur, Michon
replied. It would be useful to bring the Council back to its full
strength as soon as may be accomplished. When do you
anticipate returning to Rhemuth, or to some other place where
you will have Portal access?
A frown crossed Seisyll's face. It could be weeks, perhaps
even months. The Mearan situation is delicate, and requires
careful handling. The king was right to send me here instead
of others he could have sent, but I dare not leave until it is
resolved. What candidate have you agreed?
Focusing his intent, Michon sent their recommendation

in a burst of knowledge and information. Seisyll's image
immediately nodded.
I concur. But I would advise that you receive him as soon
as can be arranged. Do not wait until I can be present.
I agree that such a delay would be inadvisable, Michon
replied. We shall make suitable arrangements—provided, of
course, that he accepts.
I expect that he will, at least for a limited term, the face in
the crystal said. Is there anything else?
Naught that cannot wait until this is settled, came
Michon's reply. You should know, however, that the queen
stood as godmother at the christening of Jessamy's son.
The face in the crystal grimaced in sour disapproval.
Indeed. One might have expected that it would be the king.
But then, if he is the boy's father, that would not have been
canonical, would it?
Nor is fathering a child on a woman not one's wife, Michon
pointed out blandly. Merely think on it, for now. Our brother
Barrett has rightly pointed out that even a Haldane grandson
of Lewys ap Norfal can pose no serious threat while he is yet
an infant. We have time to consider our options.
The best option is one most easily carried out on an infant,
Seisyll returned coldly. But I shall await your further
deliberations. Please convey my fraternal greetings to our new
member.
With that, his image faded in the crystal and the spark in
its heart died out. Dominy de Laney sighed and briefly closed
her eyes, and Vivienne eased a crick in her neck and shook
out her hands. Barrett had briefly palmed his hands over his
sightless eyes, and Michon and Oisín exchanged glances.
"Exceedingly well done, all," Michon said to the room at
large, and grinned as he added, "I did tell you that Seisyll
would be abed at this hour."
"Disturbing, however, that more progress has not been
made in Mearan matters," Barrett replied.
"Aye, but that does not surprise me," Michon replied.
"There will be war in Meara before another decade is out—
mark my words. It will be yet another legacy of Malcolm's
marriage with the Princess Roisian: they, who had thought
to settle the Mearan succession by the marriage bed rather
than war, after Killingford."
The others merely looked at him, knowing that he had the
most direct experience of that great battle, for though none
of them had been alive for that war, Michon's father had
fought there and lived to tell of it. An uncle and a cousin had
not been so fortunate.
"Enough of thoughts of war," Oisín said quietly, after a
moment. "Do you wish me to approach our new memberelect?"

The others immediately turned their thoughts from the
Mearan question, and even the question of Sief’s death, to
the more immediate question of Sief’s successor. Slowly
Michon nodded.
"Can you bring him tomorrow night?"
"I can bring him tonight, if you wish. If he accepts, he can
be sworn to the Council immediately, and we can be about
our further business."
After a glance at the others, Michon slowly nodded.
"Go, then. We shall await your return."

Chapter 5
"Without counsel purposes are disappointed;
but in the multitude of counselors they are established."
-PROVERBS 15:22

I

N the royal palace at Djellarda, in the princely state of
Andelon, Prince Khoren Vastouni made his way back to the
workroom adjoining his apartments, pleasantly fuddled with
good wine and good company and well content with the
course of the day.
He was a younger son whose elder brother had sons, so
he had never entertained much likelihood of ever having to
rule; but that had left him free to pursue interests of his own
choosing, more artistic and academic than the arts of war
and political intrigue, and to anticipate becoming a mentor
to his nephew's children in due course. Now nearing his
half-century, he was blessed with a loving wife and family of
his own, and that morning had seen his young nephew, his
brother's heir, happily remarried.
Which was well, because Fate had dealt the redoubtable
Mikhail of Andelon a double blow in the past twelvemonth,
making him Sovereign Prince the previous autumn, through
the death of his father and Khoren's brother, Prince Atun,
and then taking Mikhail's beloved Ysabeau in childbirth in
the spring just past. At twenty-seven, having gained a throne
but lost a wife, Mikhail had only daughters by his first
marriage— the two-year-old Sofiana and the infant
Michendra—but his new bride, the Lady Alinor, adored his
children, and had professed herself eager to give him sons as
well as more daughters, and as soon as possible.
"Oh, Mikhail, I do want lots and lots of babies!" she had
declared, as she dandled little Michendra on her knee at the
wedding feast and watched Sofiana playing with Alinor's own
little brother, the two-year-old Thomas. "Mother, would you
look at this sweet, chubby little thing?"
Approaching the door to his workroom, happily replete
with good food and excellent wine, Khoren found himself
smiling and even shaking his head a little at that sweet
image of domestic anticipation. There had been several
stillborn sons in the early years of Mikhail's first marriage,
so Khoren hoped that the lovely and radiant Alinor would
soon attain her heart's desire and that, in her embrace, his
nephew would speedily find new happiness—and sons!
In all, the marriage augured well for the future. Only
reluctantly had Khoren taken early leave of the continuing
wedding festivities—which were very much a family affair,
bursting with Vastouni and Cardiel cousins and even a
smattering of younger royals from neighboring Jáca and Nur
Hallaj. His wife would linger happily in that company for

many more hours to come, along with several of their
children and grandchildren, but Khoren could no longer
ignore the call of a particularly intriguing manuscript he
wished to consult again before retiring, written in a dialect
that only slowly was yielding up its secrets.
For a fine point of translation had been eluding Khoren
Vastouni for nearly a week—and had crystallized in an
almost staggering flash of insight during the most solemn
part of the nuptial Mass earlier in the day, nearly making
him laugh aloud with sheer delight. His beloved Stasha had
given him the most mortified look.
Still basking in the satisfaction of his moment of
revelation, Khoren set his splayed hand against the lock
plate on the door and keyed the spell that would release the
lock. At its click, he pushed the door open and slipped
inside, at the same time removing the jewel-studded cap he
had worn in lieu of a coronet.
This he set jauntily atop a human skull on a stand just
inside the door; the reassembled skeleton of its owner hung
by wires from a hook in a corner of the room, for he was an
anatomist among his many other interests. Then he
shrugged off his outer robe and tossed it over a nearby stool,
emerald damask spilling onto a carpet patterned with
pomegranates as he headed toward his worktable and the
unfurled manuscript lying open upon it, its edges weighted
down with several stream-polished rocks, pleasing to hand
and eye.
It was then that he noticed the faint glow emanating from
around the edges of a velvet curtain screening off a corner of
the room: his Portal, set in semi-trap mode. It enabled
visitors to come and go at will, and even to leave messages,
but no one could venture past the Portal's boundaries unless
he gave them leave. Khoren had no enemies—at least none
he was aware of—but even in Andelon, where Deryni were
accepted as a matter of course, one could never be too
careful.
"All right, who's there?" he called out, heading toward
that corner of the room. "Anyone with half a brain would
know that I've been at my nephew's wedding today."
A flick of his arm sent the curtain skittering to one side in
a slither of fine rings against wire. The man waiting behind it
was well known to Khoren: trim and comely, of somewhat
middling height, casually clad in riding leathers of a rich
oxblood hue. As a patient smile touched his lips, the
calloused hands lifted in a gesture of guileless denial.
"In truth," the visitor said lightly, "I expected you'd be
working on that manuscript I brought you; I knew how close
you were to cracking the translation. I've not been here long,
though—and even from here, I have enjoyed just taking in
the peacefulness of your workroom. You should have been a
monk, Khoren."

Khoren snorted and released the wards on the Portal with
a wave of one capable hand, grinning as he opened his arms
to the man who stepped across its boundaries.
"Oisín Adair, I might have known it would be you," he
said as they embraced. "Seriously, what brings you here at
this hour, when you knew what my day would be like?"
"Seriously, I've come on a mission of the utmost
importance—though I'd forgotten that today was Mikhail's
wedding day. Still, will you come with me for an hour or so?
I mayn't tell you where."
Khoren drew back to look into the other man's eyes,
feeling the rigidness in the other's shoulders that echoed the
shields suddenly stiff between them.
"This sounds serious, indeed," he said quietly. "Can you
give me no clue?"
Oisín 's bearded face settled into stillness, regret in the
blue eyes.
"Sief MacAthan is dead, my friend. It's the Council that
summons you. Will you come?"
"Sief, dead? But, how-"
"That is for another place," Oisín said firmly, refusing to
be drawn. "Please, ask me no more questions. All will be
revealed, in due course."
Briefly closing his eyes, Khoren made himself take a deep
breath and slowly exhale, doing his best to banish the heady
afterglow of the wine he had drunk, regretting that he had
taken any drink at all. No Deryni looked forward to a
summons from the Camberian Council, though he knew that
his could be for no failing on his part. The news of Sief
MacAthan's death made it likely that Khoren was about to be
offered a seat on the Council—not altogether unexpected,
given his abilities and his spotless reputation, but it was still
a prospect both intriguing and daunting. Membership in
that almost mythical body was never to be taken lightly, and
forever changed those who accepted its burden.
Yet some there were, willing to take on that burden, for it
offered an opportunity to enforce and reinforce the ethical
precepts instilled in all Deryni of good formal training.
Beyond the borders of Gwynedd, in Torenth and the lands to
the south, these precepts were mostly followed—and when
serious breaches occurred, the Camberian Council could
and often did step in; but in Gwynedd, the heartland of the
original Eleven Kingdoms, backlash from the failure of
Deryni to police their own ranks had all too often been the
death of innocent members of their race. To serve the
Council was to place oneself in a position to possibly make a
difference.
"I will come, of course," Khoren murmured returning his
gaze to Oisín. "You do realize, though, that I'm in no fit state

for any serious working? I've just come from a wedding
feast, for God's sake."
"That will not affect your interview," Oisín replied.
"Come."
He set his hand on Khoren's elbow and drew him onto the
Portal beside him, turning Khoren away from him to set one
hand on the back of his neck. The other hand reached
around to cover his eyes as he continued.
"You will understand that it is not permitted that you
should sense the coordinates of the Portal where I am taking
you," Oisín murmured, "and once there, your physical sight
will remain sealed until I release you."
"Of course."
"Then, open to me now."
With those words, his mind surrounded Khoren's,
surging in behind the shields his subject obediently let fall.
As all physical sensation receded into a gray void where it
was too much bother to do anything at all, Khoren vaguely
felt a gentle tugging at the edges of his consciousness, then
a faint lurch in the pit of his stomach—and a subtle
undulation of the floor under his feet, which immediately
stabilized.
"Move forward with me now," Oisín murmured.
Though the hand across Khoren's eyes was withdrawn,
he kept them closed, well aware that it would be disorienting
to open them and not be able to see. He also kept his shields
well down, cleaving to the discipline of only what physical
senses might tell him as Oisín urged him forward and to the
left, one hand grasping his elbow and the other arm curved
around his shoulders. He could feel grit under his boots as
they moved half a dozen steps away from the Portal, and
caught the faint scent of sandalwood, a freshness to the air
itself. It was cooler here than in Djellarda, but he had no
idea where here was.
"I must leave you for a few minutes," Oisín said in a low
voice, as he set Khoren's hand against a wall. "Don't move.
I'll return shortly."
The other's footsteps receded. Khoren thought he could
hear a door opening, and he definitely felt the stir of air,
perhaps of the door closing again. The stone under his hand
was smooth and cool, but he resisted the temptation to seek
out further clues as to the room it contained, for even Oisín
's simple instruction might be a test of his obedience.
He waited. He could hear no sound save the gentle
throbbing of his own heartbeat—until he felt as well as
heard the whisper of the door again. Then Oisín was beside
him once more, a guiding hand again set under his elbow.
"Walk with me," came the murmured instruction, as the
other firmly moved him forward.

Khoren sensed a larger space as their footsteps took a
more hollow tone. Very soon, he was brought up short
against something that pressed along the tops of his
thighs—a table, he realized, as he was made to sit in a chair
of substantial proportions, with heavy arms. No sooner had
he settled into it than someone pushed it and him closer to
the table, containing him within the compass of the chair
arms. He could feel the silence as an almost palpable
presence as Oisín moved to his left side and sat, his
controlling hand never leaving Khoren's shoulder. But it was
not Oisín who spoke first.
"This room has been the meeting place of the Camberian
Council since the time of Saint Camber himself," said a
woman's voice ahead and to the left. "Before that, we believe
that it served the use of the Airsid. Do you know of the
Airsid, Khoren Vastouni?"
Khoren considered the question. It was not what he had
been expecting.
"I do not know as much as I would like," he said candidly,
for only the truth would suffice in this company. "I was
taught that our high magic sprang from their teachings, at
least in part. I have heard it said that the great Orin may
have had Airsid teachers. Some say that they came from
Caeriesse, before it sank beneath the sea," he added, a little
less certainly.
An amused chuckle came from directly to his right—
another woman's voice, lighter than the first.
"So some say. Would it surprise you to learn that some of
the founders of this Council actually looked upon the mortal
remains of Orin and Jodotha, his great disciple?"
Khoren found himself sitting forward more attentively,
longing to open his eyes, for the Airsid and their teachings
had long been his academic passion, and Orin and Jodotha
were legendary.
"Here?" he managed to breathe.
"No, not—here, said a man's voice straight across from
him, who sounded somewhat familiar. "We believe that this
place, however, was built by the Airsid—or at least begun by
them. It had been long abandoned by Saint Camber's time,
but the Council's founders rediscovered it and adopted it as
their secure meeting place—Camber's kin and other close
associates. You are sitting, by the way, in the seat called
'Saint Camber's Siege.' It is one of eight, though it is usually
left vacant, to remind us of our patron. For the most part,
only potential new members of the Council are ever seated
there—or those we call before us to answer for their actions."
The further words at last had identified at least one of his
interlocutors: Michon de Courcy, who had been one of
Khoren's classmates when both of them studied with the
great Norfal—which would have reassured him, except that

he now knew that he was sitting in Camber's Siege.
Inexplicably, he found himself straightening a little under
Oisín's hand, halfway convinced that the saint himself was
suddenly among them.
"I think you will have guessed that we have not called you
here to answer for your actions," Michon went on, in a
conversational tone. "You may open your eyes now."
Khoren felt nothing save the weight of Oisín 's hand lifting
from his shoulder, but when he cautiously obeyed, his vision
and powers were intact. His first, blinking visual images
confirmed his impression of vaulted space above the table—
which was ivory and octagonal—and Michon sitting directly
opposite, flanked by a handsome, auburn-haired woman
and another old acquaintance: Barrett de Laney, wearing his
Nur Sayyid scholar's robes. Vaguely he was also aware of
Oisín to his left, and another young woman on his right—
and that all of them were Truth-Reading him, and had been
doing so from the beginning, except that Oisín had been
obscuring that awareness before.
"I trust that you will not object to being Truth-Read
during this interview," said the woman to his right. "Coming
directly to the point, we are minded to offer you the seat left
vacant by the passing of Sief MacAthan." She gestured
toward the empty chair between herself and Barrett, before
which lay a slender ivory wand of office and one perfect rose,
creamy white and emerald green against the more yellowed
ivory of the table.
"Ordinarily, we would have secured your agreement to
this appointment before seeking your counsel," she went on,
"but a certain urgency attends our deliberations, because of
the manner of Sief’s passing. Therefore, this trial of your
functioning among us. If you should choose not to accept
this burden, you will be free to go, though we will require a
bound oath not to reveal what you shall have seen and
heard here. In the meantime, however, we would value your
opinion regarding the circumstances that have left our
numbers thus reduced. Incidentally, you know me
somewhat, though we have never met. I am Dominy de
Laney, Barrett's sister."
He had turned his gaze to her as she spoke, aware of the
touch of their minds against his. With a quick glance at
Barrett—who had, indeed, mentioned a sister, many years
go— Khoren gave a faint nod that was both
acknowledgement and assent, already turning his thoughts
to what little he knew of the dead man besides a name.
"I—gather that the death of Sief MacAthan was
unexpected," he said uncertainly. "Was he killed, or did he
die of natural causes?"
"That was our question as well," Michon replied. "The
official statement from the court of Donal Haldane of
Gwynedd would have it that Sief’s heart failed him shortly

after the birth of his son, in the presence of his wife and
the king, who could do nothing. On its face, this much is
true."
"But there is more," Khoren supplied.
Michon gave a nod. "What could not have been known in
Rhemuth is that Sief was present in this chamber no more
than a few hours before his death. He seemed in excellent
spirits, and had certainly never exhibited any sign of ill
health."
Khoren's gaze flicked to Michon. "And you conclude— ?"
"We do not believe that a failing heart caused Sief’s
death," Michon replied, "or, if it did, its failure was helped
along. By magic. At the beckoning of Donal Haldane.
Possibly with the connivance of Sief’s wife—who, you may
recall, is Jessamy ferch Lewys, the daughter of Lewys ap
Norfal. We further wonder whether Jessamy's son may not
be Sief’s at all, but Donal's, and that it was this discovery
that may have triggered a confrontation between the two
men."
Khoren's jaw had dropped farther with each of Michon's
disclosures, and his mind was whirling with the
implications.
"But—you mentioned magic. Yet Donal Haldane—"
"The Haldane kings are capable of wielding power very
like our own," said the woman seated next to Michon, "and
without having to go through extensive training in order to
access those powers. What they do require is the assistance
of a Deryni—or so we have always believed."
"But, who-"
"We suspect that Jessamy may have been responsible,"
Barrett supplied, "but if she was not, we find this possibly
even more alarming, because it would mean that there is
another powerful Deryni at the Haldane court who is
unknown to us. We aren't sure how the fathering of the child
fits into this," he added, less confidently, "or even that we're
right about its paternity. But Sief’s body was examined, and
signs of magical interference were found. From the king."
The implications of that alone, Khoren found staggering—
that Donal Haldane had acquired sufficient power and
knowledge to overcome a full Deryni as well trained as Sief
must have been.
As to how he had acquired it—that, too, had sobering
implications. The possibilities were equally frightening, if in
different ways. If Jessamy had helped him, that was one
thing; an unknown Deryni was another matter entirely, for it
could possibly realign the entire balance of Deryni influence
on a larger scale. And it occurred to Khoren to wonder
whether Donal Haldane possibly could have done it on his
own. . ..

Khoren shook his head, reluctant to believe any of it—
though he had no reason to doubt what he was being told.
Although, as a prince of Andelon, he had no direct interest
in the affairs of Gwynedd, he was well aware that Gwynedd
had long been a ground of contention between Deryni and
the very much larger human population—legacy of a careless
and often irresponsible interregnum in Gwynedd nearly two
centuries before, set in place by Deryni invaders from
Torenth to the east, which had triggered a vicious backlash
against Deryni, once human rule was restored.
For a time, the violence had spilled over into the lands
surrounding Gwynedd, so that even the more benevolent of
Deryni rulers had been obliged to curtail much of their
previous interaction with Gwynedd. Only recently had that
begun to ease—though matters for Deryni in Gwynedd
remained extremely delicate.
Given this background, and the incontrovertible fact that
Sief’s wife appeared to be involved in some sort of
relationship with Donal of Gwynedd, Khoren decided that it
was Jessamy who was the true key to this present situation.
Though it would be useful to know how Donal had acquired
access to his powers, the fact remained that he had them, he
had used them to kill Sief MacAthan, and Jessamy had been
present when he did it.
Most alarming of all was the prospect that the daughter
of Lewys ap Norfal might have followed in the footsteps of
her father, who had defied the Council's authority, for the
Council had been a powerful check on many a would-be
tyrant among ambitious Deryni. If Jessamy had, indeed,
enabled Donal Haldane to best one of the finest Deryni
minds known—for such Sief surely must have been, to be
part of the Camberian Council—the implications were
serious, indeed. And this was all apart from the possibility
that she might have meddled with the succession of the
ruling House of Haldane—who were human, but also
something more, very like Deryni—by bearing a Haldane byblow....
Such a child would actually be a double threat, both a
Haldane and a grandson of Lewys ap Norfal—and that, too,
must be dealt with. He wondered whether it might be
possible to steal away the child—for certainly, it would be
dangerous in the extreme, to let him remain under his
mother's influence, if he was, indeed, Donal Haldane's son.
Indeed, if the boy was Donal's son ...
"It may be necessary to kill the child," he found himself
saying, somewhat to his horror. "If Donal Haldane has
fathered a son on the daughter of Lewys ap Norfal, it cannot
be allowed to reach maturity."

Chapter 6
"Two are better than one;
because they have a good reward for their labour."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 7:24

K

HOREN’S flat statement only verbalized what the rest of
them had been reluctant to voice. Though killing was not
unknown to the Camberian Council, either to protect other
Deryni or to thwart illicit activities by wayward exemplars of
their race, it was usually in the context of defense or judicial
execution, even if made to look like death by natural or
accidental causes. To take the life of an innocent babe, even
a potentially dangerous one, required a ruthlessness that
was anathema to any civilized society. Further, it smacked of
the policies of pitiless extermination that had characterized
the years of Deryni persecution following the Haldane
Restoration. Yet to let the child live only added to the
possible danger, and made its eventual elimination all the
more heart-wrenching for all concerned.
"What if the child is not Donal's?" Dominy murmured,
looking as distressed as the rest of them felt. "And even if it
is, it might not manifest potentials that would be dangerous.
Surely we can afford to delay, until we know for certain."
The plea gave all of them an excuse to back down from
any immediate decision, especially until the child could be
examined. After further discussion, it was agreed that the
matter might be tabled until Seisyll should return from
Meara, since he had most ready access to the court. Michon,
meanwhile, would linger in Rhemuth, on the chance that he
might find opportunity to pursue the investigation.
"It only remains, then, to make a final decision about our
vacant Council seat," Michon said, with a confirming glance
at the others. "Khoren, as you undoubtedly have gathered, it
is not our usual practice to immerse a new member in our
affairs before certain oaths are sworn, but you have
acquitted yourself well. May we assume that you are, indeed,
willing to serve?"
Khoren flicked his gaze to each of them, in return, well
aware of the extraordinary responsibility that went with
agreement, then inclined his head.
"Volo," he said. I am willing.
"Excellent," Michon said. "You are aware, of course, that
those certain oaths will still be required of you."
"Of course."
“Tonight perhaps is not the best time," Vivienne said. "We
have summoned you from a wedding feast, and the oaths by
which we bind our number are best sworn . . . with a clearer
head."

Khoren quirked her a grim smile.
"It's certain I've not been fasting," he said. "When would
you prefer?"
Casually Oisín reached across to clasp Khoren's wrist,
using the physical link to probe his degree of inebriation.
"It can be done in a few days," he said. "Meanwhile, I
shall only remind you that what is discussed here goes not
beyond these walls. One of us can bind you to that
prohibition, but I think there is no need. You're aware what
is at stake."
At Khoren's nod, both of acknowledgement and
agreement, Oisín withdrew both his hand and the link.
"Perhaps a week, then, if we are all in agreement," Michon
said. "You shall be given ample time to prepare."
And so it was agreed.

I

N fact, several weeks passed before that task could be
accomplished, though this changed nothing regarding access
to Jessamy's infant son. Prince Khoren Vastouni was duly
pledged to the Camberian Council at midsummer: a season
that brought its own new worries for the court of Gwynedd.
At least the crises of that summer of 1082 were of a more
common variety than what the Council feared. Negotiations
in Meara continued to stall, and Seisyll Arilan's return along
with them, but domestic matters throughout the Eleven
Kingdoms gave increasing cause for more immediate
concern.
Little rain had fallen for many months. As the verdant
plains of Gwynedd dulled to gold and then to brown, farmers
turned their energies to hay-making, which was abundant,
but other crops began to suffer. And as a sultry June gave
way to even fiercer heat in July, word came of the sudden
illness of the queen's mother, Gwenaël, Sovereign Queen of
Llannedd, beset by a canker of the breast.
Immediately Queen Richeldis made ready to depart for
Llannedd, to attend on her mother during this time of crisis.
Jessamy, though but lately recovered from childbed, made
certain of her own inclusion in the queen's party, for the
journey would provide a timely ploy to remove her from the
court for a few weeks, hopefully beyond the reach of any of
Sief s friends who might have suspicions about his death.
Seisyll Arilan was safely removed in Meara, for the moment,
and Michon de Courcy had not been seen at court since
Krispin's christening, but she knew not what others might
come sniffing around. It was somewhat worrisome that, if
they did, Donal would be somewhat left to their mercy,
should a connection somehow have been made between the

king's presence and Sief’s death; but after seeing him
matched against Sief, she decided that Donal probably was
well capable of looking after himself.
As for young Krispin, surely he could not be safer than in
the royal nursery with Prince Brion. Whatever Sief’s friends
might think of her— and there was nothing whatever to link
her with her husband's death, other than that she was
present when it occurred—what part could a two-day-old
babe have had in it? She knew that, later on, signs of his
true paternity might start to emerge, to the consternation of
her enemies; but not yet, and probably not for many years.
No, for now it was safe enough to leave him—and infinitely
safer for her to absent herself from closer scrutiny.
The queen's party sailed for Llannedd the day after
receiving the news: Richeldis and Jessamy and four more of
the queen's ladies, plus a handful of domestic servants from
the royal household and a score of knights as escort, under
command of Duke Richard Haldane. They went by royal
barge as far as Concaradine, for it was thought that travel by
water would be easier on the women than a journey
overland, especially in the heat and with the queen still
suffering from morning sickness.
But the weather remained sultry and hot, with nary a
breath of air stirring as they made their slow progress
downriver. Spirits wilted and tempers began to fray. At
Concaradine, the party transferred to a royal galley, better
suited for sea travel along the southern coast of Llannedd,
but still with no wind to swell the sail. The men at the
galley's sweeps suffered from the heat, and the river was
sluggish, running low, making a navigation hazard of
sandbars that ordinarily were well-covered.
Not until they were passing off Nyford did a light breeze at
last rustle the galley's red canvas; even then, the heat hardly
abated. But as they sailed at last into the bay below the
Llanneddi capital of Pwyllheli, with Gwynedd's royal banner
flying at the masthead, they could hear the muffled knell of
the great cathedral bells tolling the passing of Queen
Gwenaël.
Shock and grief, coupled with the heat, caused Queen
Richeldis to miscarry, too soon even to determine the gender
of the child. Beset with weeping, grieving over this dual loss,
she lay despondent at Pwyllheli for several days, recovering
physical health with the relative resilience of youth but less
quick to heal in spirit.
"I should have been here for her," she told Jessamy that
first night, in between disconsolate sobs. "She never even got
to see little Brion, much less the child that I lost. And now
Brion will never know his grandmama. She would have been
so proud of him."
"Of a certainty, she would have been," Jessamy reassured
her. "But remember that she is with God now, embraced in

His love. And you would not have wished her suffering to
continue. From all that you have told me of her, she was a
good woman."
"She was," Richeldis whispered. She paused to dab at her
eyes and blow her nose, then glanced uncertainly at
Jessamy. "You believe that, don't you? That she is with God
now."
"My faith tells me that she is," Jessamy replied. "Do you
not believe it as well?"
Richeldis lowered her eyes, twisting her handkerchief in
her hands. "I do," she said in a small voice. "I must. But
you— Jessamy, you're Deryni. You know, don't you?"
Jessamy looked at her in some surprise, for she and the
queen had never discussed what she was. She supposed
that Donal must have told her.
"My lady, I—we have no special relationship with God,
other than to believe that, like all His creatures, He made us
and cares for us."
Richeldis glanced at her quickly, then dabbed at her eyes
again. "You needn't deny it," she said. "I am not frightened of
you. Well, perhaps I should be," she conceded. "The Church
teaches that Deryni are evil; but I have never known you to
do harm to anyone. And my husband trusts you implicitly,
as he trusted your husband."
Jessamy glanced away, feeling vaguely guilty over the
deceptions she and Donal had carried out, both by
engendering young Krispin and for their part in Sief’s death.
But she told herself that both had been done in the service
of Gwynedd, and therefore could involve no true betrayal of
Gwynedd's queen.
"My lady, I have lived my life in service to the Crown of
Gwynedd, as did my husband," she said honestly, "and I am
more grateful than you can possibly know, for this
expression of faith on your part. Would that others shared
your tolerance and goodwill."
The queen ventured a tremulous smile, awkwardly
reaching out to pat Jessamy's hand. The mother she had
just lost had been but a few years older.
"Jessamy," she said in a steady voice, "sacred writ tells us
that God made man a little lower than the angels. But I
think that perhaps you Deryni lie somewhere in between."
She glanced pointedly and a little defiantly toward the door.
"If a priest were to hear me say that, I should probably be
excommunicated, but that is what I believe."
"Then, you are one among few, my lady," Jessamy replied.
"But bless you for saying it."

T

HE conversation seemed to ease the queen's grief, enough
so that, two days later, she was able to face the emotional
trial of her mother's funeral with a serenity beyond her
seventeen years, dutifully walking with her brother and his
wife as they escorted Queen Gwenaël’s oak coffin into the
royal vaults beneath the cathedral and laid her to rest in a
tomb of porphyry, near to those that housed the remains of
other sovereigns of Llannedd.
But one further duty remained to Richeldis before they
might set out for home, and this she prepared to perform
with a lighter heart. Her brother Illann was already king in
neighboring Howicce, by right of their late father, for the two
kingdoms had been separate until the marriage of Colman of
Howicce and Gwenaël of Llannedd. Now Illann would take up
the second crown as well, as had been his parents' intent;
and being already anointed and crowned in Howicce, his
accession in Llannedd would be marked by only a simple
inauguration and enthronement, accompanied by the
exchange of oaths of fealty with Llanneddi nobility. The
presence of his sister, herself a queen, would lend added
dignity to the occasion.
"Madam, it still seems to me curious, that your brother
became King of Howicce when your father died," Jessamy
said to Richeldis, as she and a lady-in-waiting called Megory
arranged the dark coils of the queen's hair. Richeldis wore
the white of royal mourning for her mother—and for the
child she had lost—but the fine silk damask of her gown was
sumptuous, embellished with her royal jewels, befitting the
dignity of her brother's accession. "Your mother was still
alive, and had been queen of both realms. If your parents'
marriage was to have united the two kingdoms, I would have
thought that your mother would then have ruled both
kingdoms until she died—and then Illann would have
inherited."
"So one would have thought," the queen said with a
smile. She held a dark braid in place while Lady Megory
pinned it. "But Howiccan law can be a little odd—or perhaps
it's Llanneddi law that's odd, since it allows queens regnant.
Few kingdoms do, you know. The crowns are now united in
my brother Illann, but the kingdoms remain separate."
"That seems very strange, Madam," Lady Megory said.
"What if you'd had no brothers? What would have happened
to Howicce after your father died?"
"Since Howicce must be ruled by a king, I expect there
would have been a regency council, until I had a son,"
Richeldis replied matter-of-factly, tilting her head before the
mirror to inspect her coiffure. "Actually, that son wouldn't be
Prince Brion, because I probably wouldn't have been allowed

to marry the king at all."
"Not married the king, Madam?" another of the ladies
gasped, scandalized.
Richeldis shrugged. "Well, they couldn't have allowed
Howicce to be swallowed up by another kingdom, Clarisse—
and Brion will be King of Gwynedd some day. It wouldn't
have done for him to be King of Howicce, too."
"I—suppose not," Clarisse said dazedly.
"No," Richeldis went on, "a regency council would have
ruled Howicce until I'd had a male heir. Of course, my
mother would have sat on that council. But instead of
marrying the king, I would have been married off to some
other likely prince who was not apt to become a king in his
own right—and hopefully, we would have had sons. As it is,
if something were to happen to my brother and all his brood,
I expect that the Howiccan council would reach an
agreement with the king whereby the Howiccan Crown would
pass to a younger brother of Brion, once there was one, so
that Howicce could have a separate king again."
'Then, that explains why you must do homage to your
brother," Jessamy said, as she adjusted a gold circlet of
Celtic interlace atop the queen's veil. "Because Prince Brion
is the next heir after your brother and his sons," she added,
for the benefit of the other ladies.
"Exactly correct," the queen agreed.
"But, Madam, what if—"
"Clarisse, don't worry," Richeldis interjected, smiling as
she touched a reassuring hand to the younger woman's
wrist. "It isn't likely to happen. My brother and his wife are
breeding like rabbits, and God willing, Brion will have
brothers. But if the male line were to fail, I suppose a
regency council could— oh, elect a new king from among
their number."
"Elect a king, Madam?" Lady Megory asked.
"Yes. Odd, isn't it? But that's Howiccan law for you."
"Odd, indeed," Jessamy agreed. "But I suppose it's all a
matter of blood, in the end."
"Aye, it is."
The queen peered at her reflection once more, pinching
her cheeks and twitching at a fold of her veil, then turned to
smile resignedly at Jessamy and the others—all, save the
two of them, gowned in the bright colors usual at court.
Though Jessamy wore the black of conventional mourning,
her gown was cut of rich brocade, embroidered with jet and
crystal, and the narrow fillet of emeralds binding her black
veil had come from the queen's own coffers.
' "Goodness, would you look at us?" Richeldis said with a
gentle laugh, catching up both of Jessamy's hands and

glancing at the others. "We look like a pair of magpies,
amid all these brightly colored songbirds! But Illann will
thank us for our effort, I think." She released Jessamy's
hands and made shooing motions toward the door. "Come,
ladies. We must do Gwynedd proud."

Chapter 7
"Hast thou daughters? Have a care of their body,
and show not thyself cheerful toward them."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 7:24

B

ACK in Rhemuth, during Jessamy's absence from court with
the queen, the father of both their children paid regular
visits to the royal nursery, where the boys were thriving.
Prince Brion had reached his first birthday in June, and
took his first steps shortly after the queen's party sailed for
Llannedd. The baby Krispin would need a few years to catch
up with his elder half-brother, but he was growing quickly.
Given that the boy had lost his presumed father shortly after
birth, and his mother and godmother were absent, no one
thought it odd that Donal doted on Jessamy's child along
with his royal heir.
Seisyll was not there to observe it, being still detained on
the king's business in Meara. Nor could Michon gain ready
access to the royal children, though he made several low-key
appearances at court during those weeks, hoping for an
opportunity—and eventually had to give it up. Had the boys
been a few years older, beginning to engage in the activities
of pages and the like, finding a few minutes' access would
have been no very difficult matter; but the very young
children of the royal nursery were rarely brought farther
than the fastness of the castle's walled gardens, and then
only in the company of many governesses and wet nurses.
Further examination of Jessamy's son would simply have to
wait until he was older, or until Jessamy herself could be
persuaded to allow it, regardless of any suspicions the
Council might entertain regarding this grandson of Lewys ap
Norfal.
Meanwhile, the summer wore on—one of the hottest and
driest in living memory. In Pwyllheli, as Queen Richeldis
prepared for her brother's investiture as King of Llannedd,
almost daily letters from her husband reported drought and
falling river levels. In one that arrived the very day of the
investiture, while the royal party was occupied at the
cathedral, Donal declared his intention to move the royal
household to his country estate at Nyford until the heat
broke.
"Good heavens, he'll already be on his way by now,"
Richeldis said to Jessamy, as she read through the letter.
"Listen to this.
"I bid you meet me at Carthanelle, rather than returning to
Rhemuth," Donal had written, "for the heat will be much
eased, closer to the sea. I have taken this decision for the
sake of Prince Brion, in particular. The royal nursery is stifling
in the heat, and I cannot think that is good for small children.
Nor would I subject them to the rigors of travel by horse-litter,

which I must do if I wait too long and the river continues to
fall. Already, the waters of the Eirian are near to impassable
from Desse to Concaradine—though I have obtained several
barges of very shallow draft that will still serve. You may tell
the Lady Jessamy that her son will be traveling with the other
children of the court, so she need not fear for his health. Both
boys are well."
The queen glanced up at Jessamy, who had bowed her
head over folded hands.
"Be of good cheer, dear friend," the queen murmured,
smiling as she handed the letter to Jessamy. "This means we
shall be reunited with our sons all the sooner. Megory?
Ladies?" she called, clapping her hands toward an open door
for the rest of her women.
"Ladies, we shall be leaving as soon as can be arranged,"
she continued, as they began to appear. The king summons
us to Carthanelle—which will be a far more pleasant place to
pass the rest of summer than Rhemuth. And he's bringing
all the royal household—and the children."
This announcement elicited a flurry of happy speculation
among the women, for several besides Jessamy and the
queen herself had left young families behind in the capital,
and now could look forward to an earlier reunion than had
been thought. The prospect lent extra deftness to eager
fingers, so that the royal party would have been ready to
depart on the following day, except that King Illann asked
his sister to stay a while longer, in the aftermath of his
inauguration.
The royal galley finally departed Pwyllheli early in August,
its limp sails augmented by the men at the sweeps as they
skirted the Llanneddi coastline east and northward, into the
sheltered waters of the Firth of Eirian. The sea was like
glass, the air close and humid, but toward noon of the
second day out of Pwyllheli, as they struck out across the
estuary, the lookout sighted the chimneys and towers of
Nyford town, slowly emerging from the heat-shimmer.
"Nyford ahead," he cried.
The ancient market town of Nyford possessed an
anchorage rather than a true harbor, mostly concentrated
within the further shelter where the River Lendour met the
Eirian. Standing far forward on the galley's port side,
Jessamy squinted up at the sun overhead, then returned her
attention to the scattering of ships riding at anchor before
the town. Most showed the colors of Gwynedd at masthead
or bow, but some hailed from elsewhere. A few were drying
sails aloft, but the air was very still. Indeed, only the faintest
of breezes from the galley's own passage stirred the crimsondyed canvas of its sail, painted with its Haldane lion.
Jessamy was lifting the edges of her black widow's veil to fan
her face when the queen joined her, today gowned in the
scarlet and gold of Gwynedd for her reunion with her

husband.
“There are more ships here than I expected," Richeldis
said.
"No doubt, because the king is here," Jessamy replied.
"Aye, that's probably true." Richeldis shaded her eyes
with one hand to gaze more closely at two galleys tied next to
one another. "It appears we have a visitor from the Hort of
Orsal," she noted. "And can that be a Corwyn ship
alongside?"
Somewhat surprised, Jessamy turned her gaze toward
the two vessels, squinting against the brightness until she
could, indeed, pick out the green and black of Corwyn
trailing from the stern of one of the galleys—and Lendour's
scarlet and white beside it, for Keryell Earl of Lendour was
guardian and regent for his minor son Ahern, whose claim to
the Duchy of Corwyn came through his mother. For now,
however, the title of duke was a courtesy only, its authority
held in abeyance until Ahern should reach the age of twentyfive, for the ducal line was Deryni, and allowed to be so,
because Corwyn provided a strategic buffer between
Gwynedd and Torenth to the east, and because the dukes of
Corwyn, Deryni or no, had long been loyal to the kings of
Gwynedd.
"I knew the mother of the young duke," Jessamy said
wistfully.
"She died, didn't she?" Richeldis replied. "In childbed,
wasn't it?"
"Not exactly," Jessamy said. "A pregnancy gone badly
wrong, in its very early months—and she had never really
recovered her health after she bore Ahern. He must be ten or
twelve by now. But Keryell wanted another son. . . ."
The two fell silent at that, for both were well acquainted
with the realities of dynastic duty and the cost it sometimes
demanded. Just how high that cost could be was something
that Jessamy hoped the young queen need never learn
firsthand.
Slowly the galley glided to a halt a few cable-lengths from
a cargo vessel with Bremagni markings, and the crew
shipped their oars. The splash of a lowering anchor turned
the women's attention toward the bow, where Duke Richard
was overseeing the deployment of lines to secure the galley.
Abaft, one of the junior squires was already aboard a small
dinghy drawn alongside, and was fixing the queen's colors to
a small flagstaff in the bow.
"It appears we shall be ready to go ashore very shortly,"
Richeldis said, turning back to Jessamy. "We'd best make
ready. I can hardly wait to see the boys!"

A

MOUNTED escort was waiting to conduct the queen's
party up to the manor house in the hills above Nyford. On
this August afternoon, Donal had sent the Duke of Cassan
to meet them: the loyal Andrew McLain, of an age with the
king, who was veteran of many a military foray in the
company of king and royal duke. The duke's eldest son was
one of the senior squires in the queen's party—Jared Earl of
Kierney, due to be knighted at the next Twelfth Night—and
he gave his father a cheerful nod as he took charge of the
queen's horse, brought up by one of the men accompanying
his father.
"Welcome home, your Majesty," Andrew said to the queen,
as he made ready to help her mount. "I trust that my son
has not disgraced his good name while in your service these
past weeks."
"Indeed, he has not." Richeldis favored young Jared with
an affectionate smile as she settled into the saddle. "You and
Richard have trained up a noble company of squires." She
gestured back toward the ships riding at anchor. "What
visitors have we?"
With a lift of one eyebrow, Andrew turned his attention to
adjusting one of the queen's stirrups, pointedly not looking
up at Richeldis or any of the other women, and especially
not Jessamy. "An envoy of the Hort of Orsal, your Majesty.
And the Earl of Lendour is here, with his three children."
His tone was carefully neutral, here within Jessamy's
hearing, but she could sense the wariness that it masked—
and saw, by the flicker that passed across the queen's face,
that Richeldis also recognized it. Unlike many at court,
Andrew never allowed antipathy for the Deryni to color his
courtesy, but it was also clear that his comment was meant
as a guarded warning to the queen.
"I have heard that they are lovely children," Richeldis said
quietly. "And Earl eryell has ever been loyal and true to the
House of Haldane."
"You know what they are, m'lady," Andrew murmured, in
an even lower voice.
"Yes. Thank you, Duke Andrew." Richeldis gathered up
her reins and shifted slightly in her saddle, deliberately
turning her attention to Jessamy and the other women.
"Come, ladies. I am eager to see my son, as I know the rest
of you are eager to see yours. I am told that Prince Brion has
taken his first steps, but I would wish to confirm that with
my own eyes!"

W

ITHIN an hour they were entering the demesne of
Carthanelle, the royal manor, perched on a hillside that
overlooked the River Lendour and Nyford town and port, to
the south. Long a summer residence for the dukes of
Carthmoor, it was rarely used by the incumbent, the
bachelor Richard, so King Donal and his family were wont to
use it themselves. Though discreetly fortified, the house was
set within walled parkland so extensive that it gave the
illusion of being undefended, with fat cattle drowsing in the
golden paddocks to either side of the long avenue
approaching the house.
When the new arrivals had dismounted in the stable
yard, one of Carthanelle's resident stewards was waiting to
convey the queen and her ladies to the king. They found him
relaxing with several of his gentlemen on a shaded terrace
adjoining the formal gardens, tossing crusts of bread to a
pair of peacocks. Beyond, dotted among the wide-spreading
shade trees, a scattering of nursemaids and governesses
were overseeing nearly a score of children, all of them under
the age of ten.
"Over here, my dear," Donal called, standing and holding
out a hand to Richeldis. "Lady Bronna, please bring Prince
Brion," he added, to a neatly clad middle-aged woman not
far away, who was holding both hands of a dark-haired
toddler as he took a succession of wobbly legged steps.
With a glad cry, the young queen lifted the hem of her
gown and ran across the lawn to sweep the toddler into a
joyous hug, showering him with her kisses. At the same
time, Jessamy espied her daughter Seffira and her own son's
nurse, Mistress Anjelica, fussing over a large wicker basket,
the four-year-old peering over her shoulder.
Allowing herself a somewhat more restrained smile than
the queen's, Jessamy made her way across the lawn at a
pace more appropriate to the heat and her age and slipped
an arm around her daughter to kiss her, also sinking to her
knees beside the nurse.
"Hello, darling, have you been a good girl while Mummy
was away?"
"Maman, you're back!" Seffira squealed, twisting to throw
both arms around her mother's neck and bestow a noisy
kiss. "I've missed you terribly. And look how big Krispin has
got!"
"Yes, I can see that," Jessamy replied, nodding to
Anjelica, who smiled as she gathered up the infant and laid
him in his mother's arms. "My goodness, you two have done
a wonderful job while I've been away."
"Jesiana helped, too," Seffira admitted, "but I did a lot,

didn't I, Tante Jeli?"
"Indeed, you did," Anjelica agreed. "He's a good baby,
m'lady. "Sleeps through the night, and hardly ever fusses."
"I am glad to hear it," Jessamy replied.
Quickly she inspected her son, briefly probing the tiny
mind, then settled on the edge of a fountain with Seffira
beside her, the babe laid across her knees. Across the lawn,
the queen had shifted Prince Brion onto her hip as she and
Donal spoke with a tall, sandy-haired man of middle years,
brightly clad in red and white, who was standing with a
protective hand on the shoulder of a lad she judged to be
eleven or twelve. Two retainers in the green and black of
Corwyn hovered nearby, along with a matronly woman in
russet and a thin, ascetic-looking man in vaguely Easternlooking priest's robes and a flat-topped hat.
"Anjelica," Jessamy said in a low voice, beckoning the
nurse back to her side, "do you know who that man is, with
their Majesties?"
"The Earl of Lendour, m'lady, and his son and heir."
"I thought as much," Jessamy replied, nodding. "Do you
know what brings him here?"
"Aye, m'lady. He has brought his daughters as well, to be
fostered to the queen's household. I believe he intends that
they should also spend a year or two at the same convent
where your daughter resides."
Jessamy nodded thoughtfully. "That will be Alyce and
Marie. Goodness, I've hardly seen those children since their
mother died. Where are they, Anjelica?"
"There, m'lady, under the lilac tree with Lady Jesiana."
Affecting only casual interest, Jessamy turned her gaze in
the direction indicated by her maid, far across the lawns, to
where three young girls were chattering with a pair of
handsome, somewhat older squires, all of them seated on
the shady grass and with the girls' bright skirts spread like
blossoms. The youngest of the girls was her own Jesiana, the
nine-year-old, dark curls loosely tied back by a yellow
ribbon.
The other two were clearly older, but not by much. One
was fair and delicate of feature, golden hair tumbling around
her shoulders and bound across the brow with a rose-pink
ribbon-fillet that matched her simple gown; the other, clad in
tender leaf-green, had hair more resembling bronze. Seeing
them there, all full of hope and youthful innocence, Jessamy
was reminded of a similar pair of girls in a similar season,
that dreadful summer of her own passing into adolescence,
when her father had died and everything in her life had
changed.
That long-ago summer had borne Jessamy betimes into
marriage and motherhood—estates that had come somewhat

later to that other girl, the heiress Stevana de Corwyn:
eventually abducted and married by force to the man now
standing with their son and heir, young Ahern. (The boy
was, in fact, a twin to young Marie—Stevana's second set,
though Alyce's twin very sadly had died shortly after birth.)
In the early years, when both their families were young,
Jessamy had visited her friend as often as she could, and
had brushed the minds of all three Corwyn children. The two
women had remained friends until the day Stevana died,
miscarried of yet another set of twins that would have been
more boys for Corwyn's line--but sadly, not meant to be.
Jessamy had seen Stevana's surviving children but rarely
in the years since then, but she was heartened to see that
they appeared to be growing into handsome young adults—
and now, apparently, were being prepared to enter the adult
roles to which their birth entitled them.
Thoughtful, Jessamy handed young Krispin back into the
care of Seffira and his nurse and rose, smoothing her skirts
as she made her way toward the lilac tree. The squires, who
were wearing the livery of Lendour, scrambled to their feet at
her approach, as did the girls, and Jesiana darted into her
mother's embrace with a glad cry.
"Maman! We saw your ship this morning, from the tower
atop the house!"
"Yes, well, there was very little wind," Jessamy replied,
kissing her daughter's cheek and nodding acknowledgment
to the older girls' curtsies and the bows of the two squires.
"Young sirs, should you not be about your duties?" she said
mildly to the latter.
The pair took their leave with alacrity, to the obvious
regret of the girls, and Jessamy opened her arms to
Stevana's daughters.
"Dear Alyce, and darling Marie, come and give your Tante
Jessamy a kiss," she said. "Do you not remember me? Your
mother and I were of an age with you when first we met. She
was like the sister I had never had."
Relieved recognition lit both young faces, and the girls
crowded eagerly into her embrace.
"Of course we remember!" said the shorter of the two, the
one with bronze-colored hair, as she bestowed a kiss on
Jessamy's cheek.
The blonder one simply laid her head briefly against
Jessamy's shoulder and breathed a sigh of contentment.
"My, but you have turned into quite the beauties,"
Jessamy said, drawing back to look at them. "Alyce, you are
the image of your dear mother. And Marie . . . lovely. Simply
lovely. Stevana would be so proud of you."
Alyce nodded her blond head. "Would that Papa agreed.
He intends to marry again. Unfortunately, his intended bride

does not like the idea of grown stepdaughters," she said
bleakly.
"She's very vain," Marie chimed in, with a wrinkle of her
tip-tilted nose. "We don't much like her."
"I see," Jessamy said, containing a smile of gentle
amusement at Alyce's description of the two of them as
"grown." But she could sympathize with the girls' recognition
of their incipient stepmother's resentment. "Jesiana, why
don't you go and see if your sister and Mistress Anjelica need
help with Krispin?"
“Yes, Maman.”
As the younger girl dipped her a curtsy and headed off at
her mother's bidding, Jessamy drew Stevana's daughters
farther under the shade of the lilac tree and sank down,
patting the cool grass beside her.
"Sit down, my dears. I understand that you are to be
fostered at court."
Marie's rosy lips parted in amazement.
"How did you know? You've only just got here."
"It often happens," Jessamy replied, not unkindly. "Do
keep your voice down, child. Your father's new wife will wish
to establish her own children in their father's affections. It is
the natural wish of any mother."
"She shall not have our brother's title for her own sons,
no matter what she does!" Alyce said in a fierce whisper.
"Of course she shall not," Jessamy agreed, patting her
hand. “Your brother shall be Duke of Corwyn by right of
your dear mother. Nothing can change that. In due time, he
also shall be Earl of Lendour, for that is the right of your
father's eldest son. And if, by chance, dear Ahern were to
form an affection for a half-brother by this new marriage of
your father's, it would be his right to decline the secondary
title in favor of his brother—but that would be his decision,
and no other's.
"As for you"—she drew the two of them into her embrace
again—"your father does you a great service as well, by
fostering you to court, for brilliant marriages can be made
for the sisters of the next Duke of Corwyn."
"Aye, to some whiskered old graybeard who only wants
our dowries," Marie pouted, as Alyce made a moue. "I want
to marry for love!"
Jessamy regarded them with sympathy, but it would do
no good to pretend that their station did not carry duties and
responsibilities.
“Of course you do," she agreed. "But being who and what
you are, that may not be possible." She cast a quick glance
around to be certain she could not be overheard. "Even were
you merely human, your ducal bloodline would demand that

you marry to a certain station—that, else take the veil—
and that you may not do until and unless your brother
produces an heir."
Alyce lowered her gaze, shaking her head bleakly. "It
matters little. I have no call to the religious life—and Marie
certainly does not."
"I did not suppose that either of you did, child," Jessamy
replied. "That grace is given to few—though I am told that
you are to spend some time in the convent to finish your
education. Don't pout; you may find that a very rewarding
time. I understand that you are to go to Notre Dame d'Arcen-Ciel— Our Lady of the Rainbow. It is just north of
Rhemuth. Did you know that one of my daughters resides
there?"
Marie looked startled, and Alyce's jaw dropped.
"She does?"
"Aye, my second daughter Jessilde—or Sister Iris
Jessilde, as she is now called. She has found great
contentment there."
Alyce bit at her lower lip, clearly taken aback.
"If she has a true vocation, then I am glad for her," she
murmured, "though I cannot imagine it is a comfortable
place for those of our kind."
"Actually," Jessamy said, with another glance over her
shoulder, "the Church is quite happy for women of our kind
to take up the religious life. Shut away in a convent, we are
unlikely to reproduce more of our race." At the girls'
scandalized expressions, she added, "You needn't look
shocked, my dears. It does happen. Not all are able keep a
vow of chastity. But such a life does have its compensations,
of course. A cloister provides safety, sustenance, and ample
time for study and contemplation. There are far worse fates."
After a pause, Alyce whispered, "Mother told me how you
were forced to marry when you were near our age. Will the
king force us to marry so young, do you think?"
"I shall do my best to see that he does not," Jessamy
replied. "He will certainly weigh any prospect of your
marriages with great care. Never forget that, as Deryni and
the sisters of a future duke, your continued existence will
always be, first and foremost, a matter of expedience. I
cannot stress enough the narrow knife-edge upon which all
those of our race are forever balanced—and any stumble
could mean your deaths, or the deaths of others.
"But be of good cheer," she added, at their glum
expressions. "I cannot promise regarding the demands of
state, of course, but I count myself fortunate that both their
Majesties regard me as a friend as well as a servant of the
court."
"The queen looks a kind woman," Marie said hopefully.

"Darlings, she is hardly more than a girl like you, for all
that she is already a mother," Jessamy reminded them,
laughing gently. "She was not yet fifteen when she married
the king, and she conceived almost at once. Come November,
she will be but seventeen. But—you've not yet been
presented to her, have you? Of course you have not; we've
only just arrived."
The two girls shook their heads, eyes wide.
"Then, come, you must make her acquaintance," Jessamy
went on, as the three of them got to their feet. "She will be
glad of company closer to her own age. Most of us in the
royal household served one or both of the queens before her,
and are old enough to be her mother—or yours. And the
young men at court will adore you."
Smiling encouragement as she moved between them,
Jessamy shepherded them back toward where the queen
and Prince Brion's nurse had taken over the glad occupation
of leading the young prince in a few halting steps, his little
hands supported from either side. The king had drawn apart
with Earl Keryell and his son for earnest discussion, but
kept glancing back at his son.
Brion was a sturdy, handsome child, with clear gray eyes
and a shock of straight, silky black hair cut short across the
forehead and all around his head in imitation of his father's.
On hearing his happy chortle, Donal turned and crouched to
hold out both hands, beckoning for Brion to come to him.
With an exultant squeal, the boy let go of both supporting
hands and toddled confidently into the arms of his sire.
"Jessamy, would you look?" the queen cried, looking up
at her and the demoiselles de Corwyn. "My little man is
walking! I can't believe how much he's grown while we were
away. It has only been a few weeks."
Jessamy smiled. "He has, indeed, grown, Majesty. A
proper prince he is."
"I see that your Krispin thrives as well," Richeldis
observed, with a glance toward the baby's basket. "He's a
fine, fat babe! And who are these pretty maids?" she added,
jutting her chin at the girls.
"Majesty, these are Earl Keryell's daughters, Lady Alyce—
and Lady Marie." The girls made grave curtsies as their
names were spoken. "They tell me that their father wishes to
foster them to court."
"So the king has informed me," the queen replied, leaving
Brion to his nurse as she came to let the girls kiss her hand.
"Ladies, you are most welcome—and you mustn't be afraid of
his Majesty," she added, in a conspiratorial whisper. "If he
sometimes seems gruff, it is only because he cares so much
for all those under his protection. I hope you will be very
happy as part of my court."

The girls curtsied again, eyes wide as saucers, and
Richeldis gave a gentle laugh.
"You needn't look so serious. I'm sure we shall be good
friends. Since you already know Lady Jessamy, I shall place
you in her charge—if that is agreeable to you?" she added,
with a glance at Jessamy.
"I shall regard them as my own daughters, Majesty,"
Jessamy replied. "I am certain they will prove a credit to
your Majesty's household."
"I am certain they shall," the queen agreed, with a nod of
dismissal to the three of them as she returned her regard to
her son.
Thus did the demoiselles de Corwyn begin their life at the
court of the King and Queen of Gwynedd.

Chapter 8
"The elder women as mothers;
the younger as sisters, with all purity."
-I TIMOTHY 5:2

K

ERYELL Earl of Lendour departed for his own lands on the
day following the queen's arrival at Carthanelle, taking with
him his son and household and leaving his daughters
behind.
The king bade him farewell at the great hall steps, his
heir in his arms and his queen at his side, and sent him on
his way with the Duke of Cassan and his own brother for
escort. Alyce and Marie were permitted to accompany them
as far as the harbor for a final adieu, riding with their
brother and the two squires, but that only made the final
parting more difficult, as they kissed father and brother
good-bye and watched their galley sail out of Nyford.
They were in tears for most of the ride back to
Carthanelle, though both dukes tried to cajole their young
charges into better spirits. Alyce had mostly contained her
misery by the time they got back, but Marie was less
successful. They ate little at supper, and Marie cried herself
to sleep that night, seeking comfort in her elder sister's
arms, but finding it only in the stuffed dog that one of the
children thrust at her after supper, seeing her sadness.
The royal household remained at Carthanelle until midOctober, when the weather finally broke. Meanwhile, the
heat kept tempers short and often frayed. Though both
demoiselles de Corwyn were dreadfully homesick for the first
few days, they tried gamely to take their minds from their
misery by pitching in with the care of the children of the
household, and gradually succeeded. The little girl who had

given Marie the stuffed dog, a daughter of one of the
queen's ladies, developed a particular affection for both girls,
and often came to climb onto one of their laps and beg for a
story, when she was not trying to coax a smile from them
with her winsome antics.
The other children soon followed suit, particularly Prince
Brion. At least with the children, both Alyce and Marie soon
made themselves favorite playmates, for they were hardly
more than children themselves.
They were less successful with the children's mothers,
though Jessamy and her daughters did their best to make
the newcomers feel welcome, as did the queen. But the other
women were caught up in their own concerns, and remained
mostly aloof. It was a pattern that would repeat itself often,
as the two girls gradually moved farther and farther from the
life they had known in their father’s house.
The change of weather, when it finally came, was marked
by more than a week of solid rain, when very little moved. It
heralded a flurry of preparations for the journey back to
Rhemuth, made more exasperating by bored children
underfoot, cranky at being kept indoors, and by grown men
grumbling about the rain, eager to be on their way. The king
was as bad as any of them.
But finally came word that the river again was running at
near-normal levels, fit for the royal barges to make their way
back up the Eirian to Rhemuth. The trip northward was
hardly better than being cooped up at Carthanelle, for each
day still saw at least one deluge, but at least the scenery was
different, and the rain was good for the land. Alyce tried to
remember that, on the day they docked at Desse and
switched to horses and litters to complete the journey to the
capital. Rhemuth Castle proved to be damp and chill after
weeks of rain, and it was growing colder as autumn began
giving way to winter.
One reprieve they were granted: that their convent
education should not commence until after the festivities of
Christmas and Twelfth Night court, which were fast
approaching. This was a mixed blessing, for the foothold
they had gained while resident at Carthanelle was soon
swallowed up in the expanded court that dwelt year-round
in Rhemuth.
Marie coped by casting her lot with the other children, all
younger than herself, letting herself be swept up in their
festal preparations. Alyce, a year older, found herself caught
in a curious limbo, no longer a child but not yet a woman,
unable to fully embrace either state—and owing to the
transitory nature of her residence at court, few made much
effort to get acquainted or to help her through it. The queen
herself was probably closest to Alyce in age, but her young
son and her own duties occupied most of her available time
and energy.

As autumn gave way to winter, the weeks of Advent
seemed to stretch forever, as cheerless as the shortening
winter days. But for Alyce, this time of preparation for the
birth of the Christmas King also marked the necessary shift
in her frame of mind. The solemnities of Christmas brought
a kind of respite, as she dutifully turned her thoughts to the
wondrous birth in Bethlehem, and she found herself
becoming caught up in some of the excitement as Twelfth
Night approached, the most important court in the cycle of
the year.
It would be her first at the Haldane court, made all the
more special because it would mark the knighting of two of
her father's squires, sent from Lendour to receive the
accolade from the king's own hand. The two honorees were
friends of her childhood: Sé Trelawney and Jovett Chandos,
the squires who had had been with her father's party at
Carthanelle. Since the conferral of this honor had been set
long before Keryell Earl of Lendour decided to take a new
wife at Twelfth Night, he had delegated his elder daughter to
stand witness in his stead, with her hand on the sword with
that of the king, and had directed that she and her sister
should perform the office of investing the two young men
with the white belts of their knighthood.
"Ahern said to tell you that he would far rather have been
here with us," the newly dubbed Sir Sé Trelawney told her
that evening, seated beside her at the feast following the
court. Marie had started out sitting on his other side, but
had moved to sit with Jesiana.
Alyce rolled her eyes and gave him a sidelong glance as
he passed her a platter of fine manchet bread, saying
nothing as she took a thick slice and started tearing out the
soft center. Both Se and Jovett were Deryni, though not
known to be so, and Se was well aware of her feelings about
the wedding festivities no doubt in progress back at Castle
Cynfyn—and Ahern's feelings as well.
"She will probably be wearing our mother's jewels!" she
muttered so that only Se could hear her.
"She will be sleeping in your mother's bed," he returned,
in the same low tone. "But there's nothing you or I or anyone
can do about that. It's what your father wants."
"I suppose." Alyce had been squeezing the wad of doughy
bread into a ball, and she pressed it between her palms to
form a flattened patty before tearing it into quarters. Across
from Se, the other new-made knight, Sir Jovett, was
watching her curiously, and she caught his eye as she
reached across Se to hand each of them one of the pieces.
"Friends forever!" she whispered, very deliberately putting
the third piece in her mouth and chewing.
"Friends forever!" they answered, doing as she had done.
"And take this last piece to my brother," she added,

placing the remaining quarter in Se's hand. "Make him
the same pledge."
"I will," Se promised, and slipped it into a pouch at his
belt.
Alyce glanced toward the center dais, where the king and
queen sat flanked by several of their great lords and their
wives, and sighed.
"I wish Ahern could have come," she said in a low voice.
"He would have liked this much more. Se, you and Jovett will
write to me, won't you? I've missed both of you so much
already!"
"Of course we'll write," Se assured her. "And better than
that, I think your father intends to send someone at
intervals to continue your training—probably Father
Paschal. If we can, we'll try to persuade him that Jovett and
I should be his escorts. Not that we'll get to see much of you,
with you in the convent. But at least we can bring you letters
in person."
Alyce smiled shyly, lowering her blue gaze. "Thank you—
both of you. At least I'll have something to look forward to."
But the brief respite of the presence of friends from home
was not to last. The orders of Keryell Earl of Lendour
required the two young knights to depart the following
morning, with but scant time to bid his daughters a proper
farewell.
"Ahern wants us back as well," Se told Alyce, as he and
Jovett waited for the grooms to finish saddling their horses.
"It won't be easy for him either, you know."
"You'll make sure he's careful, won't you?" she said to
both of them, not voicing the concerns they had shared with
her about the new lady of Cynfyn.
"You needn't worry, little one," Jovett said fondly. "We'll
look after him."

T

HE drab, dreary days of winter seemed even more
oppressive, once the two left. Alyce pined for several days,
knowing that it was only a matter of time before she and
Marie were sent away. Jessamy did her best to see that her
young charges were included in appropriate activities, along
with her own children, but Alyce found that the turning of
the new year only marked the uncertainty of what lay ahead.
It was mid-January when the dreaded summons came
from the queen. The two sisters had found an abiding
affinity with young Prince Brion, and he with them, so they
were inclined to spend many of their waking hours playing

with him and minding Krispin, who was a mellow,
contented baby. On that fateful morning, Jessamy came to
fetch them from the solar, where the two of them were
sprawled before the fireplace with Jesiana, Krispin in his
basket between them, watching Brion tussle with a chubby
hound puppy. Krispin was chewing on the ear of a stuffed
toy that might once have been a cat or rabbit.
"Alyce, Marie, the queen wishes to see you," Jessamy
said, as all three girls scrambled dutifully to their feet and
Jesiana came to give her a hug. "Go now, please. She's in
her bedchamber. I'll stay with the boys."
Both girls hurriedly adjusted their clothing and inspected
one another's hair and faces, Alyce brushing at a wayward
curl escaping from her sister's ribbon-fillet.
"Do you know what it's about?" she asked.
Jessamy inclined her head. "I do—though I think it will
not please you overmuch. The queen informs me that you
are to go this week to Arc-en-Ciel. Probably in the next day
or two."
Alyce thought she had hid her dismay reasonably well,
but Jessamy came to tilt her chin up slightly, also giving
Marie a hug.
"You needn't look so glum," she said with a chuckle. "A
convent education has much to recommend it; and Arc-enCiel is better than most. I would not let you be sent there, if I
did not approve."
The sisters exchanged dubious glances.
"'Must we go there, Tante Jessamy?" Alyce said in a low
voice.
"I'm afraid you must," Jessamy replied. "The nuns can
teach you a great deal. Their discipline is firm, but their
devotion to the Blessed Lady is sound, and their confessors
seem tolerant of our race—so long as one does not flaunt
one's powers, of course. My daughter has found it quite
satisfactory."
"Has she a true call to the religious life?" Marie asked
doubtfully.
"Of course. At least she assures me that she does. This is
not to say that all who take the veil have a genuine vocation;
indeed, some are even forced to do so, as we all know well.
"But that will not be your case, I assure you. You will find
that most of the girls in the school are gently born, come
there to learn the gentle arts and skills expected of noble
wives and mothers. Believe me, there are far worse fates. I
was younger than you when I was married off to a man old
enough to be my father. The king hopes to spare you that—
as does your father."
"I think I remember Uncle Sief," Alyce said quietly, after a
reflective pause. "If the choice had been yours, would you

have taken the veil rather than marry him?"
Jessamy shrugged, smiling thinly. "I was not given the
choice," she said. "But I cannot say that I regret my
children—who would be very different people, if a different
father had been theirs. As for my marriage—" She shrugged.
"It was no better or worse than most. Sief was not a bad
man. And I have the old queen to thank for the fact that I
was spared the marriage bed for the first few years, allowed
to finish my girlhood in the household of dear Queen
Dulchesse. Service to Gwynedd's queens has brought me a
great deal of satisfaction."
Neither girl answered that comment, only bobbing dutiful
curtsies before taking their leave.
"It won't be that bad, Mares," Alyce murmured to her
sister as they walked, laying an arm around her shoulders.
"Think of all we can learn. And we'll be safe for the next few
years."
Marie merely bit at her lip and said nothing as the pair of
them made their way to the queen's chambers.

T

HEY found Queen Richeldis seated before the fire in her
boudoir, well-wrapped up in a fur-lined robe. Two maids
were combing the tangles from her long black hair, recently
washed, and her face was aglow from the warmth of the
fire—and not alone from that, for she was breeding again,
though she bore this pregnancy with far less discomfort than
that of Brion or the ill-fated child lost in Pwyllheli.
"You sent for us, Majesty?" Alyce asked, dipping in a
curtsy.
"Dear Alyce . . . Marie . . . come sit by the fire," the queen
replied, indicating a place in the fur rug at her feet. "You
may leave us," she added, dismissing the maids.
"Ladies, I have news for you that brings me little joy," she
said, when the maids had gone. "The king has decided that
it's time you took up your studies at Arc-en-Ciel. If the
weather holds, you're to go tomorrow."
"So soon?" Marie blurted, falling silent at her sister's
sharp glance.
"Pray, pardon my sister, Madam," Alyce said hastily,
taking her sister's hand. "We know that this but fulfills our
father's wishes—and we are grateful that we were permitted
to stay at court until after the feasts of Christmas and the
new year."
"Yes, well, you did turn many a young man's head during
the festivities," Richeldis observed with a droll smile. "And

not a few old men's heads as well, I am told. I suggest
that you view your time at the convent as welcome respite
from the marriage mart. And you needn't pack your lovely
court gowns. The girls at Arc-en-Ciel wear a form of the
order's habit. It's tidy and warm and saves squabbling over
whose gown is prettiest. Believe me, this is useful. I spent
some time in a convent school myself."
"In Llannedd, Madam?" Alyce dared to ask.
Richeldis inclined her head. "Ladies destined for noble
husbands must learn reading and writing and ciphering as
well as the domestic arts necessary for running a great lord's
household. I hope you will make the most of your time there.
Jessamy's daughter will befriend you, I’m sure."
"But, she's a nun," Marie said doubtfully.
"That's true," Richeldis agreed, smiling, "but she isn't a
very old nun; I've met her. Not so many years ago, she was a
girl just like you. Do give her a chance—both of you. You will
need a friend there."
The slight waver in the queen's final words reminded
Alyce that Deryni like herself and Marie would, indeed, need
a friend within the constricted atmosphere of convent life,
and she bowed her head briefly.
"I shall miss the children," she said quietly.
"And they shall miss you," Richeldis replied. "And I shall
miss you!" She rolled her eyes in mock exasperation. "In
truth, I almost envy you. Most of my other ladies are
decades older than I. Your presence at court has taken me
back to more carefree days of my own girlhood."
"It has?" Marie said, brightening.
"It has!" The queen hugged the younger girl briefly around
the shoulders and smiled. "You'd best be off now. I’m sure
you'll wish to take a few things with you. And it will be an
early start in the morning, I’m sure. The king wastes no
time, once he's made a decision."

T

HAT night, the two of them supped in the nursery with
Jessamy and her children, after which Jessamy helped them
select what to pack for the morrow. Later, when huddled
beneath their sleeping furs and coverlets in the bed they
shared, the sisters conferred about the future.
"What will it be like, do you think?" Marie whispered.
"Will the nuns be very strict?"
"I don't know," Alyce admitted. "But Lady Megory says
that Tante Jessamy's daughter likes it there."
Marie's snort managed to convey both acknowledgement
and skepticism.

"I don't want to wear a habit!" she said after a short
silence.
"Well, we must," Alyce replied. "Think of it as camouflage,
so that we'll blend in with the other girls," she added. "But
Tante Jessamy says we don't have to wear the wimple."
"Thank God for that!" Marie retorted. "What do you
suppose they'll teach us?"
"Not what we'd like to learn, I'll warrant!" Alyce said with
a snicker. "Father wants us to learn lady-things, like fine
needlework. And I think he hopes that Tante Jessamy will
teach us some of the other things we do want to learn."
"She has to be careful, though," Marie said. "Even with
the king as her patron, she daren't be open about what she
is."
"No, and we mustn't be, either," Alyce replied. "Promise
me you'll be discreet, Mares."
“I'll certainly try," Marie agreed. "Oh, Alyce, what's to
become of us?"
Alyce merely hugged her sister close, for there was no
answer to that question. Come the morrow, they would know
all too well, for better or for worse.

A

LYCE had feared she would not sleep at all, as visions of
what might be danced behind her closed eyelids, but all too
soon, Mistress Anjelica was shaking her to wakefulness, a
candle in her hand.
"Wake you now, little ones," she murmured. "You'll want
something warm in your stomachs before you ride out into
the cold. At least it looks to be a fine day dawning."
It was, indeed, a fine day, once the sun came up—bright
and sunny, if very cold. The king had assigned a gingerhaired young knight called Sir Jiri Redfearn to escort them,
along with half a dozen of the household guard. Jessamy
had decided to bring along her nine-year-old, for a surprise
visit with her sister. A maid also rode with them, for they
would stay the night in the convent's guest house, and a
manservant to manage the single pack horse.
Their little cavalcade was on its way not long after first
light, wending its way northward along the east bank of the
river, past the seminary called Arx Fidei, and then into the
foothills. They rode slowly, perhaps in deference to Jessamy,
for though fit enough, she was of an age to be mother of all
of them save the maid and the manservant.
The short winter day was drawing to a close as their party

crested a hill and came, at last, within sight of the
convent's bell tower. The gold of the dying sun kissed the
snow before the barred convent gates, and shone in rainbow
shimmers on the mist beginning to rise as the day's warmth
faded and the shadows lengthened. As they picked their way
down that last slope toward the entrance, a bell was ringing
out one of the afternoon offices.
"There it is, my dears," Jessamy announced. "Notre Dame
d'Arc-en-Ciel, the royal convent of our Lady of the Rainbow.
The order began in Bremagne, did you know?"
When both her young charges shook their heads,
Jessamy continued affably.
"Well, then. Its foundation dates back several centuries,
to the site of a very ancient holy well now contained within
the grounds of the Mother House at Fessy, near Remigny.
The well had long been a place of popular devotion, perhaps
even pre-Christian, but one spring afternoon, after a very
emphatic rain shower, an apparition of our Blessed Lady
appeared from within a rainbow. It was witnessed by three
young girls of noble family who had stopped to pray for a
sign regarding whom they should wed."
"What kind of an apparition?" Marie wanted to know.
"What did it look like?"
"Well, it's said that our Lady appeared as a young woman
little older than yourselves," Jessamy replied, "arrayed in a
sky-blue robe and veil and clasping a rainbow around her
shoulders like a shining mantle. No one knows precisely
what she told them, but within two or three years, they had
gained the support of the Archbishop of Remigny and had
persuaded the king to give them a generous endowment of
land just outside the city, where they established a convent
for the domestic education of young ladies of gentle birth.
"For their habit, they adopted the pale blue of the
apparition's robes, with a white wimple and a band of
rainbow edging to the veil. The vowed sisters wear it on a
blue veil, and also on the bottom of the scapular—which is a
sort of tabard or apron—and novices take a white veil with
rainbow edging, but you'll wear neither—though you will
wear the blue habit. Those who come for the school do not
take binding vows, of course. Like you, they come for
finishing as proper ladies, though some do stay—which you
will not. But this will be a sheltered place for you to spend
your next few years. I promise I shall stay in touch regularly.
They had reached the convent gate by now, whose arch
displayed a rainbow picked out in mosaic tiles, and Jessamy
bent to pull a tasseled rope that rang a bell within. Almost
immediately, a tiny aperture opened at eye-level and a pair
of hazel eyes peered out.
"Blessings upon all who come in peace," a musical voice
said. "How may I assist you?"

"I am Lady Jessamy MacAthan, mother of Sister Iris
Jessilde, and I bring two new students seeking refuge
beneath the Rainbow," Jessamy said easily.
"Under our Lady's grace, all who seek shall find such
refuge," the voice replied. "A moment, if you please."
The aperture closed, they heard the sounds of thumping,
of metal against metal as a bar was withdrawn, and then a
wicket gate opened in the larger door, just high enough for a
single rider to enter, crouched down. Drawing aside,
Jessamy nodded to her daughter, who urged her pony
through the opening, then gestured for Alyce and Marie to
follow. Except by special permission, men were not permitted
within the walls of Arc-en-Ciel, so their escort would retire to
lodgings in the nearby village for the night. Meanwhile,
Jessamy and the maid followed behind Alyce, Marie, and
Jesiana, and the servant with the pack horse gave its lead
over to a nun who led it through the doorway.
Inside, Jesiana was already off her pony and hurtling
toward a slight figure in blue robes and the rainbow-edged
white veil of a novice. Three more blue-robed women were
waiting a little beyond, on the bottom step leading up to the
chapel door, all wearing the sky-blue veil of professed
sisters. The one in the center, a handsome woman of
indeterminate years, also wore a silver pectoral cross.
"Welcome back to Arc-en-Ciel, dear Jessamy," she said
quietly, holding out both her hands in greeting. "And these
must be the two demoiselles of whom you wrote."
"They are, Reverend Mother," Jessamy replied,
dismounting. "And thank you for meeting us in person."
She went and bent to kiss the woman's hand and then
embrace her. Alyce and Marie also got down from their
ponies, coming shyly forward as Jessamy beckoned.
"Mother, these are Alyce and Marie de Corwyn, daughters
of the Earl of Lendour," Jessamy said, with a sweep of her
hand. "Girls, this is Mother Iris Judiana, in whose charge
you will be for the next several years."
Dutifully Alyce and Marie came forward to dip in pretty
curtsies and kiss the mother superior's hand, earning them
a faint smile of apparent approval.
"I bid you welcome, dear daughters," said Iris Judiana.
"Sister Iris Rose will take you to the robing room, where you
may clothe yourselves in the habit of our order. We shall
meet you in the chapel shortly, where you will be enrolled
beneath the Rainbow. Jessamy, I believe your Jesiana has
already gone with her sister to the parlor. You are welcome
to join them for a few minutes, if you wish, while the girls
prepare themselves. I believe you know the way."
"Yes, Mother, thank you."
With a nod to the mother superior and a wink to Alyce

and Marie, Jessamy hurried off in the direction her
daughter had disappeared. At the same time, the novice
called Iris Rose gave the newcomers a shy smile and
indicated that they should follow, conducting her charges
silently into the cloister enclosure. Passage along a short
stretch of corridor paved with encaustic tiles in cream and
blue brought them at last to an arched door whose rounded
door case had been painted like a rainbow.
"In here, please," Iris Rose murmured, finally speaking, as
she opened the door and stood aside to let them enter.
The robing room was cozy and warm, near to the parlor
where visitors were received, and had its own fireplace and
several screens to provide for the modesty of those who used
it. Several robes of pale blue wool were laid out on a table
before the fire, along with a folded stack of white wool undergowns and a pair of cinctures plaited of different-colored
cords of rainbow hues. Fingering the lining of a dark blue
mantle draped over a corner of one of the screens, Alyce
decided that the fur was rabbit, or possibly squirrel. Not so
sumptuous as the fox-lined cloaks she and Marie wore at
present, but clearly the sisters of the rainbow did not intend
their votaries to freeze to death.
"May I assist you with those?" Iris Rose asked, lifting
tentative hands toward the cloak Alyce had started to
unfasten at the throat. "Oh, 'tis heavy as well!"
She hugged the cloak against her body as she gathered
up its folds, letting out a faint sigh as her appreciative gaze
took in the fine gown of forest green wool beneath, and the
deep blue one that Marie wore.
"Ah, me, I fear our habits are not nearly so elegant as the
gowns to which you must be accustomed," she sighed. "But
we believe they are pleasing to our Lady," she added, lifting
her chin in faint challenge for Alyce to say otherwise.
"No, I'm sure the habits are quite suitable," Alyce said
diplomatically, as she picked up one of the blue gowns and
held it against herself to measure its length.
"You'll find several different lengths and sizes to choose
from," Iris Rose said helpfully. "We never know what our new
postulants will look like."
"We aren't postulants," Marie said briskly, shaking out
one of the under-gowns. "We've come as students."
"Oh, of course you have," Iris Rose said lightly. "Please
forgive me. I didn't mean to imply that you're expected to
make vows. I suppose it's the habit of the habit." She
essayed a tentative grin.
"You will be asked to promise that you'll abide by the
rules governing the school, that you'll be obedient to the
direction of Mother Superior and the sisters in charge of you,
but that doesn't bind you from leaving, when your guardians
determine that it's time for you to go. Surely someone told

you that?"
Alyce made herself relax a little and began removing her
outer garments, deciding that she liked Iris Rose. Though
the other girl appeared to be a few years older than she and
Marie, her carriage suggested gentle breeding—though
perhaps that came of the convent education. With care,
Alyce thought she might be able to find out more about what
would be expected of her here; and it was always good to
have a friend.
"Oh, of course we were told," she said, touching the other
girl's hand in reassurance, though she did not yet dare to try
establishing any kind of Deryni link. "My sister has heard
too many horror tales of girls locked up in convents against
their will. Tante Jessamy assured us that this is not the case
at Arc-en-Ciel. In fact, she told us that her daughter has
been quite happy here—though I must confess, we've not
met her. I assume that you know Sister Iris Jessilde. ..."
"Oh, we all know Iris Jessilde." Iris Rose grinned, her
brown eyes taking on a new animation. "She can be so
funny—and she's quite the accomplished embroideress. Very
pious, too. But—how can it be that you've not met her? Is
she not your cousin, if Lady Jessamy is your aunt?"
"Well, I suppose she would be our cousin," Marie said,
from within the folds of outer gown she was pulling off over
her head. "But Tante Jessamy isn't really our aunt. She and
our mother were like sisters, so we've always called her
Tante Jessamy—"
"We only came to Rhemuth in the autumn, so we don't
even know Tante Jessamy very well," Alyce said, picking up
one of the white wool under-gowns. "Before last summer, we
hadn't seen her for years."
"Oh," said Iris Rose. "Well, I know that Jessilde went
home last spring for her father's funeral, but obviously you
weren't there yet. So, where did you come from? You don't
sound local."
Flashing Iris Rose a smile, Alyce stepped behind one of
the screens nearer the fire and continued to undress.
"We're not at all local," she replied. "We were raised with
our brother at Castle Cynfyn, in Lendour. But our mother
died when we were very small, and our father has finally
decided to remarry. Unfortunately, our new stepmother—
"—didn't want rivals around for his affections," Iris Rose
finished for her. "So he's packed you off to the convent for
finishing."
"Well, we will need to manage large estates someday,"
Alyce replied, pulling on the new under-gown. "Our father is
an earl, and our brother will be a duke when he comes of
age—through our mother's inheritance," she added, at Iris
Rose's sound of inquiry.

"I'd heard who your parents are," Iris Rose said neutrally.
"Not that it matters to me—that you're ... well, you know."
Alyce stepped from behind the screen to look at Iris
Rose's back, ramrod straight in its pale blue habit, topped by
the white wimple and novice veil. For her own part, Alyce's
own image could not have been more innocent, with her
golden hair tumbled onto the shoulders of her white undergown. Still behind the screen, Marie had frozen, listening.
"Do you mean that?" Alyce asked quietly.
Iris Rose turned slowly to face her, brown eyes looking
fearlessly into Alyce's blue ones.
"I do," she said. "In the years I have been here, I have
come to know and love Sister Iris Jessilde. I cannot believe
that it is evil to be—what she is. Or what you are."
Alyce simply stared at her for a few seconds in shock,
uncertain whether to take this bald statement as a
declaration of trust or a test. But by Truth-Reading Iris
Rose, Alyce could see that she believed what she had just
said. As she started to reach for one of the blue over-robes,
Iris Rose bustled forward and scooped it up instead, briskly
rearranging its folds so that she could ease it over Alyce's
head.
"You're very brave," Alyce murmured, from within the
folds of pale blue wool.
"Bravery isn't nearly as important as vigilance," the other
girl replied in a low voice, as Alyce's head popped free. "You
should know that there's a new chaplain recently come here
who does not like . . . well, women with minds of their own."
She gave Alyce a meaningful look as folds of pale blue wool
fell to ankle-length around her, including Marie in her
comments as the younger girl stepped into view once more.
"Sister Iris Jessilde would have warned you, but I got to you
first. Just be very careful."
Alyce inclined her head slightly as she settled the skirts of
the blue robe. "Thank you, I'll keep that in mind. But surely
you have nothing to fear from him.
Iris Rose glanced sidelong at the door as she handed one
of the multi-colored cinctures to Alyce, then to Marie. "Lady
Alyce, I may not be—what you are," she said in a low voice,
"but I do have a mind of my own—and perhaps tend to
speak it more often than I should. He believes that women
should be silent. He assigns very harsh penances when we're
not."
"I see," Alyce replied. "And does this paragon have a
name?"
"Father Septimus. He's young and handsome, and can be
very charming, but don't let that fool you. Mother Judiana
knows him for what he is. We're all hoping and praying that
he won't be around very long."

Astonished, Marie glanced between Iris Rose and her
sister. "But—if he's that unpleasant, how did he get here in
the first place?"
Iris Rose rolled her eyes. "His brother is a bishop down in
Carthane: Oliver de Nore. Mind you, he's only an itinerant
one, but he still has a great deal of influence. Any bishop
does."
A clatter at the door latch announced the bustling arrival
of a much older woman in the habit and blue veil of a vowed
sister.
"Are we ready yet?" she asked, mouth primping in an
expression of disappointment as she noted the two girls'
somewhat disheveled locks. "Good heavens, you can't go to
Mother looking like that! Iris Rose, you haven't done their
hair yet. Let me lend a hand. I'm Iris Mary," she added, as
she came to lift a handful of Alyce's curls. "Dear me, this
mane badly needs closer acquaintance with a comb—but
you'll wear it in a plait while you're here among us," she
said, as she began dividing it into sections to do just that.
"Now, which one are you, Alyce or Marie?"
"She's Alyce," said Iris Rose, smiling as she began a
similar service of Marie's ruddier locks. "And this is Marie.
And you mustn't worry, girls. Sister Iris Mary isn't nearly as
ferocious as she pretends to be."
"Goodness, no!" Iris Mary retorted with a good-natured
wink. "I am far more ferocious!"
The relaxed banter between the two appeared to indicate
that perhaps it was permissible to dispense with overmuch
stiffness or formality, though Alyce sensed, without being
told, that the limits had yet to be learned, especially for
those of her race, and especially in light of the warning Iris
Rose had just given her.
Nonetheless, by the time both stood in the full attire of
their new situation, each with hair now tamed to a single
plait down their backs, the future appeared far less bleak
than they had come to fear. Sister Iris Rose was humming
contentedly as she made a last inspection of each girl's
attire, adjusting a cincture here, a fold of skirt there, and Iris
Mary was smiling as she brought out two wreaths of dried
flowers.
"By rights, these should be made of fresh flowers," she
said, handing one to Iris Rose, "but the truth is, we rarely
know enough in advance to prepare them—so dried ones
have to suffice. Besides, it's winter, so the choices are few.
But you'll only wear them for your reception by Reverend
Mother, until you're veiled."
"I hope that's only a figure of speech," Marie said. "We
don't intend to become nuns, you know."
Iris Mary made a clucking sound, looking faintly amused

as she put her wreath on Marie's head. "Certainly not,
child. I can imagine the sorts of tales you've heard about life
in some convents, but I can assure you that no one is here
who does not wish to be here."
"Then, what's this about veils?"
"Actually, they're more like kerchiefs, tied underneath
your plait," Iris Rose assured them. "Not terribly attractive,
but they're very practical."
"You will receive an actual veil," Iris Mary added, turning
to fuss with Alyce's wreath, "but it's simply a plain white one
such as any well-bred girl might wear, held in place by a
rainbow-plaited fillet rather like your cinctures—and you'll
only wear that on Sundays and other formal occasions. It's
quite pretty. But the reason for having you wear a version of
our habit is so that you'll blend in better with the vowed
community, which is less disruptive to us. I promise you that
there is no agenda more sinister than that."
"You see, Mares?" Alyce murmured aside to her sister. "I
told you it would be all right."
"I suppose," Marie replied, though she still looked not
altogether convinced.
To the relief of both of them, their formal presentation to
the mother superior was considerably less daunting than
they had feared. Accompanied by Sisters Iris Rose and Iris
Mary, they made their way out along the cloister walk and
through a side door into the chapel—and this, too, was not
the dark, oppressive place they had feared.
A sweetly sung hymn of welcome met them even before
they passed through the rainbow-arched doorway—the
combined voices both of sisters and of students; and though
the day had been bleak and wintry for the ride to Arc-enCiel, the Chapel of the Rainbow was a place of lightness and
peace, purest white where stained glass did not pierce the
outer walls, and ablaze with color at east and west, both
from glorious rose windows and from scores of candles set
behind shades of vari-colored glass around the altar.
Enfolded in light and sound and a hint of floral incense,
they followed the two sisters down a stretch of carpet woven
to give the impression of walking along a rainbow, passing
between the center-facing choir stalls of the students and
community. Jessamy came out to meet them as they
advanced, conducting them thence to the sanctuary steps,
where the three of them paused to reverence the altar
beyond.
Before that altar, Mother Iris Judiana rose from a simple
stool to receive them, accepting Jessamy's curtsy with a nod
and a smile, then opening her arms to embrace her. Alyce
and Marie had also dipped in respect as Jessamy made her
reverence, and now curtsied more deeply as Jessamy drew
back from the mother superior and turned to present them.

"Mother Iris Judiana, I have the honor to present my
heart-daughters, the demoiselles Alyce and Marie, children
of my dear friend Stevana de Corwyn, the late heiress of
Corwyn. Their dear brother will be Duke of Corwyn when he
comes of age, and likewise Earl of Lendour upon the death of
their father, Keryell of Lendour, who has asked that they be
given into your care to learn the gentle arts suitable to their
rank."
"I am pleased to receive them, dear Jessamy," said
Mother Iris Judiana, smiling as she extended her hands to
the two girls. "May they be a credit to this house, and cleave
cheerfully to its discipline. Let them now be enrolled under
the favor and protection of our Lady of the Rainbow,
signifying the same by their signatures in the great book of
our house.
With those words, she signaled them to rise, Jessamy
leading them before a small table to one side, where lay an
open book displaying a mostly empty page. Two much
younger girls stood to either side of the table—students, by
their dress—holding a rainbow-striped canopy above it. A
somewhat older one in novice habit stood behind the table,
bearing a quill and inkwell, and curtsied to the pair of them
as she held out her implements.
"Darlings, this is my daughter, Sister Iris Jessilde,"
Jessamy said softly, nodding fondly to the girl holding the
quill. "It will be her honor to enroll you under the Rainbow."
"It is for the schooling only," Alyce said in final
confirmation of their intent, as Jessilde put the quill in her
hand. "We make no vow save to keep the discipline of this
school."
The older girl answered with a merry smile beneath her
rainbow-edged white veil, amusement crinkling at the
corners of eyes as blue as cornflowers, and the two girls
holding the canopy giggled good-naturedly.
"Be assured, there is no trickery here," Jessilde
murmured. "You are perfectly free to stay or to go—save that
the wishes of your father or guardians may require what you
would otherwise, of course. But this is not a prison. No one
will try to force a religious vocation that does not exist."
The assurance rang of truth—and Alyce had been probing
gently to be certain of it—but she still turned briefly to the
previous page of the book to confirm what she was signing. A
heading on that page declared it to be the first entries for the
term begun the previous Michaelmas.
Feeling somewhat foolish, she signed her name with care
and handed the quill to Marie, who also seized courage and
affixed her name beneath that of her older sister. When they
had done, Jessamy moved between them and took a hand
from each, leading them back before the mother superior,
with the rainbow canopy accompanying them.

There, at a sign from Jessamy, the pair of them knelt at
the feet of Mother Iris Judiana, who took a pine sprig from a
silver pot offered by another of the girls and sprinkled them
with holy water in the sign of the Cross.
"Let these daughters be veiled according to the custom of
our house," she said in signal to two more girls, who
approached with fine white linen draped over their arms.
The veiling itself was something of an anticlimax. As
Jessamy removed the dried floral wreaths from both bowed
heads, the girls with the veils performed their offices, bidding
Alyce and Marie to hold the front edges of the veils in place
while rainbow-plaited fillets were bound across their
foreheads, entirely suitable for the lives they were to lead for
the next few years. Once veiled, the pair were conducted by
Mother Judiana herself to seats in the back row of the
students' choir stalls, these to be their assigned places
henceforth.
There followed a sparse few words of welcome and of
notification regarding the rest of the day's schedule, and
then an adjournment to the refectory for a plain but
substantial supper. Shortly after that, they were shown to
the rooms they would share, each with a roommate. Alyce's
was a lively redheaded girl called Cerys; Marie was paired
with a younger girl called Iery. To their surprise, the rooms
were cozy and warm, if sparse, each with a heavy wool
curtain covering its single small window and several
rushlights set in wall niches.
"I know it must seem rather modest, compared to what
you've been accustomed to," Cerys told her, indicating the
whitewashed walls of their room, "but in truth, we don't
spend much time here, other than to sleep. We each have a
coffer in the common room, for our clothing—except for our
night gowns. Those go under our pillows. And you do have
an aumbry cupboard there, on your side of the bed, for a few
personal items."
Alyce noted the arched cupboard door set into the wall on
the left side of the wide bed, the crucifix at its head, and also
the tiny fireplace in one corner of the room, radiating a
comforting amount of heat. There was also a close stool in
another corner of the room, for use during the night.
"We're allowed a fire in the morning and at night," Cerys
added, noting her new roommate's scrutiny. "A lay servant
cleans out the night ashes and starts the morning fires, and
comes back later to lay the night fire, but we have to clean
out our own morning ashes after morning prayers and
breakfast, and empty our own chamber pot. We usually take
turns doing that. Sister Iris Anthony says that it's good
experience for well-bred girls to perform such duties for
themselves, so that we'll know what's involved when we
must manage our own domestic servants."
"That's probably true," Alyce said, somewhat surprised

that there had been no trace of resentment in the other
girl's tone. She tried the edge of the bed and glanced at her
companion. "Cerys, do you like it here? I mean, really."
"Oh, I do," Cerys replied. "Mind you, I wouldn't want to
stay here forever—I don't think I could ever be a nun!—but
my father is only a simple knight. If I expect to marry well, I
must be properly prepared to run a noble household."
"I see," Alyce murmured.
For the next little while, until time for evening prayers,
Cerys chattered away about life at the school and Alyce
mostly just listened, though it did give her a somewhat
better idea what to expect. She saw Marie briefly before
evening prayers, and met Iery, who was quiet but seemed to
have a sense of humor.
"I like her," Marie whispered, as they settled into their
stalls for the final service of the night. "Maybe this will be all
right after all."
Bed followed evening prayers, and Alyce lay awake far
longer than she usually did, close beside Cerys for warmth.
When she finally did sleep, she did not dream.

Chapter 9
"Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein."
-JEREMIAH 6:16

T

HEIR new life at Arc-en-Ciel began in earnest the next
morning. Jessamy and Jesiana had stayed the night, and
rose for early Mass in the convent's chapel, then broke their
fast with Jessilde and the rest of the community before
making their good-byes, leaving Alyce and Marie to settle
into their new situation as best they could.
By and large, this proved far less difficult than they had
feared. The nuns, for the most part, were gentle and kind,
and quickly warmed to the lively and talented sisters from
Lendour. Acceptance came more slowly from the other girls,
but they, too, gradually began to relax and include the
newcomers among them. Marie and Iery got on famously,
and Cerys proved to be amiable and genuinely kind, and
soon included Alyce in her friendship with another girl their
age, called Zoë, who would quickly become Alyce's particular
friend.
For the rest, Alyce soon decided not worry. If a few of the
girls kept their distance—and some of the nuns as well—
most of them were no worse than indifferent, and seemed
not to mind that two more Deryni were now among them.
The way had been paved by Jessilde, who apparently had
long since proven her harmlessness to the satisfaction of the
community.
Which left the demoiselles de Corwyn to contend with the
reason they had come to Arc-en-Ciel in the first place: to
continue their education as young ladies of gentle breeding.
They found the cycle of instruction in the convent school
somewhat different from what they had known in their
father's hall, where they had studied many of the same
subjects as their brother. Though Alyce had always been the
stronger student, both were competent in the basic skills of
reading, writing, and ciphering, and had a far better
background than most of their classmates in history, the
classics, and languages
These accomplishments, while acknowledged as
commendable, were considered far less useful than the
domestic skills that were the focal point of the curriculum at
Arc-en-Ciel: household management, simple physicking, and
even surgery, along with the regular regimen of devotion and
religious instruction that one might expect in a religious
establishment.
And of course, there was the ubiquitous needlework to
occupy hands not busy with other tasks: sempstering and

fine embroidery, mending, spinning and weaving—all
reckoned to be essential skills in the repertoire of all
gentlewomen, if only so that they might oversee such work
by others when, eventually, they must run their own
households. Music, drawing, and dance provided a further
soupçon of gentler diversion. The purity of Marie's voice soon
singled her out for extra tutelage in choir and musical
ensemble. Alyce's fine calligraphic hand raised appreciative
eyebrows in the convent's scriptorium.
“Your calligraphy is exceptionally clear, my dear," Sister
Iris Althea told her, casting her gimlet glance over a fluent
practice page. "Already, your work is more than good enough
to serve in any lord's secretariat. If you continue to apply
yourself, you could be a true artist."
"Thank you, Sister," Alyce murmured. "I have been
fortunate enough to have excellent teachers."
"And they have had a worthy pupil," Sister Iris Althea
said graciously. "I wonder if you would be willing to try your
hand at some fine copy work for the library? We have several
volumes that have become finger-soiled and difficult to read,
despite the reminders I give our girls to take care in their
handling, and I have been wishing to replace them for some
time."
Alyce allowed herself a shy smile, unused to being
acknowledged for an adult accomplishment.
"I hope that I may be of assistance, Sister—if you truly
think my work is good enough."
"Oh, 'tis more than good enough, child—or, I should say
'Lady Alyce,' for this is not a child's work. As you come to
know our library, you will find many manuscripts in regular
use that are not nearly so fine." She smiled and gently
cupped Alyce's cheek, smiling with genuine warmth. "I shall
speak to Mother Judiana about you, dear. It seems that
Lady Jessamy has brought us yet another treasure."
The very next day, Alyce was given her own carrel in the
scriptorium, close to one of the fireplaces and near to a
glazed window, though the winter sun offered little in the
way of illumination. Still, there were candles aplenty, as
many as she needed, and the space became a favorite
personal haven in the days and months ahead. In time, it
also became a place to tutor other students of promise,
including her friend Zoë Morgan, whose quick wit and sense
of humor often brightened her day.
Half a dozen others gradually admitted Alyce to their
circles of more particular friends. Marie likewise found a few
special friends with whom to share girlish confidences.
As for the rest, those who were indifferent at least were
not hostile, and soon allowed the newcomers to settle into
quite tolerable anonymity. The two sisters found that the
school habit helped a bit, since everyone looked more or less

the same, differing largely in height and girth and the
color of the braids hanging from beneath each shoulderlength veil or kerchief.
Among the sisters, Alyce found somewhat more ready
acceptance. Sister Iris Rose shifted from mere acquaintance
to actual friend, as did Iris Mary; and Jessilde MacAthan
became a friend as well. And ruling them all, Mother
Judiana showed herself unfailingly benevolent, wise, and
fair-minded.
The sole note of discord that gradually arose was the
antipathy that soon developed between Alyce and the
chaplain of whom they had been warned. There were three
priests responsible for the community's spiritual wellbeing—offering daily Mass, hearing confessions, and
teaching the odd catechism class or bit of church history in
the convent school—and with two of them, she had no
problem. The eldest, called Father Deuel, was a semi-invalid,
and could be crotchety when his arthritis was bothering
him, but seemed to embody everyone's idea of what the
perfect uncle or grandfather should be: genuinely fond of all
his charges, and inclined to turn an indulgent eye on all but
the most serious transgressions.
The next in seniority, Father Benroy, was equally
indulgent, with a fine calligraphic hand and failing eyesight
that kept him mostly confined to the very close work of the
scriptorium. Over the first few weeks of Alyce's regular
presence there, the pair of them developed a cordial working
relationship based on mutual respect for one another's
artistry, and Benroy soon began to offer her extra tutelage.
The third man had none of the positive qualities of the
first two: Father Septimus de Nore, who taught catechism,
prepared the girls for Confirmation, and was known to be an
extremely punctilious confessor, especially of Deryni. Only a
few days after their arrival, Jessilde repeated Sister Iris
Rose's warning, and stressed the importance of absolutely
avoiding him at confession.
"He abuses his office, if there's any whiff of a Deryni
'taint’—and you and I and Marie are more than merely
tainted," Jessilde confided, during the hour of recreation the
girls were allowed with the community before evening
prayers. "There's nothing to be done about the classes he
gives. He'll try to bait you, but you mustn't let yourself be
drawn into argument with him. Eventually he'll win, whether
he's right or not—and as a priest, he has the authority to
make life difficult for us."
"That hardly seems fair," Alyce muttered. "Who does he
think he is?"
Jessilde gave her a sidelong glance. " 'Fair’ has nothing to
do with it, Alyce. He's the brother of a bishop—and
moreover, a bishop who hates our kind. There's been many a
burning in Carthane attributed to Oliver de Nore—and the

two brothers are cut from the same cloth. If Father
Septimus chooses to enforce the letter of law—and he
usually does—he can be extremely difficult."
"He couldn't burn anyone—could he?" Alyce asked,
shocked.
"Not here—and certainly not without cause that
absolutely couldn't be ignored," Jessilde replied, with a
shake of her head. "I'm sure that you would never be so
foolish as to give him such cause.
"As for lesser transgressions—well, fortunately, Mother
Judiana has enough rank to protect us usually." She cast a
fond glance toward one of the fireplaces in the common
room, where Judiana sat laughing and smiling with two
other sisters and several of the older students. "She's a
duke's daughter by birth—and the superior of Arc-en-Ciel
always ranks as a baroness in her own right: one of the
perquisites of it being a royal convent. We were founded by a
Bremagni princess, you know."
Alyce nodded thoughtfully. "I knew that," she said
vaguely. "But—is she really the daughter of a duke? I wonder
that she'd be allowed to take the veil."
Jessilde laughed gently. "You don't yet know Mother very
well. She's a very strong-minded woman, and a very kind
and good one. But she comes from a very large family—two
brothers and four sisters—so I'm sure her father was happy
enough to see her enter the convent. I know he sent her with
a handsome dowry. She was the favorite of his daughters,
and she found her vocation at a very early age."
Alyce guessed that such a background probably would
make Mother Judiana a very formidable opponent, if
crossed. Fortunately, she soon learned that this formidable
nature was focused on being advocate and defender for
those in her charge, whether sister or pupil. Though Father
Septimus blustered a great deal, and settled into a pattern of
confrontations with Alyce in catechism class, his frustration
only mounted as he discovered himself unable to follow
through on any of his veiled threats.
"I don't expect that you are even capable of
understanding the concept of redemption, Mistress de
Corwyn," he muttered so that only Alyce could hear, one
afternoon as she tried to slip out of his classroom after a
particularly acrimonious class debate on salvation and
redemption. "And I don't recall that I have ever seen you at
confession. Of course, I would expect a soulless Deryni like
yourself to avoid that sacrament whenever possible—and to
lie, if you cannot. Your kind are damned anyway."
Alyce held her temper only with the greatest of effort. The
rest of the class had already fled from the classroom, but the
priest had moved between her and the doorway to block her
escape. Beyond, she could see Zoë and Cerys lingering just
outside the open door.

"With all respect, Father, you are, of course, entitled to
your opinion," she said quietly. "However, Father Benroy is
my confessor, not you, and will vouch for my faithfulness to
my religious duties."
"You insolent hussy!" Septimus hissed, stepping closer
and glaring down at her. "Pretending piety and innocence,
when every word that passes your lips spreads corruption! I
will check with him, you know."
"You are welcome to check with whomever you like," Alyce
said evenly. "But the state of the soul you do not think I
have is the affair of my confessor alone—and God, of course.
But certainly not you. Good day to you, Father."
With that, she dropped him a curtsy—correct to the letter
in technical exactitude but devoid of any genuine respect—
and darted past him, seizing the arm of the astonished Zoë
to propel her and Cerys on along the corridor. All three of
them were shaking by the time they gained the safety of the
cloister yard—though at least Father Septimus had not
followed them.
"Alyce, you mustn't taunt him!" Cerys whispered, eyes
wide. "He's a pompous idiot, and everyone here knows that,
but his brother is a bishop."
"All true," Alyce agreed, "but he is not my confessor! And
he can't excommunicate me just because I voiced an opinion
differing from his."
"Don't be too certain of that," Zoë murmured.
But the matter seemed to drop there. There were no
repercussions during the following week—and Father
Septimus was coolly civil enough in class. Still, Alyce told
Father Benroy about the incident, and Jessilde—and also
Mother Judiana, when Jessilde urged her to go to the
convent's superior.
Judiana heard the report in silence, making no
pronouncement about the relative appropriateness of the
behavior on both sides; but before summer's end, a new
chaplain came to Arc-en-Ciel, a merry catechist called
Father Malgar de Firenza, and Septimus de Nore found
himself transferred to a prestigious parish in Cassan.
Nothing was ever said of the circumstances behind this
transfer, which had also been a promotion for Father
Septimus, but all the community breathed a little easier for
his departure.
That summer also brought a surprise visit of old friends
from home: Sé Trelawney and Jovett Chandos, knighted the
previous Twelfth Night in Rhemuth, who arrived bearing
letters and gifts for the demoiselles de Corwyn from their
brother and their father. With the two young knights came
their old tutor from Castle Cynfyn, Father Paschal Didier.
The arrival of two handsome young men at Arc-en-Ciel

set many a heart aflutter, even though the pair were
allowed no farther than the guest parlor and chapel. The
bearded Father Paschal inspired more thoughtful
contemplation, elegant and somewhat exotic in his flowing
black robes and the black, flat-topped cap of the R'Kassan
clergy, with knotted prayer beads wrapped around one wrist.
The priest's visit came as something of a surprise, albeit a
most welcome one. For while his previous remit ostensibly
had been the religious and secular education of Corwyn's
heirs, it also had included instruction in other disciplines
apt to raise eyebrows in his charges' present
circumstances—a resumption of which their father now
proposed.
"The choice is yours, child, if you would rather I not
proceed," Paschal told Alyce, when she and Marie had read
the pertinent letter from their father and passed it on to
Jessilde, who had brought them to this meeting in the guest
parlor. Sir Se was standing with his back against the door,
head bowed; Sir Jovett remained in the corridor outside the
room, as further security against interruption.
"I will not deny that there is some small risk in what your
father has asked," Paschal went on, "but both he and I
believe the risk is acceptable. And Lady Jessilde, I have
permission from your mother to include you in the
instruction I give to Lady Alyce and Lady Marie, if you wish
it."
"I don't understand," Jessilde murmured, her face pale
beneath the white of her novice veil as she looked up from
the letter. "How is this possible?"
"That one of our blood may validly wear this?" Paschal
replied, briefly lifting the plain wooden priest's cross that
hung against the breast of his black robes. "Let us merely
observe that not all the world is like Gwynedd. I am
Bremagni-born, though I was educated at Nur Sayyid and
the R'Kassan seminary at Rhanamé. It is true that, even
there, our kind must go warily, but perhaps because of the
Torenthi royal house, the Eastern Patriarchate of Holy
Mother Church has always been . . . 'flexible' regarding holy
orders."
"'Flexible?'" Alyce said.
Paschal shrugged and smiled faintly. "One of the
privileges—and duties—of the Patriarch of Torenth is to
preside at the empowering of Torenthi kings," he said. "This
requires certain . . . skills . . . that are nowhere to be found
among Gwynedd's clergy.
"The Eastern Hierarchy acknowledges the usefulness of
such skills, at least in moderation, but also recognizes the
potential for much abuse, should their number come to be
dominated by men who can wield such powers. To minimize
this danger, Eastern canon law stipulates that human
bishops must always constitute a majority within the

hierarchy. Thus far, the measure has proven effective."
"A practical resolution of a very real human fear," Jessilde
said thoughtfully, nodding agreement.
"Father Paschal, I can tell her about this later," Alyce said
impatiently, finally daring to interrupt. "Are we to have a
session today? How long can you stay?"
"Patience, child!" Paschal said with a laugh. "We have
leave from your father to abide here for several days, and I
have already explained to Mother Judiana concerning your
father's wish that I brief you regularly about the state of
affairs in Corwyn and Lendour. She has agreed. In return, I
have offered to celebrate Mass tomorrow morning, to give
respite to the chaplains of this house. But we shall need to
be both concise and circumspect about your 'briefings,' as
you can imagine."
Marie, hitherto largely silent, glanced at Jessilde,
concerned. "Is it safe for him to do this in a religious house?"
she whispered, wide-eyed.
"So long as we exercise due caution, there should be little
danger," Jessilde replied.
"Precisely," Paschal said. "To that end, I have been obliged
to somewhat restructure my methods of instruction—and
the presence of Sir Se and his companion should ensure
that we are not disturbed without due warning. In the
future, should they not be able to accompany me, I shall ask
the three of you to keep watch, each in turn, while I work
with the other— assuming, of course, that Sister Jessilde
wishes to avail herself of my instruction," he added, with a
glance at the young religious, who nodded.
"Excellent. In a moment, then, dear Sister, I shall need
leave to probe behind your shields, so that I may assess your
present level of ability. You will kindly prepare yourself. And
Lady Alyce, you will come and sit beside me, please," he
added, seating himself near the window and parting the
bench beside him. "With your permission I should like to
resume your training by imprinting a set of 'lessons' for you
to contemplate until my next visit. Then I shall do the same
for your sister—and also give you the 'briefing' that Mother
Judiana expects you to receive, if not in the manner she
expects."
Alyce smiled as she came and sat beside him as
instructed, seizing his hand to kiss it in affection and
respect.
"Thank you, Father," she whispered. "I have longed for
this day."
"I know, little one. And believe me when I tell you that
you are a worthy pupil. Relax now and open to me," he
instructed, passing his free hand downward before her eyes,
which closed as she felt a familiar lethargy wash across her
consciousness, product of training triggers set long ago,

master to pupil.
"Excellent. . . now deeper .. . Good ..."
Thus did the Earl of Lendour's household chaplain take
up his tutorial duties again, not only with Alyce and Marie
de Corwyn but now with Jessilde MacAthan as his pupil as
well, in quarterly installments that soon took on a rhythm of
regular and welcome visits. Though Sir Se and Sir Jovett did
not always accompany him, as Earl Keryell made increasing
use of their services, Paschal brought letters from both
young men when he could, and almost always from Ahern.
Keryell's letters were less regular, perhaps at the instigation
of his new wife, but Alyce and Marie were relieved to note
that no new Lendour heirs were forthcoming.
Meanwhile, the residents of Notre Dame d'Arc-en-Ciel
came to look forward to the visits of the serene and
somewhat exotic R'Kassan priest, whose arrival was always
much welcomed, for along with the letters he carried for his
noble charges, he always brought news and amusing
anecdotes from the outside world, and sometimes new
manuscripts for the convent library, and dainty sweetmeats
for everyone.
The girls, for their part, flourished under the discipline of
the convent school, with sufficient solitude to reinforce the
inner work that Father Paschal set for them each time he
came to visit and also the leisure to pursue the artistic
potentials being developed by their convent training. Marie
was developing into a lutenist of promise, to accompany her
vocal talents; and Alyce's calligraphic skills continued to
unfold, to the delight of Sister Iris Althea and Father Benroy.
Nor could any find fault with their growing domestic
competence, or their adherence to the disciplines of their
faith. Both girls were confirmed shortly after Easter of their
second year there, when a bishop came up from Rhemuth to
administer that sacrament.
On a personal level, as Alyce continued the shift from
girlhood to young womanhood, she was also learning
important lessons. Though she continued to share a room
with Cerys, and the two enjoyed an amiable enough
relationship, it was Zoë Morgan with whom she found herself
spending most of what leisure time they were given, not only
because the two of them often worked together in the
scriptorium but because Zoë's father, when he came
occasionally to visit his daughter, often brought letters from
Jessamy and even from the queen, that must be delivered in
person.
These visits, though infrequent, became occasions of
welcome diversion, not only for Zoë, but for Alyce, Marie, and
Cerys as well. Though the girls had not been long at court
before they came to Arc-en-Ciel, Alyce well remembered the
tall, sandy-haired knight usually to be found not far from
the king's side, and fell gratefully into the fatherly affection
he offered to his daughter's friends.

Sir Kenneth Morgan tended to stay for several hours
when he came to call, delivering his letters and then regaling
his appreciative audience with the latest news from court. In
addition, he usually included all of them in the largesse of
marchpane sweets and other dainties he sometimes brought
as a special treat.
Sometimes, when absent on the king's business, he sent
letters to Zoë by royal courier, and always included a few
words of fond comment for his daughter's friends. Very
occasionally, if he had chanced to see Earl Keryell in the
course of his duties, the courier's pouch would also include
a letter sealed with the Lendour arms, but both Alyce and
Marie understood that their father was much occupied in the
king's service, and accepted that he had little time for
correspondence. Also, they suspected that letters were
actively discouraged by their stepmother.
Drawn into this semblance of substitute family with Zoë's
father, then, it was little wonder that Alyce should come to
regard his daughter as another sister. Since Zoë already had
sisters aplenty, it had not occurred to Alyce that the feeling
might be mutual, but their friendship was growing strong,
whatever one called it.
Just how strong became apparent one wintry afternoon
early in 1084, more than a year after Alyce's arrival at Arcen-Ciel, as the two of them worked alone in the scriptorium.
Earlier, Father Benroy had given them both a tutorial on
painted capitals, for Zoë had been turning her focus
increasingly to the illumination of the pages Alyce penned.
Their assignment had involved a foliated and illuminated D
for Dominus, with a furry creature of their choice peeking
from amid intertwined vines. As Zoë surveyed the squirrel
she had painted, cleaning one of her brushes on a bit of rag,
she glanced across at Alyce's considerably less competent
lion nestled amid oak leaves. Their slanted writing desks
faced one another against a narrow shelf that held several
unlit candles.
"Your lion looks like he could use a good meal," she said
good-naturedly.
"Like a fat squirrel, maybe?" Alyce retorted, not looking
up as she scraped at a vexing smudge on one of her lion's
ears.
"Don't sulk. Your calligraphy is better than mine will ever
be," Zoë replied. "D'you think it's about time for some extra
light?" she said, glancing over her shoulder at the window
behind her. "And I don't know about you, but I could use
another log on the fire."
"I'll do it," Alyce said, happy enough to set aside her
stylus.
Taking one of the candles over to the fireplace, she lit it
from what was left of the fire, then set it on the hearth while

she encouraged a renewed blaze with several new sticks
of firewood, watching until they had caught. Both she and
Zoë wore close-fitting cuffs to keep their sleeves clean, and
had put aside their veils while they worked. As Alyce
returned to the desk with her lit candle, she gave the other
girl's blonde braid a playful bat.
"Hey!" Zoë said, though she was smiling as she said it.
"That's the paw of my lion, chastising you for saying that
he looks ill-fed," Alyce said with a grin, as she sat again and
leaned forward to light several of the candles between her
and Zoë.
"Well, he does," Zoë replied.
"So he'll eat your squirrel, and that will solve the
problem," Alyce said. As she set down the candle she had
used to light the others, Zoë leaned closer and blew one of
the candles out.
"What are you doing?" Alyce murmured, startled.
"Changing the subject," Zoë replied "and making a point."
"What point?"
Zoë made a pointed sweep of the room with her gaze, even
leaning far enough to one side for a good look at the closed
door, then returned her gaze to Alyce.
"The point is that I know that you didn't need the fire to
light a candle," she said very softly. "Alyce, there's no one
else here—and you wouldn't have frightened me."
Alyce felt her mouth go dry, and a cold chill clenched at
her stomach. She had been extremely circumspect about
using her powers since coming to Arc-en-Ciel, other than
when working privately with Father Paschal and Marie and
Sister Jessilde—and Zoë could know nothing of that. Could
it be that she wanted a demonstration?
"Are you asking what I think you're asking?" she
whispered.
Zoë nodded—and deliberately blew out another candle,
her sea-gray eyes not leaving Alyce's.
"You want to see me do it."
Zoë nodded again.
Rolling her eyes briefly heavenward, Alyce glanced behind
her at the closed door, extended her senses to scan the
corridor outside—utterly deserted—then turned back to Zoë
and passed a hand over the two candles Zoë had blown out.
As she did so, both flared back alight.
Zoë flinched back involuntarily and her jaw dropped, but
there was only delight writ across her face as her gaze
shifted from the candles back to Alyce.
"You really can do it!" she whispered.

Rolling her eyes again, Alyce gave a sigh. "Well, of course I
can do it. It's one of the first things we learn—that, and
this." She lifted one closed hand between them, wrist
upward, and conjured handfire in her palm as she opened
her fingers, revealed as a faintly glowing sphere of green fire.
"Oh!" Zoë' breathed, enchanted anew, and apparently still
not frightened.
Shaking her head in amazed disbelief, Alyce quenched
the handfire and glanced at the door again, leaning closer to
her friend.
"Why did you ask me to do that?" she asked.
Zoë colored slightly and glanced down at her lap. "I—
Alyce, I know what you are—and I obviously don't think that
what you are is evil, or I wouldn't be saying this to you. I
also know that you're very careful not to do anything here
that might. . . frighten people.
"I didn't think that what you did was frightening," she
went on less certainly, as she dared to look up, "but I think
you must find it frightening to be so alone, knowing that
most people are afraid of ... what you are. I just wanted to
say that, if you ever want to talk about it...."
Abruptly she stopped talking and glanced at her hands,
clasped tightly in her lap, lips also clamped together, clearly
afraid she had said too much. Alyce merely stared at her in
astonishment for several seconds, uncertainty warring with
the impulse to reach across and take her hand in
reassurance.
She had been Truth-Reading Zoë Morgan as the words
came tumbling out, and had no doubt that they had come
straight from the heart. She had come to trust Zoë more
than any other human she had known. But was it enough,
merely to trust in the goodwill of another, no matter how
well-intentioned, when one's very life could hang in the
balance?
"Zoë, what is it you want me to do?" she asked softly.
"I—suppose that I want you to feel that you can talk to
me about—about whatever is most important to you, the
things that frighten you, the part of your life that you can't
discuss safely with anyone else. I want you to tell me about
what it's like to be—what you are." Zoë glanced nervously at
the door.
"I want to know if it's true that our two peoples once
worked together openly, and if it is, I—think I want to learn
to do that, too," she finally blurted. "I know that will
probably mean—letting you touch my mind, but I—I'm
willing to do that, because I love you and trust you like a
sister!"
Tears were welling in her eyes by the time she had
finished, but when Alyce would have spoken, Zoë held up

one hand and shook her head.
"No, don't say anything yet. There's more I need to say. I
know that you must talk about these things with your sister
and with Sister Jessilde, because she's—what you are. And I
think that Father Paschal must be one, too, though I don't
know how that's possible, with him being a priest and all.
"But I think that the real reason he comes here so often is
not just to bring you letters and presents from home, or to
tell you what's happening there, but so that he can continue
your training. And Jessilde either helps him, or he's training
her, too. If I'm wrong, tell me and I'll be quiet, but that's
what I think."
Alyce had listened to this unfolding of logic in disbelief,
though she was quite certain that Zoë was absolutely
earnest in what she was saying. She was also wondering
whether, if Zoë had reached such conclusions, others also
might have done so. Caution urged her to simply seize
control of the other girl's mind and erase all memory of this
exchange, also blurring the logic by which Zoë had arrived at
her all-too-perceptive conclusions—and that was what
Father Paschal would have advised, she felt certain.
But another part of her rejoiced in her friend's unsolicited
and tearful declaration, and was already considering ways in
which she might allow what was being asked. To have a
friend with whom she could be utterly candid, in everything .
..
"Zoë, have you told anyone else about these astonishing
suspicions?" she asked softly.
Zoë drew herself up indignantly. "Certainly not!"
"Not even your confessor?"
"Not even him. No one," Zoë said emphatically.
Alyce drew a deep breath and let it out slowly. Whether
she obeyed her head or her heart, she would have to set
certain controls, to protect both of them; but especially if it
be the latter, best it be with permission and cooperation.
And she would need both time and privacy to do that
properly—luxuries she did not have at the moment, for the
bells would soon be ringing for the evening office.
"Zoë, give me your hand," she murmured, laying hers on
the shelf between them.
In the other's eyes, she could see uncertainty warring
with the trust just declared, but Zoë Morgan did not hesitate
to place her hand in Alyce's, even though it was trembling.
"You are so brave!" Alyce whispered, lightly closing her
fingers around Zoë's. "I know you said you weren't afraid,
and I know you meant it, at the time. But how could you not
be afraid?—though I promise you, on my immortal soul, that
I'll not hurt you."
She cupped her other hand over their joined ones and

dared to send a gentle tendril of calm across their link. At
the same time, she bypassed Zoë's will to resist and began
teasing out the necessary threads for plaiting a quick
protection that must suffice until she could do the job
right—or until Father Paschal could be persuaded to assist
her. Zoë had gone very still, and a little glassy-eyed.
"Zoë, understand that it will take some time to do what
really needs to be done," Alyce whispered as she worked,
"and we don't have that time right now—not to do it
properly. But in the meantime, I need to protect both of us."
"Are you—reading my mind?" Zoë managed to whisper,
eyelids fluttering.
"No, I'm not—and I won't, without your permission—but I
am setting up certain safeguards. For now, I'll simply require
that you speak of this to no one. From this moment, you will
be physically unable to speak of it, other than in my
presence and with my permission. In fact, until I tell you
otherwise, you'll have only vague recollections regarding
what we've just discussed, and what's happening to you
now. Later, I'll give you back full memory, but for now, that's
what I need. I'd like it to be with your consent."
Zoë gave a slight nod, almost drifting into sleep.
"Good," Alyce said. She gave the captive hand a squeeze
and released it, also releasing Zoë to the controls she had
just set. "You know, we'd better clean up here, or we'll be
late for chapel. Tomorrow we can pick up where we left off."
And by tomorrow, Alyce thought to herself, maybe I'll have
figured out the best way to do what needs to be done. But oh,
Zoë, bless you for your faith!
Zoë blinked and ventured a faintly bewildered smile that
dissolved into a yawn. "Goodness, it's been a long afternoon,
hasn't it?" she said. "I can't imagine why I'm so tired. I hope I
don't nod off during evening prayers."
"We both could use some fresh air," Alyce agreed.

Y

OU are right that I would not have approved," Paschal said
the next time he came, after Alyce had sent Zoë for
refreshments, and told him what she had done. "But having
said that, I must confess to being most impressed at how far
you have brought her along." He had been examining one of
Zoë's illuminated pages, but Alyce knew he was not referring
to the artistry of pen or brush or paint.
"Indeed, your work appears to have been both subtle and
effective," Paschal continued, sitting. "Had you not told me, I
would not have thought to look at her more closely—which I
now must do, as soon as she returns; you know that."

Alyce only nodded, saying nothing.
"I would ask what you were thinking," Paschal went on,
"but the answer to that is clear. She is fond of you, and you
of her—and I know it will have given you much comfort to
find a friend on whom you may rely—and that may well be
true, within these walls. But it is a short-sighted measure,
Alyce."
"Could you not reserve that judgment until after you have
examined her?" Alyce said boldly.
"I could—and I shall," he replied, rising as Zoë re-entered
the room with a tray decked with cups, a jug of wine, and a
plate of sweet cakes and nuts. "Zoë, dear, put those down
and come here, please."
Apparently unconcerned, Zoë did as he requested, coming
fearlessly to look at him in question. "Yes, Father?"
"Have you ever seen Lady Alyce conjure handfire?"
The bald question took Zoë totally by surprise, but she
only said, "That is forbidden, Father."
"Answer the question!" Paschal snapped, feigning anger,
though his flicker of thought to Alyce acknowledged the deft
evasion in lieu of an answer.
"No, Father, I have not," Zoë said, looking mystified.
"Say that you have never seen her conjure handfire, or
kindle fire from the air," Paschal persisted.
"But, I never have—"
"Say it!" Paschal commanded again.
Looking puzzled rather than alarmed—and it was clear to
both Paschal and Alyce hat Zoë believed she was telling the
truth—Zoë said patiently, "I have never seen Alyce conjure
handfire, or kindle fire from the air. Father, why do you keep
asking me this?"
"He asks to test both of us," Alyce replied, smiling as she
came to put an arm around Zoë's shoulders. "And we've both
passed. You may remember and speak freely now."
An odd look came over Zoë's face as her gaze flicked
between Alyce and the priest, but when her lips parted to
actually speak, Paschal shook his head and came to brush
his fingertips lightly across her forehead, exerting control.
"Relax, don't speak," he murmured, letting Alyce help him
guide the compliant Zoë into a chair.
He spent some little while probing his subject, testing the
safeguards Alyce had set, tsking, adjusting, then withdrew,
leaving Zoë drifting in trance.
"Very nicely done, my dear," he said quietly to Alyce. "I
believe that only one of us could bypass what you have
done— and that is hardly a danger, I think. I shall be quite

interested to observe where all this leads.
"Of course, you must both be careful not to provoke
undue attention," he went on, "for if it came to be suspected
that you had interfered with her mind, you and she could
both be in a good deal of danger; but here in the shelter of
the convent, you should have little to fear. You have learned
your lessons well—and better than that, you have applied
them with both restraint and compassion. She is a true
friend, Alyce."
"I know, Father—and thank you," Alyce murmured.
"Thank you," he replied, lightly touching Zoë's hand. "And
now, perhaps dear Zoë might pass some of the those sweet
cakes to a hungry old priest, for I find myself grown quite
peckish with all this talk."

Chapter 10
"Hear counsel, and receive instruction."
-PROVERBS 19:20

M

EANWHILE, as Alyce and Marie made lives for themselves at
Arc-en-Ciel, life at the court of Rhemuth settled into welcome
domesticity. All through the first half of 1083, both Prince
Brion and his secret half-brother continued to thrive; and
early in July, shortly after their respective birthdays—Brion's
second and Krispin's first—the queen was delivered of
another prince, Blaine Emanuel.
"Sire, you have another fine son," Jessamy announced
happily, emerging from the queen's bedchamber with a
squalling, red-faced bundle wrapped in a coverlet of
Haldane scarlet. "Methinks this prince will be another bold
one, like his brother."
"But they shall be friends," Donal insisted, an arm
around his own brother's shoulders as he and Richard came
to inspect the newborn infant, followed by a handful of
assembled ministers. "Brothers should always be friends."
A covert look passed between Jessamy and the king as he
briefly folded back the coverlet, for both knew that the
remark had included her Krispin as well as the two trueborn
princes.
"The queen seemed not to labor overlong with this one,"
Donal observed. "Is she well?"
"Aye, well enough, Sire—given that birthing a baby is
aptly termed 'labor.' Would you care to return your new son
to his mother's arms, and tender your admiration for the
fruit of her labors?"
He gave a boyish grin and took the squirming bundle
from her arms, leading the parade of courtiers into the
queen's bedchamber, where Richeldis lay propped against a
pile of snowy pillows in the great state bed, one of her ladies
tidying the long braid lying over one shoulder.
"Madam, I am come to bring your son back to you," Donal
said, bending to lay the child gently in the curve of her arm,
"and I congratulate you on labors well spent. He is beautiful.
I thank you."
Richeldis inclined her head with a hint of mischievous
smile. "And I thank you, Sire," she replied, "though perhaps
next time, you might give me a somewhat daintier
daughter?"
He laughed aloud at that, echoed by the polite chuckles

of the courtiers around him, then bent to kiss her
forehead before shooing all of them out of the birthing
chamber, himself following. Later that night, following on an
informal supper in the upper council chamber, he and a few
of his close associates drank the health of both mother and
child.
"Gentlemen, I give you the new prince: Blaine Emanuel
Richard Cinhil Haldane," he said, after Richard had toasted
the queen. "May he have a long and happy life, and may he
be a credit to his house."
Seisyll Arilan, included among their company, drank the
toast dutifully enough, but his thoughts drifted, as they so
often did, to another child of the royal household, and now
he might gain proper access to that child. The Camberian
Council's inquiries about young Krispin MacAthan cropped
up with annoying regularity, and regularly he explained how
it was not possible to make close examination of any child of
the royal nursery without arousing suspicion.
Besides, he reminded them, even if their worst fears came
to be realized and young Krispin proved to be the king's son,
the child surely could constitute no threat to their designs
for many years, and not without much training that certainly
would come to light before it could constitute a real danger.
Would they have Seisyll risk his own position of vantage
within the royal household on only the possibility that the
child was more than met the eye?
"An audacious possibility has occurred to me," Oisín
Adair said thoughtfully, after yet another such discussion,
some months after the birth of the new prince. As all eyes
turned toward him in query, he shrugged.
"I travel a great deal, as you know. Last week, my
business took me to Ratharkin, to deliver a pair of
broodmares to the governor. R'Kassan creams they were—
very fine specimens.
"While there," he went on, lifting a restraining hand at
Vivienne's scowl of impatience, "I found myself dining at the
governor's table. And who should I find seated across from
me but Sir Morian du Joux, who once was known as Morian
ap Lewys."
"No!" Vivienne said sharply, before Oisín could continue.
"If you're thinking to send him to assess the boy, no."
"Well, he is the boy's uncle," Khoren said reasonably.
"I don't know," Seisyll said doubtfully. "Vivienne, I know
that you've never trusted him, because of his bloodline, but
he's been under our direction since the age of nine. It was
Sief who kept him from court all these years, and who got
Donal to go along with it, by suggesting that a Deryni placed
at the Mearan court would be an extremely valuable asset."
"He is still Lewys ap Norfal's son," Vivienne said
stubbornly.

"Yes, and he has acted competently as our agent for more
than twenty years, and has never put a foot wrong," Michon
pointed out. "I had part of his training, Vivienne. Oisín is
right; I don't know why it hasn't occurred to us before."
"I regret that it has occurred to us now," Vivienne
muttered.
"Would Jessamy allow access?" Dominy asked, ignoring
the remark. "I know he's her brother, and Krispin is his
nephew, but has he even been back to Rhemuth since the
boy's birth?"
Seisyll shook his head. "He didn't come to Sief’s funeral—
not that there was any love lost there, or that he could have
heard the news and arrived in time. Besides, he and
Jessamy probably haven't seen one another more than half a
dozen times since before their father's death; he'd been
fostered to court several years before that. After Sief married
Jessamy, he did his best to poison the relationship between
brother and sister, in hopes that this would keep her from
corrupting him."
"Was there actually a danger of that?" Khoren asked.
Oisín gave a snort. "Who knows? If we were talking about
horses, I'd say that blood will tell. But Michon is right. So far
as Morian is concerned, he has never, ever put a foot wrong."
Barrett de Laney, who had remained largely silent, jutted
his chin in the direction of Oisín .
"What would it take, to get Morian back to Rhemuth to
meet his nephew?" he asked.
"The king would have to summon him," Seisyll said
promptly. "Or Morian would have to present a convincing
reason for a personal visit to Rhemuth, something requiring
that he report to the king in person. Or," he added, at
Barrett's gesture encouraging further development of this
line of thinking, "the governor could be induced to send him
to the king on some convincing pretext—and Morian does
have the governor's ear... and the situation in Meara is
sufficiently volatile that Iolo Melandry does send regular
reports to Rhemuth, and might want an occasional report to
carry the weight of Morian's verification that the information
he's been gathering is true."
"My thinking, precisely," Barrett said with a faint, tight
smile. "Oisín , could you work with that?"
"You mean, could I approach Morian and ask him to
manipulate the governor, to get himself sent to Rhemuth?"
Oisín replied.
"Exactly that."
Oisín considered briefly, then nodded, grinning. "I can be
in Ratharkin within the next week. We shall see what can be
arranged."

T

HERE was no working Portal in the palace at Ratharkin, but
one had been established decades earlier at a manor half a
day's ride north of the city, formerly held by a Deryni lord
but now occupied by a minor baron of the Old Mearan
aristocracy. Oisín Adair sold horses regularly to Sir Evan
Sullivan, whose daughter had married a Connaiti princeling,
and Oisín also had set certain controls in Sir Evan so that
he could show up unannounced and obtain use of a horse
without anyone remarking on his sudden presence.
Accordingly, not a fortnight after his meeting with the
Council, Oisín made his way to the Portal at Sir Evan's
manor of Arkella, borrowed a horse, and set out for
Ratharkin, arriving at midmorning.
The R'Kassan cream that he was riding turned heads as
he drew rein in the stable yard, and seemed to conjure most
of the stableboys and squires within minutes—and also the
attention of the animals Oisín had delivered to Governor
Melandry a few weeks before, who whickered and called to
the new arrival; R'Kassan creams seemed to prefer the
company of other cream horses, and had eyes for no steed of
any other color.
The commotion also produced Iolo Melandry himself, who
cast an appraising eye over Oisín's mount.
"That almost looks like one of the beasts from Arkella," he
said.
"It is one of the beasts from Arkella," Oisín replied, to
forestall too much speculation. "My own threw a shoe not far
from there, and I had to walk there and beg the use of this
one. I mayn't stay long, for I've business in Kindaloo on the
morrow, but I hoped I might impose briefly for some
refreshment. It's a ferocious hot day."
"Then, you must come in and take some wine with me,"
Iolo said, blissfully unaware that Oisín was encouraging his
impulse for hospitality. "And I shall ask Sir Morian to join
us. He shares our love of fine horseflesh, as you know."
Oisín did know, and had planted that observation as
well. Within minutes, the two of them were sitting beneath a
breezy, shaded porch atop the palace walls, sipping chilled
wine while Iolo reported on the progress of the horses he had
bought from Oisín, and the difficulty of finding good trainers.
Very shortly, Morian ap Lewys du Joux made his
appearance, booted and spurred from an earlier ride, and
buckling a silver-mounted Kheldouri dirk over a loose-fitting
tunic of cool Cassani linen that fell to mid-thigh. In contrast
to this relaxed attire, he wore his auburn hair sleeked back
severely in a soldier's knot, braided and clouted at the nape

of the neck. Though he and Oisín affected only casual
pleasure to meet again, a quick communication passed
silently between them, such that, as Morian came to take
the cup of wine Iolo offered, the merest contact of their
hands was sufficient for Morian to trigger the controls long
ago set, taking the governor instantly from full awareness
into drowsing trance.
When Morian had deepened that trance, instructing his
subject to relax and enjoy his wine, he pulled a stool closer
to sit beside Oisín as the two of them gazed out over the
city.
"I am somewhat surprised to see you here," Morian said
to him aside, sipping at his wine.
"No more surprised than I, to be sent," Oisín replied. "I
have a somewhat delicate mission for you."
"Indeed."
"You have never met your nephew, I think," Oisín said.
Morian turned to gaze directly at Oisín . His eyes were a
startling deep blue, almost violet.
"My sister's child," he said. "And why would I want to do
that?"
Offering his open hand, Oisín invited a direct link,
smiling faintly as the other instead touched fingertips lightly
to his wrist. But the contact was sufficient for the necessary
rapport, by which Oisín quickly imparted the Council's
speculations regarding the child—and their suspicions
regarding the death of Morian's brother-in-law, and the
king's probable part in it, and possibly Jessamy's as well.
Morian said nothing as he drew his hand away, also
ending the rapport, only taking up his cup again to sip at his
wine as he gazed out over the city.
“I haven't seen my sister above a dozen times in the past
thirty years," he finally said, not looking at Oisín . "Sief
discouraged it—and I understand why. But what you've
suggested is—quite astonishing." He glanced into his cup,
speculating aloud.
"Poor Sief. We never really got on, but he didn't deserve
that. I was got away from my father before I could be
'tainted'—I know what he's said to have done—but Sief never
trusted my sister. An odd basis for a marriage, don't you
think?"
" 'Better to marry than to burn,' to quote Holy Writ out of
context," Oisín said. "In the case of your sister, better to
marry her off than to kill her off. At least you didn't face
that."
"No." Morian sighed. "Very well, I'll do it. It will take some
time to set up an excuse to go to Rhemuth—or to have Iolo
send me."

"Understood," Oisín agreed. "I think there is no great
urgency, since the boy is not yet two—and it's understood
that you'll need to make careful preparations. But we do
need to know what we're dealing with."
Morian shook his head, still trying to take in the concept
of a nephew who might also be the son of the King of
Gwynedd.
"Morian," Oisín said softly, guessing the line of the
other's thinking, "it isn't as if we're simply talking about
another royal bastard."
"I know that," Morian replied. "And if it was done, it
appears to have been done deliberately—and if deliberately,
then for a reason. The question is, what reason?"
"We'll worry about that once we discover whether he is
Donal Haldane's son," Oisín said, tipping back the rest of
his wine. "I'd best be off—or shall I stick around, so that you
don't have to explain my sudden departure to the governor?"
"No, go ahead. I might as well begin setting up the idea of
sending me to Rhemuth, while I already have him in control.
And if I'm going to do that, it's easy enough to cover your
departure."
"As you will, then," Oisín replied, standing. "Good luck to
you."

I

N fact, it did not prove feasible to go to Rhemuth that season
or even the next, for the rumblings of unrest in Meara were
sufficiently troubling that Iolo Melandry preferred to keep his
aide close by his side—or else out in the field gathering
intelligence, as only a Deryni might do. During those two
years, the king sent his brother Richard twice to that
troubled province to observe and report back, and sensed
that the time was approaching when only his own presence
would suffice to restore order.
But he put it off, because unrest of another sort was
brewing closer to home, in Carthane to the south, where an
itinerant bishop called Oliver de Nore was gaining notoriety
for his rigorous enforcement of the Statutes of Ramos—yet
another cause for concern to the Camberian Council.
The Statutes of Ramos had been formulated nearly two
centuries earlier, in the wake of the Haldane Restoration,
and severely limited the participation of Deryni in the life of
Gwynedd. Though de Nore had no specific authority to
enforce the secular aspects of the Statutes, canon law was a
bishop's stock in trade, and sometimes allowed him leeway
surely never intended by the formulators of those Statutes.
As the decade wore on, de Nore could take credit for the

persecution, incarceration, and even execution of scores
of men and women, some of them of long-hidden Deryni
bloodlines. Most poignant were the deaths of those
discovered while trying to gain access to the priesthood, long
forbidden to those of their race; and for such men, the
penalty was always death by fire. Their fate, in particular,
elicited impassioned anger and debate among the members
of the Council, for they were well aware that, until all were
once again free to take up priestly vocations, Deryni would
never regain a full partnership with the humans among
whom they lived.

F

ORTUNATELY, de Nore and those who constituted ultraconservative elements within the Church's hierarchy in
Carthane did not yet seem inclined to insist that their
interpretation of the Laws of Ramos should extend beyond
Carthane's borders, much to the relief of the three Deryni
then resident at the Convent of Notre Dame d'Arc-en-Ciel.
Since the ouster of Bishop de Nore's brother as a chaplain,
nearly four years before, royal patronage and the convent's
proximity to Rhemuth had kept at bay any further
infiltration by would-be zealots. Or perhaps the presence of
two important royal wards had buttressed the status of Arcen-Ciel as a sanctuary for certain select Deryni.
Nonetheless, by late April of 1085, as Alyce de Corwyn
helped with preparations for the clothing of a new novice and
the profession of final vows by the Deryni daughter of
Jessamy MacAthan, initial reports were trickling into Arc-enCiel of renewed violence in Carthane, and an outbreak of
rioting in Nyford. The day before the ceremonies were to take
place, Father Paschal arrived with more detailed news that
kept him sequestered with Jessilde and Mother Judiana for
several hours, while the community continued to prepare for
the next day's celebrations.
Much had changed at Arc-en-Ciel since Paschal's last
visit. Much to their delight, Alyce and Zoë now shared a
room, though the circumstances by which this had occurred
had surprised them both. For Alyce's original roommate,
Cerys Devane, had experienced a religious epiphany the
previous winter that surprised even herself, and had moved
into the postulants' dormitory at Easter to prepare for
reception as a novice at the same time Jessilde made her
final vows.
"Cerys, are you sure?" Alyce had asked her, remembering
the other girl's protestations when they first met, that she
could never be a nun.
"No, I'm not at all sure," Cerys had admitted, though her
face had glowed with an inner radiance that none could

gainsay. "I only know that I've never been happier in my
life, and that this seems to be the place God wants me to
be."
"But, you were here before, and you're still here," Alyce
had said reasonably.
"Of course I am," Cerys replied. "But God is here.” she
touched the flat of her hand to her heart, "and I sense that
there's more I'm meant to be doing in His service. I don't yet
know what, but isn't that part of what a novitiate is all
about?"
Whatever the true reasons for the decision, it had left
Alyce without a roommate after Easter—and Zoë's
roommate, a rather plain Llanneddi girl called Edwina, had
announced her plans to leave early in June to be married
out of her father's castle near Concaradine.
So Zoë had asked permission to move in with Alyce,
leaving Edwina the privacy of her own room for her last few
weeks at Arc-en-Ciel. The arrangement had allowed the new
roommates far greater privacy to continue exploring their
enhanced relationship, but even so, they preferred not to
speak openly of what they were doing.
Father Paschal told me that the king and queen are coming
tomorrow, Alyce sent to Zoë, when they had settled into bed
and doused the nightlight.
That's nice, Zoë returned sleepily. I think my father is
coming, too. I may not get to see him again before he takes off
for Meara in June.
The exchange was not the same kind of mutual rapport
that might have been enjoyed by two Deryni, for it required
physical contact, and that Alyce initiate the link—and that
Zoë offer no resistance—but the result was useful,
nonetheless, especially in an environment where one must
be circumspect.
I hope he'll be safe, Alyce sent. My father and brother are
going as well. Meara isn’t a place I'd particularly want to go,
with all the troubles there.
Speaking of “safe," Zoë said, should I be worried about
other Deryni who might be there tomorrow?
I'm not sure, Alyce replied honestly. But Father Paschal
told me that he tried to probe you from across the room, since
that's what another Deryni might do—though only if he or she
had reason to be suspicious. Still, there will be at least a few
here tomorrow: Jessamy and her children, and maybe some
of the in-laws from her eldest daughter's family. There could
be others as well, that we don't know about. But you passed
muster.
Well, that's a relief, Zoë, responded. But maybe, just to
make sure, you ought to shut me down until tomorrow's
ceremonies are over.

That's what Father Paschal suggested, Alyce sent. You
know, you're getting far too good at this.
We'll credit that to your ability as a teacher, Zoë returned,
as she yawned hugely. I am but a mirror to reflect your own
brilliance. Why? Did he think there was any real danger?
I don't think so, Alyce replied. But it doesn't hurt to be safe.
I'll do it in the morning.
Maybe we should just go a-Maying instead, Zoë said.
Tomorrow is going to have entirely too much ceremony and far
too many important people.
Go to sleep, Alyce ordered. Tomorrow, we're both going to
need all our wits about us.

Chapter 11
"Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the
Lord,
and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God."
-ISAIAH 62:3

F

ESTIVITIES the following day were to begin at noon. As
expected, Jessamy rode up from Rhemuth to witness her
daughter's final vows, bringing along Jessilde's two younger
sisters and also young Krispin, just turned three.
As a courtesy to Jessamy, the king and queen also made
the journey up from the capital, their presence lending
additional solemnity to the occasion, even though it was a
private visit. Prince Brion, who was almost four, rode
proudly at his father's saddlebow; the toddler Blaine, much
to his disappointment, was relegated to a well-padded horselitter with his mother, who was six months gone with child.
The three-year-old Krispin had expected to share that
fate, but to his glee found himself hoisted up before Sir
Kenneth Morgan, who had come along as the king's aide,
and also to help supervise the three boys—and to visit with
his daughter.
The convent chapel was packed even before the royal
party's arrival, not only with the families of the two
principals in the day's ceremonials but with local folk come
to catch a glimpse of the king and queen.
"It's rather like a wedding," Jessilde had told Alyce, Marie,
and Zoë early that morning, amid the bustle of last-minute
preparations. The previous afternoon, while the nuns saw to
the final cleaning of the convent church and made certain
that linens were pristine and habits brushed up, the
students had woven floral garlands to bedeck the altar rails
and pillars in the nave, and now were finishing the final
touches. It was Jessilde herself who had made the wreath of
multi-colored roses for Cerys.
"These have opened nicely," she said, adjusting one of the
pale pink ones. She'll wear her hair loose on her shoulders
like a bride, and her best gown, all of it covered with a very
fine, very long white veil."
"Is there a bouquet?" Marie wanted to know. "I can't
remember whether they carry flowers or not. I've only seen
this happen once before."
"No, these will be her flowers," Jessilde replied. "She'll
carry a lighted candle instead—carefully, lest she set her veil
alight!—and her parents will conduct her down the aisle
while you and the rest of the choir sing the Ave Vierge
Doreé."

"I don't think her parents are entirely happy about her
decision," Zoë said. "Her mother looked like she'd been
crying when they arrived last night, and her father hardly
said a word."
"They had a rich husband all picked out for her," Alyce
said. "Of course, he was old enough to be her father—and
nearly, to be her grandfather."
"I'm sure they did," Jessilde replied. "She's a beautiful
young woman, and she would have made a fitting
adornment to any lord's court." She flashed an impish smile.
"Of course, God had other plans for her."
Marie screwed up her face in a grimace of dismay.
"Somehow, I don't think that being a bride of Christ is quite
the same."
"No, it's much better!" Jessilde said happily, "at least for
me. And for Cerys." She picked up the finished floral crown.
"I'd better go and help her finish dressing."
They had decked the chapel with flowers, bursting from
vases to either side of the altar and garlanded all along the
altar rails, in addition to the garlands festooned across the
ends of the benches set to either side of the rainbowcarpeted center aisle, where the guests would sit. Flowers
also bedecked the fronts of the choir stalls, and hung in
swags from the canopies over the back row. The altar wore a
blanket of roses as a frontal, and had acquired a rainbow
canopy of fine tapestry, with threads of gold woven amid its
many colors, so that it glistened in the light that poured
through the east window, already aglow from the colored
glass.
By noon, the church was packed, Marie with the soloists
of the choir, Alyce and Zoë amid the other students in their
places with the general choristers, the sisters, servers, and
clergy waiting ready for the entrance procession. As the last
stroke of the Angelus bell faded into stillness, the choirmistress moved before the choir, gathered their attention
with a glance, and raised her hands in signal for them to
rise.
With the first sweet notes of the Salve Regina, sung a
cappella in three-part harmony, the two girls given the honor
of conducting the king and queen to their seats started
forward, with the royal couple and the two young princes
walking under the rainbow canopy they carried. Zoë's father
and one of the queen's ladies followed behind them as the
royal party were led along the rainbow carpet and into the
choir, where they were shown to seats of honor on the
Gospel side, nearest the altar.
Sir Kenneth caught his daughter's eye and winked as he
took a seat next to the king, also sending an amiable nod
and a smile to Alyce; the young princes sat dutifully between
their parents. In the nave, Jessamy stood before a front

bench with her two younger daughters and Krispin, also
on the Gospel side—and on the Epistle side were Cerys's
brothers and sisters, all dressed in their finest. Their parents
waited at the rear of the nave with the daughter soon to be
received under the rainbow, for her reception would precede
Jessilde's final vows.
Others, too, had particular cause to be present here
today. Standing in the row behind Jessamy and her
children, Alyce noticed a pretty, dark-haired young woman
who looked a lot like Jessamy, who glanced back at the
double line of blue-robed sisters now starting down the aisle
behind the crucifer and two torch-bearers. By the woman's
expression, as she saw Jessilde among them, Alyce decided
that the one who looked like Jessamy must be her eldest
daughter Sieffany—which suggested that the two men next
to her, farther from the aisle, were probably her husband
and her father-in-law, both of them Deryni.
It occurred to Alyce that Jessamy had mentioned the
father-in-law before, and had said that he came occasionally
to court—Michon de Courcy, was it?—and the son was
Aurélien. Jessamy had not said it in so many words, but
Alyce had been left with the distinct impression that the
father was a formidable Deryni, indeed, and to be avoided, if
at all possible.
Certain it was that Jessamy did not look pleased to have
him standing behind her, and had positioned herself as a
buffer between him and her youngest, the boy Krispin,
sitting quietly in the aisle position. Surely she did not think
that Michon would hurt the boy?
The sisters filed into their stalls and the clergy took their
places to begin the Mass, for the two ceremonies would take
place within that context, following the Gospel. After the
opening prayers, the readings spoke of being called by God,
and the symbolism of the rainbow as a sign of His promise,
and then a pious account of the apparition by which the
Blessed Virgin had made her will known concerning the
foundation of what became l'Ordre de Notre Dame d'Arc-enCiel.
At the conclusion of that reading, as the girls with the
rainbow canopy went back up the aisle to fetch Cerys and
her parents, a hush settled within the sun-drenched
brilliance of the chapel, and then Marie's pure voice lifted in
the first verse of an old Bremagni bridal hymn, Ave Vierge
Dorée. The rest of the choir joined in as two of the youngest
girls from the school strewed fragrant rose petals before the
bridal party as Cerys's parents led her down the rainbow
aisle. Uplifted before her, Cerys bore her candle of profession
as if it were the most precious treasure the world could offer.
With all eyes focused there, young Krispin chose that
moment to dart from his mother's side and into the choir to
join the two princes, eliciting smiles and a few suppressed
giggles among the girls of the convent school, a stern glance

from the king, and an indulgent hug of the culprit from
Queen Richeldis as he settled happily between her and
Prince Blaine for a better view of the proceedings.
Murmurs of amusement gave way to sighs of wistful
admiration as Cerys passed into the choir, for she had never
looked more beautiful, or more content. Her figure-skimming
gown of costly damask was the rich lilac hue of hyacinths,
shot with gold, her loose hair tumbling down her back like a
cascade of flame, and crowned with roses in every color the
convent gardens had to offer. A veil of sheerest gossamer fell
to her waist in the front and onto her gown's short train in
the back.
By contrast, her mother looked like a plump and
somewhat gaudy songbird in a gown of several shades of
blue and green, with tears brimming in her blue eyes as she
and her husband, a shorter and more somberly dressed man
of middle years, presented their daughter before Mother
Judiana, seated on a cushioned stool at the foot of the altar
steps, and returned to sit with their other children.
There followed an exchange of questions and answers
between superior and postulant, after which Judiana folded
back the front of Cerys's veil and conducted her to the altar,
where they set the candle at the feet of the statue of the
Virgin, then passed though a side door while the choir sang
another hymn.
When they returned to bow before the altar, Mother
Judiana with the veil over one arm, the new postulant wore
the pale blue habit of the order, much as she had done while
a student with the other girls, but now with a snowy wimple
close-covering her hair—save for the bright-flame tail of it,
now braided and hanging down her back—and the wreath of
roses now set atop.
This she removed and lifted up in offering before laying it
reverently on the altar. Then she came down off the altar
pace and lay prostrate in the midst of the choir, arms
outstretched, Judiana covering her from head to toe with the
fine veil she had worn and then kneeling beside her, while
the community sang a litany of the saints in antiphon,
answered by the choir of the school.
When they had finished, Judiana assisted Cerys to rise
and led her back to the stool at the foot of the altar steps,
sitting as the new novice knelt to offer up her joined hands
between Judiana's and made her first profession of chastity,
stability, fidelity to monastic life, and obedience. After that,
she returned briefly to the altar to sign a copy of the
promises she had just made, before kneeling again before
the community's superior.
All that remained was the veiling of the new novice,
accomplished very simply as two novice members of the
community brought the white veil with its rainbow edge and
held it taut above her bowed head while Judiana

pronounced the formal words of blessing:
"Dearest daughter in Christ, henceforth to be known
among us as Sister Iris Cerys, receive this veil in token of
your chastity, and as a sign that you are enfolded in our
Lady's grace and received within the embrace of the rainbow,
a symbol not only of God's promise to have mercy on His
people, but of our Lady's reassurance that she shall be our
Advocate in the day of final Judgment.
"And though you now shall endeavor to dwell beneath the
rainbow, turning your face toward the brightening sun, may
the cloud-white of the novice veil remind you that you have
yet to achieve the fullness of that rainbow-vision that comes
with true knowledge of the Son of God."
She draped the rainbow-edge over the new novice's
wimple, arranged the veil's folds on her shoulders, then set
her hand on it as she pronounced the words of final
blessing, "In Nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti, Amen."
With that, while the choir sang a joyful Alleluia, Judiana
traced a cross on the new novice's brow, conducted Sister
Iris Cerys to the place in choir that henceforth would be
hers, and returned to the stool before the altar.
On a visual level, the reception of Jessilde's final vows
was far simpler, though it held a greater poignancy for those
who understood its greater import. Coming before the
community's superior, Jessilde placed her hands between
those of Judiana and pledged her lifelong promises,
repeating the traditional monastic vows Cerys had just
made—and she, like Cerys, went to the altar to sign her
agreement to the vows just sworn.
But then, instead of lying prostrate before the altar, she
stood close before it and spread her arms in self-offering,
leaning forward then to rest her forehead against the snowy
altar linens as she sang an exhortation from the Psalms,
repeated by the choir:
"Suscipe me, Domine, secundum eloquium tuum, et
vivam....” Receive me, O Lord, as Thou hast promised, and I
shall live; and disappoint me not in my hope. .. .
This exchange they sang three times, Jessilde beginning
on a slightly higher note with each repetition and the choir
answering, after which she came to kneel once more before
Judiana, bowing her head as the white veil of a novice was
removed, shears brought on a silver tray, and the back of
her wimple loosened so that Judiana might release the coiled
braid of her hair and cut it off, close at the nape.
This time two vowed sisters brought the rainbow-edged
blue veil that would replace the white one; but before doing
that, Judiana removed the plain blue scapular that Jessilde
had worn as a novice and replaced it with one embroidered
along the lower edges with rainbow bands. Her words, as she
laid the pale blue veil across Jessilde's head, were similar to

those she had spoken earlier:
"Dearest daughter in Christ, known among us as Sister
Iris Jessilde, receive now the veil of a fully vowed member of
this order, the clear, celestial blue of our Lady's mantle,
enfolding you in the bright rainbow that signifies God's
promise and our Lady's benison. May you dwell ever in the
Son-light that creates this Sign, In Nomine Patris, et Filii, et
Spiritus Sancti, Amen."
As she had done for Cerys, now she traced a cross on
Jessilde's forehead, before placing a gold ring on the
marriage finger of her left hand. Jessilde raised that hand
above her head, so that all could see the ring, then bent to
kiss Judiana's hand before being raised up.
After that, she took back the coiled braid of her hair from
the silver salver and laid it on the altar in offering, as Cerys
had offered up her flower crown. One day, in one of their
sessions with Father Paschal, he had told Alyce and Marie
and Jessilde that, in the days before the great persecutions,
the men of the all-Deryni Order of Saint Gabriel had worn a
similar braid, though of four strands, never cutting their hair
once they had made their vows; and if forced by
circumstance to cut their braids, had been obliged to dispose
of the braid in ritual far more intricate than Jessilde's simple
offering.
Alyce thought about that parallel all through the Mass
that followed, wondering how many others within these walls
were aware of that ancient Deryni custom besides those
Father Paschal had told.

M

ICHON de Courcy knew, though he would have been
surprised to learn how many others present were also privy
to that knowledge. His purpose in attending Jessilde
MacAthan's final profession, while ostensibly to honor this
important milestone in the life of his son's sister-in-law, was
actually a long awaited opportunity to hopefully gain him
access for that closer look at her younger brother; for there
had been little doubt in Michon's mind that the boy's
mother, Jessamy, would ride up from Rhemuth for the
event, and probably would bring all of her younger
children—as, indeed, she had done.
Not that she had been pleased to see Michon in the party
with her eldest daughter—though, given his familial
connection, he was certain that no one else would have
thought his presence inappropriate. The king and queen
certainly had been cordial enough.
But he suspected that it was Jessamy who, to remove
young Krispin from such close proximity to a man who

might uncover the truth about him, had instigated the
boy's sudden dash forward to sit with the princes—though
Krispin's impulsive action was not altogether inappropriate
or unexpected, under the circumstances. The young princes
had occupied the best seats in the house for a close view of
the proceedings; and though, by special dispensation, the
Mass ran well into the afternoon, the three boys had been
quite well behaved, given their young ages.
But though Michon had feared that the change of seating
arrangement might stymie any chance of success in the true
purpose of his presence, he found his opportunity later that
evening when, after supper in the refectory with the rest of
the close family and friends invited to stay the night, he
chanced to be walking in the cloister garden. After pausing
to chat briefly with Sir Kenneth Morgan and his daughter—
and Lady Alyce de Corwyn, in whose presence he kept
himself carefully shielded—he noticed three dark heads
clustered somewhat conspiratorially in a sheltered corner of
the garden, one of their owners poking at something on the
ground. Wandering closer, he saw that the object of their
interest was a very small, very dead bird—a swallow, by the
look of it, not yet fully fledged.
"What a pity," he said, as he crouched down casually
among them. "What do you suppose happened?"
There in the convent garden, none of the three showed
any sign of wariness, for they had seen Michon in the
church, sitting behind Krispin's mother, and knew he was
kin to one of the nuns.
"I think he falled out of his nest," said Prince Brion, who
was senior of the three both by age and by rank. Under the
eaves above them, Michon could see the bulges of several
tiny nests plastered close against the rafters.
"But, why didn't he fly?" Blaine said plaintively.
"Because his wings are too small," Brion replied, grasping
the tips of both tiny wings and stretching them out to
display their juvenile state. "See, they're only little. But I
think he was going to be a swallow, like those up there."
He glanced upward at a nest tucked up under the eaves,
with several little heads looking down at them with beady
little eyes. Nearby, several adult swallows were clinging to
precarious toeholds amid the ends of the rafters, heads
swiveling to watch them.
"I see more babies up there!" Blaine cried.
At the same time, Brion started to turn the bird over for a
closer look at the markings on its throat, but Krispin
recoiled, wrinkling up his nose in disgust.
"Ugh, it's got crawly things on it! Leave it alone!"
Brion abandoned the bird at once, wiping both hands
against his crimson tunic, and Blaine hastily backed off a

step, lower lip a-quiver. He collided with the crouching
Michon, who slipped a comforting arm around him and also
took the opportunity to do the same to Krispin.
"It's all right, son. That's part of nature's way," he said,
reassuring young Blaine and, at the same time, quickly
daring a very gentle touch of the other boy's mind—and then
a deeper probe, when the first touch seemed not to be
noticed. "Do you think we ought to bury him?"
"That's a good idea," Brion said. Already showing signs of
leadership, he immediately started to scoop out a suitable
hole with his bare hands.
"Maybe he's just sleeping," young Blaine said hopefully,
as he watched his brother dig.
"No, I'm afraid he's dead, son," Michon replied.
"But—why did he falled out of the nest?" Blaine insisted.
"Why didn't the mama bird or the papa bird help him?"
"I'm sure they wanted to," Michon assured him,
redirecting the boy's attention to the adult swallows
watching from above. "I'm sure they're very sad. Don't you
see them looking down at us? They're watching to make sure
we take good care of their baby."
"Oh," said Blaine, apparently satisfied with this
explanation.
"Shouldn't we wrap him in something soft then, before we
bury him?" Krispin asked, turning to look at Michon. "I can
get a handkerchief from Mama. . . ."
"I have another idea," Michon replied, for he did not want
the boy to go just yet. "Birds are nature's creatures. Why
don't you line his little grave with leaves, or flower petals?
That would make him a very soft bed."
"An' it will make him smell better, too!" Brion said,
looking up with a pixie grin as he continued to scoop fresh
earth. "Blaine, you go get some flowers."
As Blaine raced off to pillage the nearest rosebush,
ruthlessly pulling off the heads of several blown blooms,
Krispin glanced up again at Michon, still taking comfort from
his embrace.
"You know a lot about birds, don't you, sir?" he asked.
"Well, I know a lot about a few things and a little about a
lot of things," Michon admitted. "I do know that your
particular bird would have grown up to be a very fine
swallow. I love watching them wheel in the sun. . . ."
And as Blaine returned and the three boys set about
shredding roses and lining the little grave, Michon continued
to crouch among them to encourage and advise—and was
able to probe undetected into young Krispin's mind,
discovering most of what he had come there to learn.

Chapter 12
"Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the
war."
-ISAIAH 3:25

I

'VE finally managed a look at Krispin MacAthan," Michon
announced to the Camberian Council a few days later,
accessing their meeting place from the Portal at Rhemuth
Cathedral. "I cannot tell you for certain that he is Donal
Haldane's son; but I can tell you that I do not believe Sief
can have been his father."
After deflecting their startled flurry of questions and
demands for clarification, he reached his arms to either side
to link hands with Barrett and Vivienne, flanking him left
and right, and waited while the others did likewise, drawing
them quickly into a deep rapport that enabled them to share
what he had learned. When they came out of the trance, his
fellow councilors glanced uneasily among themselves,
uncertain what it all meant.
"Far more useful, of course, would have been to question
Jessamy directly," Michon reminded them. "Krispin himself
knows nothing of the man whose name he bears, save what
he has been told. And if Donal Haldane is his father, I still
have no idea how that came to pass."
"In the usual way, one would assume," Oisín murmured,
in a droll aside to Seisyll.
"Whatever his paternity," Michon went on, ignoring the
remark, "we are fortunate, indeed, that Krispin MacAthan—
or Krispin Haldane, as he probably should be called—
exhibits none of the worrying characteristics that made his
grandfather so dangerous. Nor does he seem to favor his
mother, in that regard. If anything, he somewhat reminds
me of Morian—who will need to be told that he need not
pursue our previous request," he added, with a glance at
Oisín . "All things considered, his Deryni heritage, combined
with whatever it is that makes the Haldanes so curiously
formidable, seems to have produced a child of quite
interesting potential."
Dominy raised an elegant eyebrow. "Pray, define
'interesting,' in this context," she said.
Several of them smiled ruefully at that, and Michon
shrugged. "The boy is only three. If we cannot bend him to
our purposes, he can always be eliminated later on. But this
one bears watching, I think. Actually, the boy is nearly of an
age to begin his training as a page—which means that he
will be far more accessible in the future. Accordingly, it
might be profitable for Seisyll to watch for opportunities to
gain his friendship."

"I have been doing that for the past three years," Seisyll
replied, "but it is true that he should become more
accessible in the future. And it's a relief to know that we
need make no immediate decisions."
“There is another decision that will require our attention
sooner rather than later," Michon went on. "I saw Keryell's
girls while I was at Arc-en-Ciel. They've both become quite
the beauties."
"Probably as well, then, that they are locked away in a
convent for now," Dominy said mildly. "What are they now?
Maybe fifteen or so?"
"Fourteen and fifteen," Barrett replied. "Ripe enough for
marriage."
"Yes, well," Seisyll muttered. 'The last time I spoke to
Keryell about his plans for them, he was quite willing to be
guided by our recommendations. And I can guide the king,
of course. I have him thinking about several likely
candidates who would inject the right Deryni blood into the
Corwyn line."
"Those matches aren't nearly as critical as they once
might have been," Oisín pointed out. "Rather, we should be
thinking about a match for their brother Ahern. He is easing
nicely into the promise of his line, and his father has been
campaigning him rather heavily the past year or so. When
the time comes, he should make quite a formidable Duke of
Corwyn."
Vivienne had been nodding as he spoke. "Ah, yes.
Surprisingly good bloodlines. I know that no one was pleased
when Keryell seized Stevana de Corwyn and married her by
force, but the outcome has been most salubrious—and even
Keryell himself seems to have come around to the discipline
of the Council."
"Perhaps we should send him on a mission to Carthane,"
Dominy said. "Something must be done about Bishop Oliver
de Nore. . . ."

B

UT for Donal Haldane, while Carthane and its Deryni
persecutions remained a troublesome source of periodic
unrest, it was westward that he looked with increasing
uneasiness, for Meara remained yet unsettled. His sons were
thriving, the harvests plentiful, and with the decade at its
mid-point, even Nimur of Torenth seemed to have turned his
aspirations away from Gwynedd, campaigning eastward past
Arjenol that season. By September of 1085, when Queen
Richeldis presented Donal with the dainty daughter she had
longed for, christened Xenia, the king could look back on

several seasons of peace, though most of the year to date
had been bracketed with military readiness.
That spring, acting on rumors of growing unrest in
Meara, Donal had appointed his half-brother, Duke Richard,
to assume active field command of the Gwyneddan Army.
Richard, in turn, had spent the summer organizing the
Gwynedd levies and drilling the standing units—and to good
purpose, for August had seen a royal birth in Meara: a son,
to the Princess Onora, who was daughter of the present
Mearan pretender, Prince Judhael.
The birth of a male heir had rekindled Mearan aspirations
to independence, even though the marriage of Donal's father
with Roisian of Meara was to have settled the Mearan
succession after the death of her father without male issue.
Prince Judhael was Roisian's nephew, son of the Princess
Annalind, who had been Roisian's twin.
But the widow of the last prince, the Dowager Princess
Urracca, had promoted the cause of Annalind, the younger
twin, over that of Roisian, whom she deemed a traitor to her
land for having married Malcolm Haldane. All three were
now long dead—mother and both daughters—but Annalind's
son Judhael had begun to attract renewed support among
Mearan separatists. During that winter following the birth of
Judhael’s grandson, his wife—who was Llanneddi, aunt to
Queen Richeldis—wrote several times to her niece in
Rhemuth, warning that, if a Mearan accommodation could
not be reached, their respective husbands were headed for
war.
All through that winter and into the spring of 1086, much
of the gossip and speculation at the court of Rhemuth was
focused on the prospect of rebellion brewing in the west. At
midsummer, the king gave his brother Richard a
commission as acting viceroy of Meara and sent him to
Ratharkin to set up a court of inquiry, with instructions to
enlist the full assistance of the Lady Jessamy's brother, Sir
Morian du Joux. By this, he meant Deryni assistance.
Serving as the prince's advisors and staff were Lord
Seisyll Arilan, Sir Kenneth Morgan, and Keryell Earl of
Lendour, who brought along his son Ahern. In addition, the
king sent summons of array to two of his earls whose
holdings lay near Meara's borders, and who thus had a
personal interest in holding the peace in Meara: Jared of
Kierney and Caulay of Transha, both of them in their
youthful prime and both bringing small but powerful levies
to enforce the king's authority, if necessary. Finally, as a
sign of his personal authority, the king also sent along a
squadron of Haldane lancers.
By Lammastide, Duke Richard had assembled his team
in Ratharkin and begun to hear grievances. By Michaelmas,
it had become clear that most or the Mearan complaints
were groundless or trivial, and that the Mearans were but
wasting the court's time.

Matters came to a head late in October, though the
aftermath fell just short of all-out war. It was Keryell and
Ahern who, on the eve of the Feast of All Saints, just
managed to foil an assassination plot that might have
claimed Richard, the royal governor, and perhaps several
more high-ranking Gwyneddan men—except that Ahern de
Corwyn had chanced to detect the rebels' intentions before
they could be fully carried out, he being young and,
therefore, not fully under their suspicion. Nor was it widely
known in Meara that he and his father were Deryni.
The concerted response by the king's men was enough to
prevent serious harm to Richard himself, but not enough to
save Keryell and several Haldane lancers who were cut down
in the fighting. Two of the assassins were also killed
outright.
"How could this have happened?" Richard whispered,
nursing a badly bruised hand in his chambers that night
with Seisyll, Morian, and the two young earls whose levies
had provided the military force for a successful defense. Sir
Kenneth Morgan, tonight acting as Richard's aide, was
pouring wine for all of them, and sported a bloodied bandage
across his forehead and a blackened right eye. "Jared, how
many others did we lose?"
"Five of your Haldane lancers, two of my own, and one of
Caulay's, your Highness," Jared replied, "and we could lose
several more from their wounds. Keryell's boy may lose a leg.
The knee was shattered."
"Damn!" Shaking his head, Richard let it fall heavily onto
his undamaged hand. "Bad enough, to lose his father. And
now, if he lives, he'll be a cripple all his days."
"Your Highness, this canna be allowed tae go
unpunished," Earl Caulay said, his border brogue thick with
emotion, for the man he had lost had been a cousin. "If ye
dinna nip it in the bud right now, there'll be another fullscale rebellion within five years, mark my words."
"I agree," Seisyll said. "The plot obviously had been long
in the planning, and it very nearly succeeded. It seems clear
that they were after you—and that is a direct attack on the
king your brother."
"I can't argue with that," Richard said. "How many
prisoners have we?"
"Eight," Morian replied promptly. "And we killed another
ten."
"Did many escape, do you think?" Richard asked.
Seisyll exchanged a glance with Morian. The two of them
had gone among the prisoners a few hours earlier, reading
their guilt.
"I doubt it," Seisyll said.
"Most of the prisoners are known trouble-makers,"

Morian added.
Richard slowly lifted his head. At thirty, he was a
seasoned warrior, already with a reputation on and off the
field, but in this hour he looked far older.
"I am minded to hang them all, gentlemen," he said, "for
only by sharp example may we hope to discourage future
treachery of this sort. I do not doubt that Caulay is right:
that we shall have to mount another punitive expedition here
within the next few years. But stern measures now might
postpone it a while longer." He sighed. "I like it not, that I
must be the one to send word of our losses to my brother. I
had not thought to lose him an earl on this mission, and
especially not..."
His vague sigh in the direction of Morian made it clear
that he was regretting the loss of Keryell's Deryni skills as
well as the man himself. The others exchanged grim glances,
but when no one else spoke up, Sir Kenneth said gently,
"Shall I prepare the execution order, your Highness?"

W

ORD of what Richard had caused to be done reached
Rhemuth on a wet and blustery morning some five days
later, though he and his returning troops—and the bodies of
the slain—would not arrive for another fortnight. With the
news from Ratharkin came lists: those killed or executed in
the king's name and those who had died in his service.
Donal received the report, both verbal and written, in the
snug withdrawing room behind the screens at the end of the
great hall, and immediately called for an aide and a clark.
Sir Kenneth Morgan had brought the news, muddy and rainbedraggled, and shifted uneasily from one booted foot to the
other as the king read, wringing rain from a sodden hank of
sandy hair pulled back at his nape. Doing his best to stifle a
sneeze, he let a squire exchange his dripping cloak for a
warm, dry blanket and sat as Donal waved him to a stool set
close before the fire, gratefully accepting the cup of mulled
wine a page thrust into his fist.
"How bad is it really, Kenneth?" the king asked, still
scanning the lists.
"Bad enough, Sire," Kenneth replied. "We were very, very
lucky that our losses weren't worse."
As Kenneth closed cold-numbed fingers around his cup
and took a long pull at his wine, Donal said, "I see here that
you and Keryell may well have saved my brother's life—that
you were the heroes of the day. Did you know that Richard
said that in this letter?"
Kenneth nearly choked on his wine, looking up in

surprise mixed with faint discomfiture. A knight of only
minor holdings, about to turn forty, he had been the king's
loyal servant for more than half his life—still well fit for field
or council table, but hitherto quietly resigned that fame and
fortune were unlikely to be his.
"I'll take that as a 'no,'" Donal said, quirking him a faint
smile.
"I but did my duty, Sire, as I would have done for you,"
Kenneth said, when he had stopped coughing.
"Well, you did it very well, and I'll not forget. Now, go get
yourself a hot meal and a bed." As Sir Kenneth rose to do the
king's bidding, the summoned men entered, the aide
saluting with fist to breast and the clark bowing over the
writing case clutched to his chest.
"Again, well done," Donal said, as the exhausted man
took his leave. "Tiarnán, I have just received ill news from
Ratharkin," he went on, beckoning the aide closer. "Who are
Earl Keryell's stewards in Lendour and Corwyn, in his
absence?"
"In Corwyn, that would be the seneschal of Coroth, my
Liege," the aide replied, glancing after Sir Kenneth. "For
Lendour, I don't know; I would need to make inquiries. Has
something happened to Earl Keryell?"
"Unfortunately, it has." Donal handed Tiarnán the lists he
had just received. "There was an assassination attempt.
Richard is safe, and he hanged all the perpetrators, but
Keryell is slain, and five lancers, along with several others
from Kierney and Transha. Keryell's son is gravely wounded.
I'll ask you to notify the families of the lancers; their names
are there." He nodded toward the lists in Tiarnán's hand.
"Father Farian will help you with the necessary letters, and
I'll need to send some of my own. As for Keryell's daughters,
I think that warrants more personal attention." He rose and
stepped into the corridor to summon a page.
"Ivone, please ask Lady Jessamy to attend us," he said.
Tell her I shall need her to ride to Arc-en-Ciel at once. And
have Sir Jiri Redfearn assemble a suitable escort. It's vile
weather to send her out, but this kind of news comes best
from another woman—at least the bare bones of it."
As the page scurried off to carry out the king's
instructions, Tiarnán quickly scanned down the lists, grimfaced, shaking his head.
"Ill news, indeed, Sire. I recognize several of these
names—on both sides. And with Ahern injured and still
under-age, it occurs to me that you'll need regencies in
Lendour and Corwyn. Do you wish me to summon the
appropriate men?"
Donal shook his head. "Not at this time. Just advise the
stewards what has happened, and say that I have taken
Corwyn and Lendour directly under my protection for the

nonce, pending more permanent arrangements. If young
Ahern doesn't live, Keryell's daughters are about to become
very important heiresses."

T

HE page who summoned Jessamy to join the king did not
know the reason, but his instructions that she was to
prepare to ride to Arc-en-Ciel told her that it must concern
Alyce and Marie, or possibly Zoë Morgan, whose fathers were
presently on assignment in Ratharkin. Everyone at court
knew the precarious nature of Duke Richard's mission in
Meara, and what other high-ranking lords were in his party.
The king was dictating to Father Farian when she entered
the room, now dressed to accommodate the freezing rain
outside. Nearby, Sir Tiarnán MacRae was busy with his own
pen and parchments. One look at their faces warned her
that the news must be bad, indeed.
"You sent for me, Sire?"
He sighed and looked around at her, waving dismissal to
the page who had brought her and also casting an absent
glance at Tiarnán and the young priest, who now were
conferring in low tones.
"I've had ill news from Ratharkin," he said without
preamble.
"Yes, Sire," she murmured. "Not of Duke Richard, I
trust?"
"No, he is well, thank God, but Keryell Earl of Lendour
has been slain, along with several others, and his son is
sorely wounded. His daughters must be informed. I'll not
burden you with details that are better saved for them, but
you should know that young Ahern may yet succumb to his
injuries— though he was yet alive when the news left
Ratharkin."
"That is, at least, one blessing," she murmured. "Have
you word of Sir Kenneth Morgan? His daughter is also at
Arc-en-Ciel."
'Tell her that he is well," the king replied. "He brought the
news, and I have sent him to bed." He shook his head
wearily. "I do not envy you this mission, my lady. Would you
rather I sent another?"
"No, Sire," Jessamy said softly. "Better it comes from me
than from a stranger."
Donal nodded. "Thank you. I had hoped that would be
your answer. I've asked Sir Jiri Redfearn to assemble an
escort. He should have horses ready by the time you reach
the stable yard."
"Thank you, Sire," Jessamy murmured. "Do you wish us

to stay the night at Arc-en-Ciel or to return immediately?
The weather—"
"—is beastly, I know," the king said, finishing her
sentence. "Let the girls decide—though I see no need for
overmuch haste. Kenneth said that the bodies of the slain
will not reach Rhemuth for a week or more." He paused a
beat, sorrow in his face. "You'd best be on your way."
"Very good, Sire," she whispered, sinking in an obedient
curtsy.

A

N early dusk was descending as the sister-portress admitted
the half-dozen riders drawn up in the driving rain outside
the convent gate. Lady Jessamy MacAthan was well known
at Arc-en-Ciel, and her instructions were accepted without
question as she bade one of the sisters to take Sir Jiri and
his men into the outer parlor to warm before the fire.
"Pray, bring them dry blankets and food and drink as
well," Jessamy said, letting another sister take her own
sodden cloak and exchange it for a dry robe lined with fur. "I
come on the king's urgent business, and must speak with
Alyce and Marie."
"They are with a visitor, my lady," Sister Iris Agatha
informed her. "Their family chaplain. Do you wish me to
interrupt them?"
Jessamy looked at the blue-robed sister sharply. "Father
Paschal is here?"
The sister nodded. "He is, my lady. They do have
permission for him to call on them. Their father gave his
leave shortly after they joined us."
"Oh, I'm well aware of that,'" Jessamy assured her. "I'm
simply glad to learn that he's here. Unfortunately, I bring ill
news concerning Earl Keryell. He's been killed in Ratharkin,
and the girls' brother is seriously wounded. I've been sent to
fetch them back to Rhemuth. I'm sure Father Paschal will
wish to accompany them."
"Indeed, I'm sure he will," Sister Iris Agatha replied, eyes
wide with surprise and compassion. "Are we—at war with
Meara?"
Jessamy gave a weary shrug. "I would assume not, since
the king said nothing of that. I have no details, save that Zoë
Morgan's father brought the news—so she, at least, may rest
easy. May we go now?"

W

HEN, after a discreet knock, Zoë herself opened the door of
the writing room adjoining the convent's main library,
Jessamy brushed past her with only a perfunctory greeting,
leaving Sister Iris Agatha standing outside as she pulled the
door shut behind her. Across the room, the Corwyn sisters
were rising from seats before the fire, near to a slight, blackrobed figure bent over a brown leather satchel.
"Tante Jessamy!" Alyce cried, delighted, though her face
fell as she saw the older woman's somber expression, and
her sister grabbed her hand, apprehension growing. Now
sixteen, Alyce de Corwyn was coming into stunning young
womanhood, with creamy skin and dark-lashed eyes the
same blue as her fur-lined over-robe. Marie, a year younger,
was of rosier complexion, with a bronze braid instead of
Alyce's gold, but equally attractive.
"Tante Jessamy, what's wrong?" Alyce asked, when the
older woman did not immediately speak. "What can have
brought you out in such dreadful weather?"
Saying nothing yet, Jessamy came to slip an arm around
the waists of both girls and hug them close in greeting,
gazing past them at the man in R'Kassan clergy robes, who
straightened to give her a guarded inclination of his head.
Clergy trained at the great R'Kassan seminaries were widely
respected for their erudition and soundness of doctrine, but
it was not widely known that priests like Paschal sometimes
ventured quietly into Gwynedd by special mission, usually
as private chaplains and tutors of noble children.
That some of them were Deryni was even less well known.
But because their first duty was to their patrons rather than
local bishops, and because they tended to keep a low profile,
they usually were left alone. Jessamy had met Paschal
briefly at Carthanelle, when Keryell of Lendour had given his
daughters into the queen's keeping, and she was well aware
of who and what he really was.
"Lady Jessamy," Paschal said neutrally, though his eyes
showed a hint of wariness at her presence. "I trust you are in
good health."
Inclining her head, Jessamy drew the girls with her closer
to the fire, and Paschal.
"I am, Father, I thank you," she said, belatedly
remembering that she had left Zoë standing anxiously beside
the door. "Zoë, come here, child. There's been ill news from
Ratharkin. Your father is unharmed, but—"
Marie's hands had flown to her mouth as Jessamy spoke,
and she gave a little gasp.
"Is our father dead?" she breathed, her voice quavering

with dread.
Wearily Jessamy gave a nod, drawing the younger girl
into the circle of her arms and letting Zoë go to Alyce.
"I fear that he is, my dear. I am so very sorry. He fell in
the king's service, protecting Duke Richard. I have no further
details at this time."
"And what of our brother?" Alyce demanded, clinging to
Zoë. "Say that he is not dead as well.. . ."
"He was alive when the news was sent," Jessamy allowed,
"though I am informed that he was wounded. But we must
not give up hope, dear child."
Going suddenly white, Alyce sank down on the stool
where she had been sitting, an anxious Zoë sinking beside
her as Marie began sobbing in Jessamy’s arms.
"Our brother is dead, isn't he?" Alyce murmured numbly,
starting to shake in Zoë's arms as Father Paschal came to sit
on her other side. "He's dead, but you aren't telling us."
At Jessamy's pointed glance toward Zoë, Father Paschal
reached across to set his hand on her shoulder, extending
controls. As her eyes closed and she slumped against Alyce,
Jessamy nodded her thanks and returned her attention to
Alyce, all the while stroking Marie's hair.
"Darling, that isn't true," she said truthfully. "I cannot
guarantee that he is still alive, but I swear to you that, when
the news was sent, he still lived. Read the truth of what I am
telling you, Alyce—or Father Paschal can confirm it for you,
since I know he has been reading me as we speak. I wish I
could give you more certain reassurance, but I cannot, dear
heart. You must keep hope alive, and storm heaven with
your prayers. They expect that it may take as long as a
fortnight for Duke Richard and his party to return to
Rhemuth. Meanwhile, the king asks that you return to
court."
Jessamy's calm, reasoned statement broke the final
barrier holding back Alyce's tears. For the next little while,
she leaned against Father Paschal and sobbed her heart out,
with Zoë oblivious beside them.
When, finally, the sobbing eased and Alyce raised her
head, snuffling and wiping at her eyes with her sleeve,
Paschal allowed Zoë to stir, blurring her awareness of the
passage of time. As Zoë straightened, she pulled off her veil
and handed it to Alyce, who did a more thorough job of
wiping her eyes and then blew her nose. Marie, too, had
begun to compose herself, and Jessamy pulled off her veil
and bade Marie use it mop her face.
"My dears, I am so very sorry," Jessamy murmured.
"Would that I could have brought you better news. Shall we
ask Zoë to bring you something warm to drink?"
Alyce started to shake her head, still dabbing at her nose,

but Jessamy was already urging Zoë to go, and Father
Paschal was also indicating that this was a good idea. When
Zoë had gone, Marie came to sit beside her sister, laying her
head on Alyce's shoulder and snuffling softly. Alyce glanced
around listlessly, hugging her arms across her chest, men
whispered, "We shall never come back here, shall we, Tante
Jessamy? Now that our father is gone, I fear that the king
will see us soon married."
The words transported Jessamy back to the awful night
her own father had died, though at least she did not think
that Donal would force these girls into a totally detestable
match. At least not while their brother yet lived.
"He has said nothing to me on that account," she said
truthfully. "And provided your brother recovers—and God
grant that he shall! —he will have some say in whom you
wed. But this is not the time to worry overmuch about that."
Alyce said nothing, only slipping an arm around her
sister's waist, spent by her weeping. I suppose we must go
tonight to Rhemuth."
"No, we have the king's leave to delay until tomorrow,"
Jessamy replied. "And I think you would take comfort in
bidding your friends farewell. Perhaps in the morning, before
we leave, Father Paschal would offer Mass for your father's
soul," she added, with a glance at the priest, who nodded.
"I shall ask Mother Judiana," he said. "I'm certain she will
have no objection. And of course I shall accompany you to
Rhemuth— and to Cynfyn, after that. My place now must be
at Lord Ahern's side—and to comfort his sisters."
Jessamy nodded. "Then, we should see about getting a
few things packed, girls. You need not bring much with
you—"
"But, what of my books, my manuscripts— ?"
"Those can be sent later," Jessamy assured her. "More
important just now is to find warmer clothing for both of
you, for the ride back to Rhemuth will be cold as well as wet.
I did bring some oiled cloaks for you, such as the soldiers
wear, well-lined with squirrel, but you will need warm gloves
and hats."
"I'm certain those can be found," Alyce said dully. "Oh,
Tante Jessamy, what's to become of us?"
"You shall be the toast of the king's court," Father
Paschal said with a tiny smile. "And when the time comes,
your brother shall find himself inundated with suitors for
your hands."
"If he lives," Marie said bleakly.

Chapter 13
"Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to
heaviness." -JAMES 4:9

T

HEY rode out of Arc-en-Ciel shortly before midday of
following morning, though whether the falling snow was
better than the rain and sleet of the day before, Jessamy
could not say. Alyce and Marie rode together, Jessamy
beside the priest, with Sir Jiri's household escort divided
ahead and behind and Jiri himself bringing up the rear. All
of them were well-muffled against the cold and the very
sticky snow, and no one said much. As Jessamy had
suggested, they carried little with them.

By the time they reached Rhemuth later that afternoon,
the light snowfall of the morning had become far more
serious, to the point of seriously slowing their progress.
Accordingly, all in their party were weary and chilled to the
bone by the time they rode into the castle forecourt. As
grooms took the horses on into the stable yard, Sir Jiri
Redfearn immediately conducted his party through the great
hall and into the withdrawing room behind the dais, pausing
en route to let them shed their sodden outer cloaks beside
one of the great hall fireplaces.
In winter and in the increasingly chilling days of autumn,
Donal was wont to use the chamber as his preferred
workroom, and today was dictating correspondence to a
clark working at a table near the fire, pacing as he spoke.
Behind him, several more men were quietly conversing on a
bench and several stools closer to the fire. All of them rose
as Jessamy and the two girls entered the room, followed by
the priest, and Donal lifted a hand in signal for the dark to
cease his writing.
"Brother Brendan, we'll finish that later; you may go," he
said. "And the rest of you as well—save for Sir Kenneth.
Ladies ... please come and warm yourselves by the fire; you
must be frozen. And you as well, Father. Please be welcome.
Ivone, warm up that wine for them, and Jiri, please ask the
queen to join us."
As Sir Jiri left on his errand, and most of the men before
the fire gave way to the newcomers and left, Donal
exchanged a measuring glance with Jessamy, who returned
a nod of reassurance. He then bent his gaze toward Alyce
and Marie, who were sinking uncertainly on the bench to
either side of Jessamy, steeling themselves for the further
news they did not want to hear. Behind them, the squire was
setting out cups for mulled wine, and Sir Kenneth had
emerged from shadow, his sandy hair glinting in the firelight
as he gave a grim nod to Alyce and Marie.

"Dear Alyce and Marie," the king said gently, moving a
stool in front of them and sitting, "I am so sorry to bring you
back to Rhemuth with such ill tidings. I hope your journey
was not too taxing."
Alyce remembered proprieties well enough to glance
toward Father Paschal, still standing a little apart from
them.
"It was very cold, Sire, but thank you for your concern.
May I present Father Paschal Didier, our father's household
chaplain and our tutor of many years. He happened to be
visiting Arc-en-Ciel when ... the news arrived."
Donal spared a sparse nod in acknowledgment of the
priest's bow and gestured for him to sit, Kenneth also taking
a seat near the king, though farther back.
"I am grateful for your presence. Father—though I would
wish that we met under happier circumstances." He sighed
and turned his attention back to the two girls. "I fear I have
no further news beyond what Kenneth brought yesterday, so
I cannot tell you whether your brother yet lives. His injury
itself was not life-threatening, but the damage was severe,
and infection is always a concern."
"Perhaps we might know more regarding the nature of his
wounds, Sire," Alyce replied, strain making her voice quaver.
"Is he fit to travel? Pray, do not spare us, for I have learned
much of surgery and physicking at Arc-en-Ciel, and would
know what we must expect."
At Donal's glance, Kenneth cleared his throat uneasily
and sat forward a little.
"Alyce, your brother and your father very probably saved
Duke Richard's life," Kenneth said, not answering her
question. "Mearan separatists had plotted to slay the duke
and as many as they could of the delegation, but Lord Ahern
discovered the plot in time to raise the alarm, so that we
were not taken totally by surprise. In the fracas that
followed, your father then killed at least four attackers before
he finally took a mortal wound."
Marie closed her eyes, biting back tears as Kenneth
continued.
"Your brother also acquitted himself well, and aided me in
wrestling your father's killer to the floor, holding him
helpless until others could take him captive, along with
several more of the rebels. Rarely have I seen a lad of his age
fight more bravely or with more skill."
"You have avoided speaking of his wound," Alyce pointed
out.
Kenneth briefly bowed his head, then looked at her again,
not sparing her.
"Unfortunately, the fighting was still in progress, my lady,
and your brother took a leg wound that shattered the left

knee. The surgeons are hopeful that he will survive, but
he may lose the leg."
"Dear God," she breathed.
"Alyce, my brother's own battle-surgeon is caring for
him," Donal assured her, as the queen and one of her ladies
entered the room and all of them rose. "Ah, there you are,
my dear. Our Alyce and Marie are in need of your comfort."
Shaking her head in sympathy, Richeldis came to Alyce
and Marie with open arms, sadness written across her pretty
face as she enfolded both younger girls in a sisterly embrace.
"Dear Alyce, Marie—I was truly sorry to hear about your
father."
"Thank you, Madam," Alyce murmured, as her sister
began crying again. "Sire, my brother—is it truly safe to
move him, wounded?"
Donal moved aside so that his young wife could take his
seat on the stool, for she was again with child.
"I am told that he would not stay at Ratharkin," said the
king, "and that he asked for you often in the days
immediately after his injury." He smiled grimly. "Master
Donnard felt that it was safer to move him than to have him
pine for his sisters' loving care."
Alyce had been biting at her lower lip as the tale
unfolded, her fear mirrored in her eyes, and she swallowed
with difficulty before speaking.
"But—he is going to live . . . ?"
"Alyce, I can only tell you that he was alive when I left a
week ago," Kenneth said, "and that the surgeons are hopeful
that he shall remain so. He is young and strong."
"If it's any consolation," Donal added, "Richard hanged
the perpetrators to the man—eight of them—and we have the
names of several more who appear to have eluded capture,
at least for now. I fear this means that we must expect more
trouble in the future, but perhaps the example of those
executed will at least postpone another Mearan expedition
for a year or so. And your father's sacrifice for Gwynedd will
not be forgotten."
Tears were spilling from Alyce's lashes now, but she
brushed at them impatiently with the back of one hand,
lifting her chin bravely.
"And what is to become of us, Sire?" she murmured.
"Alas, that cannot be determined until we know whether
your brother will survive," Donal said reluctantly. "He
became Earl of Lendour upon the death of your father, of
course, though it will be another ten years before he may
wield the full authority of that office; but I shall certainly
allow him a say in your fate. For now, until he is mended,
your place is at his side."

Alyce inclined her head, blinking back more tears.
"Thank you, Sire. And if he does not survive?"
Donal glanced at Richeldis and Jessamy, then back at
Alyce and Marie, regret in his gaze.
"That would be ... difficult, on many levels—and believe
me, child, I understand what now concerns you," he said
gently. "You both are of an age to marry soon. Perhaps you
have even begun to form personal preferences, though I
know you are aware that, being who you are, duty may well
oblige you to marry other than where your heart might
wish."
Alyce nodded, tight-lipped, and Richeldis glanced
beseechingly at her husband.
"My lord..."
"No, she must know the full extent of how things lie,"
Donal said, not relenting. "Alyce, your brother has suffered a
grave injury in my service, and may not survive. If that
should come to pass, I assure you that I should regret that
greatly.
"However, if that should occur—or if he should die
without a male heir," Donal went on, "the two of you would
inherit. It would be complicated, so we shall worry about the
details when and if that should become necessary. But
whatever else may befall, your eventual husbands will have
serious responsibilities, because of who and what you are, so
you will appreciate why they must be carefully selected."
"Donal Haldane, you are no help at all!" the queen
declared, as Marie wailed and Alyce began sobbing. "You
make it all sound so dreadful and official. But girls, you may
be certain that, when the time comes, the king will choose
you gentle husbands—else he shall not often have his queen
in his bed!" she added, with an admonitory glance at Donal.
Donal managed a half-hearted chuckle at that, indulgent
of what he knew was an attempt to reassure the frightened
girls, and Jessamy drew both of them into the circle of her
arms again.
"Shu-shu-shu," she murmured, "we shall not speak
further of marriages just now. Your Majesties, methinks
these pretty maids have grieving to do, which is best done in
private, in Aunt Jessamy's arms. Come, darlings. I shall
have an extra bed made up in my own chamber for the
night. Nothing need be done in haste. We have time and
enough to ponder what the future may bring."

A

LYCE awoke the next morning to find herself alone in

Jessamy's great bed. Marie was nowhere to be seen. She
could hear activity through the partially open doorway into
the next room, so she rose and made hasty ablutions, rebraiding her hair and dressing hurriedly in her blue school
gown, which was all she had, and poked her head next door
to investigate.
Next to the fire, Jessamy and Mistress Anjelica were
pulling a tawny gold under-tunic over the head of a child—
revealed to be Krispin, as his tousled head emerged from the
neck of the garment. Nearby, a somewhat recovered Marie
was braiding the hair of Jessamy's youngest daughter, now
eight. Both children looked to have grown a handspan since
Alyce last had seen them. Krispin grinned at her as his
mother turned aside to retrieve a comb from the mantel. Now
nearing five, he was turning into a handsome young man.
"Look, Mama!" he said, pointing.
"Well, good morning," Jessamy said, as she and the
others turned and saw Alyce. "We were going to let you sleep
awhile longer." She grimaced as she tried finger-combing
Krispin's tangled hair, and handed the comb to Anjelica.
"Good heavens, Krispin, did you stand on your head
while you slept? Jeli, I'm about convinced that this child
invites mice to nest in his hair when he goes to bed for the
night. God alone knows how he manages to get his hair so
tangled, just from sleeping."
Alyce smiled bravely and came to crouch down beside
Krispin, who had his boots on, but with the laces dangling.
The boy grimaced as Anjelica began working the tangles out
of his hair.
"Good morning, Krispin—and Seffira," she said.
Seffira broke away from Marie to come and give Alyce a
welcoming hug.
"Cousin Alyce, I'm so sorry. Mummy says your papa has
gone to be with my papa. I'll bet that makes you sad."
Marie pressed her lips tightly together and turned away,
obviously schooling her own composure, and Alyce felt her
throat start to tighten. She spent several seconds returning
Seffira's hug before gently propelling the child back to
Marie's ministrations.
"It makes me very sad, Seffira," she agreed, turning her
attention to the lacing of Krispin's boots. "And my brother
was hurt, too. That also makes me sad."
"Where did he get hurted?" Krispin wanted to know,
yelping as Anjelica worked at a particularly troublesome
tangle.
"In Meara," Alyce replied without thinking. "Oh—it was
his knee that was hurt," she added, realizing what the boy
was really asking. "But it happened while he was helping
catch some bad men—and he was very brave."

"What did the bad men do?" Seffira asked.
"Well, some of them had killed our papa. And some of
them had tried to kill the king's brother."
"They tried to kill Duke Richard?" Krispin asked,
indignant. "He's the bravest knight in the world! When I grow
up, I want to be just like him!"
"Well, that's a very fine thing to want," Alyce agreed, as
Anjelica finished combing the boy's hair, only just
controlling a smile. "Duke Richard is a very brave knight."
"Mummy, I want to wear my page tabard today!" Krispin
declared, sliding from his stool to head for a trunk against
the outside wall. "Duke Richard likes us to look smart!"
Jessamy captured him before he could get very far, and
Anjelica came after him with a fur-lined over-tunic.
"Well, Duke Richard isn't here right now, dear, so let's
save the tabard until he gets back," Jessamy said, as she
and Anjelica pulled the garment over Krispin's head.
"When will that be?" Krispin demanded.
"In a week or two," Jessamy replied. "That's after we've
been to Mass next Sunday, and maybe after we've been to
Mass another Sunday."
"Oh." Krispin set his hands on his hips and gave an
exasperated sigh, then grinned. "That's all right, then. If it
got dirty, he wouldn't like that." He looked up engagingly at
Anjelica. "We get something to eat now, Jeli?"
"Yes, we get something to eat now, love," Anjelica said,
taking the boy's hand. "Seffira, you come as well. Prince
Brion will be waiting for both of you."
As she left the room, both children in tow, Jessamy
sighed and settled on Krispin's stool, turning her gaze
toward Alyce and Marie. "I think Anjelica and I are getting
too old for running after little ones," she said. "Mothering is a
job for the young. Alyce, it's good to have you back, even
under such circumstances. How did you sleep?"
Alyce ventured a bleak smile. "Well enough, all things
considered." She shook at a fold of her skirt, mud-spattered
along the hem. "Would you look at the state of this gown?"
“There's a brush behind you, dear. And after we've broken
our fast, we shall ask among the other ladies and see what
can be assembled in the way of essentials." She went to one
of the large coffers in the room and lifted the lid to rummage.
"Meanwhile, let's see if we can't find something suitable in
here. The first thing we'll need will be proper mourning for
both of you. The king has ordered a Requiem Mass at noon,
for all those slain."
"I hate black," Marie said bleakly, as Jessamy produced
an armful of fine black wool from the depths of the coffer
and shook it out, testing the length against one, then the

other of her charges.
"I'm sure you do," Jessamy murmured, one eyebrow
raised, as she pressed the gown into Marie's arms and
continued her rummaging. "Unfortunately, the two of you
are no longer children. This is the royal court, and all eyes
will be upon you in the days to come, and especially once
your brother returns to Rhemuth.
"Therefore, both of you must wear mourning," she
concluded, hauling out another black gown for Alyce. "And
with your fair coloring, you'll both look quite stunning—
though that is hardly the purpose of the exercise. Now, go
and try those, and then go down to the hall for something to
eat. This afternoon, we'll have the sempstresses up to take
measurements for a few new things. Off with you now."

I

N the coming days, while they awaited Ahern's return, along
with the body of their father, Alyce noticed a subtle change
in the way they seemed to be perceived at court. Whether
out of sympathy for their bereavement, or the queen's
personal intervention, or simply because they were now
older, both the sisters found themselves far more readily
accepted than when they last had lived at court, four years
before.
Which should not really have surprised them. Because of
the nature of appointments to the queen's household, faces
came and went, some girls staying only for a season, with
many a nubile young lass coming from as far afield as
Carthmoor, Marley, and Rhendall in search of suitable
husbands— a crusade whose excitement was usually shared
by all the younger members of the royal household, often in
the form of new wardrobes.
Perhaps because neither of the demoiselles de Corwyn yet
entertained aspirations of matrimony for themselves—and
had an unmarried brother who was the very eligible future
Duke of Corwyn—most of the girls now serving in the
queen's household rose eagerly to this latest challenge,
bending their efforts to the assembly of suitable gowns.
Some of the garments were made afresh, a few gleaned from
others' coffers, but the result was a modest wardrobe for
each in the allotted time.
Among the instigators of this energy and largesse was a
baron's daughter from Cassan, called Elaine MacInnis, some
two years younger than they, whose cheerfulness and sense
of style had already made her the petted favorite of most of
the older women.
"It's a pity that you must wear black for a while," Elaine
said to Alyce, as she and Lady Megory, one of the queen's

permanent household, adjusted the hem on one of the
new gowns taking shape in the hands of the sempstresses.
"But we've given you something else for Christmas and
Twelfth Night at Cynfyn. It's almost black—a very deep
green—but it will have rather nice embroidery at the neck. If
we get that part done, of course. Lady Jessamy is working
the pattern."
Elaine's good nature was contagious, and Alyce soon
found herself relaxing a little—which, in turn, seemed to
enable others in the royal household to relax as well. This
boded well for the future, if the goodwill persisted when they
returned from Cynfyn.
In the meantime, she and Marie spent many an hour
starting to settle into other aspects of life at Rhemuth:
making the closer acquaintance of the children, exploring
the castle's corridors, daring occasional forays into the royal
library and scriptorium, and praying daily for Ahern's safe
return. Later, they would look back on those days as a
welcome interlude of ordinary contentment, temporary
respite from the renewed sorrow to come.

Chapter 14
"Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my
father." GENESIS 50:5

I

t was early December when the bodies of the slain came
back to Rhemuth, with the first snows powdering the
rooftops and gusting down off the plains north of the city.
For those whose loved ones had resided at the capital, that
essentially would be an end to it, as their families laid them
to rest from the churches where they had worshipped in life.
For Keryell, there still remained the final journey home, and
for his son and heir, the uncertainty of his own future.
Duke Richard and Seisyll Arilan rode at the head of the
cortege, and retired immediately with the king, to give him
an update on the situation in Meara. Most of the Haldane
lancers had remained in Ratharkin with Earl Jared, in case
he needed assistance in the immediate aftermath of what
had happened there, but with winter setting in, it was
unlikely that any serious trouble would erupt again until the
following summer. The Dukes of Cassan and Claibourne had
returned to their lands with their troops, and remained on
alert, but they, too, would be locked down against any
serious campaign until the weather eased late in the spring.
For Alyce and Marie, the reunion with their brother was
tearful but joyous. Young Ahern had survived the initial
crisis of his wound, despite his insistence on being moved,
and thus far had even kept his leg; but he was exhausted
and in great pain by the time he arrived in Rhemuth with the
baggage train that brought the bodies. To everyone's great
relief, the surgeons now predicted that amputation probably
could be avoided, but the shattered knee would heal stiff and
unbending. That was better, by far, than losing the leg, but
he was well aware that his injury probably had put paid to
any career as a warrior or, indeed, for any other activity
requiring great mobility. Whether he would even ride a horse
again remained another question yet to be answered.
Fortunately, Ahern possessed a keen mind and varied
interests, as had many an earl and duke before him, and
had received a solid grounding in the administrative skills
necessary to his rank—and owned the distinction of
belonging to the only ducal family in which his Deryni
bloodline was at least tolerated. He also possessed a
precocious grasp of military strategy that had already
brought him to the attention of both the king and Duke
Richard—acumen that, once he was fully recovered, might
still enable him to make useful contributions as a tactician.
But few could see much trace of that promise in the
gaunt, white-faced youth strapped to the horse-litter that

Master Donnard led into the castle yard that bleak
December day, shivering with fever and with splinted leg
aching and rattled from the journey overland from Meara.
And though his sisters bore up bravely at the sight of the
shrouded bundle that was their father's body, wrapped in
the red and white banner of his arms and escorted by Sé
Trelawney and Jovett Chandos, it was Ahern for whom they
now wept, for he scarcely knew them as they came to shower
him with relieved kisses, so racked was he by fever.
Torn between duty to the living and the dead, Alyce
delegated Marie and Se to go with Master Donnard and the
king's own physician to see their brother settled into
quarters in the castle. Meanwhile, she and Jovett
accompanied her father's body to the chapel royal, where
Father Paschal and the royal chaplains would keep watch
through the night.
But they remained there only long enough for the
obligatory prayers proper on receiving a body at the church
before retiring to Ahern's bedside. There she and Marie kept
tearful company beside him until he slid at last into merciful
sleep, eased past pain by the physician's medicines but also
helped along, when he slept at last, by Alyce's Deryni touch.
The two of them stayed beside him—praying, hoping—until
Jessamy finally insisted that they go to bed.
The following day, the king and queen and all the court of
Gwynedd attended the Mass offered by Father Paschal for
the soul of Keryell Earl of Lendour—in the chapel royal
rather than Rhemuth Cathedral or even the basilica within
the walls of Rhemuth Castle, for Ahern was insistent that he
be allowed to stand upright before his father's coffin, braced
on crutches and supported by the two young knights who
had brought him from Ratharkin. His sisters stood to either
side, gowned and veiled in black, and managed not to shed a
tear where anyone could see.
Prince Richard Duke of Carthmoor led the cortege that
set out the following morning for the Lendouri capital of
Cynfyn, where Earl Keryell would be laid to rest with his
ancestors. In addition to an honor guard of Haldane lancers,
King Donal had sent along half a dozen of his senior knights
to remain in Cynfyn and assist its seneschal in setting up
the council that would advise the new Earl Ahern until he
came of age, still ten years hence. The late earl's chaplain,
Father Paschal, was also in the party, along with the sisters
of the new earl, several of the queen's ladies as chaperones,
assorted domestic servants, and the two young knights who
had accompanied Keryell from Ratharkin.
During the week-long journey across the great plain east
of Rhemuth, the two girls took turns keeping Ahern
company, one sharing the wagon where he lay with his
splinted leg pillowed and stretched before him, the other
riding elsewhere in the party. Alyce made a point of varying
her position in the cavalcade, riding sometime with the other

ladies or Father Paschal and sometimes even at Duke
Richard's side, but Marie, more often than not, could be
found beside Sir Sé Trelawney.
The weather turned colder as they traveled eastward from
Rhemuth, with occasional sleety showers, but at least the
snow held off. By following the southern bank of the River
Molling, they managed to avoid the worst of the weather
already sweeping down from the north. Though the
temperature plummeted at night, and their horses crunched
through a heavy rime of frost every morning, any serious
snowfall held off until they were making their final ascent
into the Lendour foothills.
They arrived at Castle Cynfyn but a fortnight before
Christmas, under a soft curtain of gently falling snow.
Entering the castle bailey through the outer gatehouse arch,
the cortege passed upward along a narrow avenue lined with
Lendouri archers drawn up as an honor guard to admit the
late earl to his capital for the final time. Interspersed among
them were many of his retainers from Coroth, come to pay
their respects, for Keryell had also been principal regent for
Corwyn after the death of his children's mother, Stevana de
Corwyn.
Deinol Hartmann, their father's seneschal, was awaiting
their arrival on the steps of the hall, along with the wife their
father had taken some three years previously. Now twice a
widow, the Dowager Countess Rosmerta stood icy and
remote in her widow's weeds, at her side a grown daughter
from her first marriage, effusive in her greeting of Duke
Richard, the king's brother, but according her stepson only
the barest of curtsies as Sir Deinol bent to kiss the boy's
hand in affirmation of his new status. Alyce and Marie she
acknowledged hardly at all.
Keryell Earl of Lendour lay that night before the altar of
the church within the castle walls, guarded by his men. The
evening meal in his hall that night was a joyless, strained
affair, with the bachelor Duke Richard seated in the place of
honor at the right hand of the widow, whose attempts to
engage his interest were politely turned aside; he and his
knights retired as soon as could be reckoned seemly.
Alyce and Marie were not present to see it, for they took a
sparser meal in Ahern's room with Se and Jovett. Later,
while Father Paschal sat with Ahern, the two knights
accompanied Alyce and Marie on a late-night visit to the
church, where they were heartened to see the dozens of folk
from round-about come to pay their final respects and offer
up a prayer, for Keryell had been much respected in the
lands he had ruled.
Father Paschal celebrated the Requiem Mass the next
morning, after which Keryell was laid to rest beneath the
floor of the castle's private chapel, directly before the altar.
Duke Richard lent an extra dignity to the affair by his mere
presence, and let it be known how much his brother

esteemed the sacrifice made by the late earl—and spoke,
as well, of the courage and honor of the new one.
Ahern bore up manfully throughout, allowing himself to
be carried to the church in a litter; but from there, for the
interment, he hobbled the distance between church and
chapel on his crutches, though the effort exhausted him.
Keryell's widow made much of her rights and prerogatives,
so his daughters were mostly ignored.
That night, when the castle at last settled into sleep, the
two sisters retired wearily to the chamber that been Alyce's
in childhood, bundling up in fur-lined cloaks as they
huddled on a pile of sheepskins spread before the fire.
Picking up a stick of kindling, Marie began poking among
the embers.
"So," she said. "Our father is dead and buried. And what
shall become of us now?"
Alyce slowly shook her head. "Who can know? In the
short term, I suppose we go back to Rhemuth after
Christmas and Twelfth Night."
"I wish we could stay with Ahern," Marie muttered
mutinously.
"You know we can't." After a moment, Alyce gave a heavy
sigh, clasping her arms around her knees to rest her chin on
one forearm.
"This doesn't much change our situation, you know," she
said. "Until and unless Ahern has children, preferably sons,
we're still only heartbeats away from the succession of a
dukedom and an earldom."
"'You're only heartbeats away," Marie replied. "You're the
oldest."
"Yes, but if I die without heirs, you're the heir."
Her sister did not look up from her prodding of the fire.
"What if I don't want to be the heir? she muttered.
Alyce smiled bleakly and reached across to clasp her
sister's hand.
"Then, pray for our brother's health—and mine," she said.

A

hern mostly slept for the first few days after his father's
burial, leaving Duke Richard to begin shaping the council
that would assist the new earl as he began taking up the
reins of his new rank. Virtually everyone interesting was
involved in the process, even Father Paschal, so Alyce and
Marie spent the first few days re-exploring their favorite
childhood haunts—and avoiding Lady Rosmerta. Which was

not difficult, because the widow mainly kept to her own
rooms.
But each evening, as the newcomers relaxed into the
resuming pace of life at Castle Cynfyn, the sad castle hall
slowly began to regain a softer air, as the gentle sounds of
lyre and harp and occasional sweet voices were heard
increasingly during supper, slowly lifting spirits into the
hopefulness of the Advent season. Most of Ahern's council
were older, and preferred Duke Richard's company to that of
mere adolescents, but Se and Jovett made certain that the
new earl's sisters did not lack for company.
Sometimes, on bright, clear mornings when the sun set
the snow all aglitter, the four of them would venture out on
brief, brisk rides through the surrounding hills, though
always attended by at least half a dozen other knights. As
Christmas approached, Alyce began to notice that her sister
was often in Se's company, and almost always managed to
ride beside him when they went on their outings.
But the two young knights were not often available in the
daytime, and the weather was gradually worsening as
Christmas approached. It was on a cold, blustery day that
kept everyone inside, a few days before the Christmas Vigil,
that Alyce found herself recruited with her sister to decorate
the castle chapel for the solemnities of Christmas Eve, for
the coming of the Holy Child was still an occasion for
rejoicing, even if hearts still were heavy with Keryell's
passing.
"I think this needs more holly," Marie said, though with
little enthusiasm. "What do you think?"
They were huddled on a bench at the rear of the chapel
with a firepot at their feet, surrounded by evergreen boughs
and runners of bright ivy and sprigs of red-berried holly.
They had already plaited the first half of a garland intended
to adorn the altar rail, and Alyce was laying out the
framework for the other half.
She glanced at her sister's work and reached for another
trailer of ivy.
"It looks all right to me."
Marie gave a sigh and tucked in another sprig of holly
anyway.
"I still wish we could stay here with Ahern."
"Don't you mean with Se?" Alyce replied, arching a
delicate eyebrow at her sister.
Marie blushed furiously and ducked her head closer to
her work.
"Don't try to deny it," Alyce said. "I've seen the two of you,
making eyes at one another."
Marie glanced sidelong at her sister, trying
unsuccessfully to control a grin. "Are you going to tease me

forever, now that you've guessed?"
"Well, maybe not forever." Alyce smiled. "But don't get
your hopes up, Mares. I suspect that the king has someone
more lofty in mind for you than a simple knight."
"He is hardly simple!" Marie said indignantly.
"Not in the sense I know you mean," Alyce agreed. "But
marriage with him would not advance any of the king's
concerns. Unfortunately, that's what our marriages are for."
"What if we ran away?" Marie said.
"And do what? Get married anyway? They'd catch you,
Mares. And then they'd annul you, and probably lock you up
in a convent somewhere until they married you by force to
someone else. And Se would be disgraced—maybe even
found out."
"You're so mean! It isn't fair!"
"'Fair' has nothing to do with it. I'm reminding you of
realities."
"Fah! for realities," Marie muttered. "I want him, Alyce."
"And I want lots of things, dear sister, but merely wanting
is not necessarily enough."
The sound of approaching footsteps stayed her from
saying more, and she fell silent, glancing up distractedly as
someone in a flash of saffron-colored skirts and a cloak of
forest green came in and deposited an armload of scarlet
ribbons and pine cones at their feet.
"I'm so glad you've used mostly pine and ivy instead of
holly," said a low, musical voice. "The pine has a much nicer
smell. But I thought you might like to work some color in
with it. Besides, I'm avoiding Lady Rosmerta."
Both sisters broke into appreciative grins. In the months
following Keryell’s remarriage, Vera Howard had been one of
several well-born girls fostered to the household of his new
countess—much to the indignation, at first, of Marie, who
had tearfully suggested that perhaps their father's motives
had been more self-serving than altruistic, by installing half
a dozen nubile young women in the very accessible context
of his new wife's boudoir…
'That sounds like jealousy to me, Mares," Alyce had
declared, trying to cajole her sister out of her mood. "I know
you're angry with Father, for sending us away; and I know
you don't much like the Lady Rosmerta—I don't, either. But
by that reasoning, we were living in the queen's household
for the convenience of the king—and you know that isn't
true!"
Marie had humphed at that, and flounced around the
room for several minutes, but finally had agreed, albeit
grudgingly, that Alyce was probably right. When, a few
months later, the two of them had actually met some of their

stepmother's fosterlings, in conjunction with a brief visit
by their father and stepmother en route to Twelfth Night
court in Rhemuth, even Marie had actually liked the other
girls.
They especially had liked Vera Howard, the one who had
just joined them: a lively, well-spoken lass with honey-brown
hair falling straight to her hips and gray-green eyes that
recalled the luminance of sunlight on a tranquil sea. Vera's
father was Sir Orban Howard, a knight with lands not far
from Castle Cynfyn, and her mother and theirs had been
close friends.
"I've given up working with holly," Alyce informed the
newcomer. "It prickles your fingers to death—though it does
have nice color. But the ribbons will be just what's needed. I
don't suppose you'd like to give us a hand?"
"Actually, I did come to offer a bit of help," Vera replied,
"though not with pine boughs." She quirked them a guileless
smile and turned briefly to pull the chapel door closed, then
sank down beside Alyce on the bench. As she stretched one
hand before them and opened it, a spark of greenish light
flared in her palm and quickly took on the shape of a winged
gryphon less than a hand-span high.
The apparition turned its head as if to look at both of
them; then, as it spread its wings, seemed to fold in on itself
before disappearing with a faint pop that was more felt than
heard.
"Who are you?" Alyce demanded, though instinctively she
kept her query to a whisper, for it was clear that Vera was
Deryni like herself. Marie merely stared at the other girl in
wonder.
Vera ventured another tentative smile. "Your father told
me that I am your sister."
"What?" Marie blurted.
Shaking her head, Vera laid one finger across her lips in
an urgent sign for silence, cutting her off in mid-word.
"I promise you, it isn't what you're maybe thinking," she
whispered, humor crinkling at the corners of her eyes,
"though our sire was quite the ladies' man. Actually, you
and I are twins," she said to Alyce. "Fortunately, not
identical, though I would love to have had hair like yours."
She nodded toward Alyce's pale braid. "But if we'd been
identical, our parents never would have been able to carry
off the deception."
"But—how is that possible?" Alyce whispered, stunned.
Again glancing toward the door, Vera delved into the
bodice of her gown and withdrew a folded piece of
parchment, well sealed with green wax.
"This is for you," she said, holding it up so that the seal
was visible.

The familiar imprint on the seal showed the Corwyn
gryphon as an escutcheon of pretense over the arms of
Lendour, as Keryell had used them in his capacity as Earl of
Lendour and one of Corwyn's regents.
"I see that you recognize the seal," Vera went on. "Before
Father left on this last Mearan expedition, he asked me to
keep this for you, in case anything ever happened to him. He
said I was to make certain you read it in a safe place, where
you wouldn't be disturbed, because it can only be read
once."
At Alyce's look of bewilderment, Vera shook her head.
"Don't ask me more until you've read it—and I trust you've
been Truth-Reading me while I'm telling you this. I know you
can do that."
As Alyce slowly nodded, Vera turned the packet of
parchment to display writing on the side without the wax
seals.
"You recognize the hand?" she asked, as Marie crowded
closer to see it as well.
Alyce swallowed audibly and nodded.
"All right, here's what you need to do." Vera placed the
packet in Alyce's free hand and closed the fingers around it.
"Take this up to the altar rail, as close as possible to
Father's grave. That way, if anyone should come in while
we're doing this, they'll think you're simply praying. Marie
and I will continue making garlands, and if necessary, I'll
fend off intruders."
"What if it's Father Paschal?" Marie asked. "He could
come through the sacristy."
"It's all right. He knows about this."
"Father Paschal knows about you?'" Alyce broke in.
"Well, of course. Who do you think trained me?"
"But—he never mentioned—"
"No, and he hasn't told me much about you," Vera
countered. "That was to protect all of us. Especially in your
case, he was somewhat concerned that Father had given
Lady Jessamy access to some of your training triggers."
"She's rarely used them," Alyce murmured, stunned.
"We've not spent that much time at court."
"Would you necessarily know if she'd used them?" Vera
replied. "She did come occasionally to Arc-en-Ciel, didn't
she?"
"Well, yes—but Jessilde was usually with us then."
"Jessilde—who is Jessamy's daughter. It isn't likely,
Alyce, but they could have been working together, to check
on you occasionally, if only to see how Paschal's training was

progressing. Now does it become clear why Father felt the
need to be so careful?"
"But, she would never—"
"Alyce, we don't know what she would never do," Vera
pointed out. "Have you forgotten who her father was?"
"I—hadn't thought about that," Alyce admitted.
"I didn't think you had. And I believe that Paschal has
avoided reminding you, for fear of planting an idea in your
mind that Jessamy might discover, if she did try to abuse
the trust she was given."
Alyce found herself shivering at the idea that Jessamy
might have been doing just that, without her knowledge.
Marie's eyes were huge with wonder.
"If that's a real concern," Alyce whispered, "what happens
when we go back to court? For the next few years, we're
going to be there all the time, now that Father is gone."
"Father Paschal intends to modify your triggers before
you leave—though I don't think he intends that Lady
Jessamy should know. And he certainly doesn't intend that
she should know about me. Ahern, of course, doesn't know
anything about any of this, except that I've been fostered
here for the past three or four years."
After a few seconds to digest what Vera had just revealed,
Alyce said dazedly, "I had no idea about any of this... ."
"Which was the purpose of the exercise," Vera replied.
"But right now, you need to deal with what Father left for
you. Before you break the seal, kiss it—and make sure that
your tongue touches the wax. That's part of the means by
which the spell is activated for you, personally—I knew you
were about to ask," she added with a grin.
Despite her mixture of surprise, curiosity, and annoyance
that their father had not better prepared her for this, Alyce
managed a tentative smile.
"If we really are twins, I suppose there'll be no keeping
any of my secrets from you in the future," she said.
Vera grinned. "Father Paschal has always warned me that
there are disadvantages as well as advantages to being
Deryni." She brushed her hand over Alyce's, closed around
the parchment packet.
"Now, there will be two messages inside. I'm told that the
visible one is a simple bequest of some items of jewelry—
which is all anyone else would see, if they opened it. The
other message is for you alone, written between the lines of
the first one. When you open the letter, that second message
will glow slightly, so you needn't worry about having enough
light to read it. Make certain you read it through slowly,
because you only get one chance; the writing will disappear
after you've read it."

Alyce swallowed down the lump that was rising in her
throat.
"I—believe you," she whispered. "It's all just so—so—"
"—unbelievable. Yes, I know." Vera smiled faintly. "It's so
audacious, I still hardly know whether to love him or damn
him," she confessed. "But I truly believe that he loved us—
enough to do what he had to do, to give at least one of us the
chance to develop our gifts away from public scrutiny,
without having to contend with—well, with people knowing
what we are." She glanced away briefly before continuing.
"I'd known him all my life, though I didn't know who he
really was until I came here. So far as I or my 'parents' knew,
he was simply my godfather, just as he was godfather to
many other children of his vassals—though there weren't
any others exactly like me," she added, with a quick smile at
Alyce. "He had me fostered here after he sent the two of you
to court and Arc-en-Ciel—which he felt was the safest place
he could send you, while he began bringing me into the
family picture and started my training—and yes, I do have
quite a lot of training now. Fortunately, Lady Rosmerta is
not Deryni, and hadn't a clue what he was up to—silly cow!"
Marie gave a nervous snicker. "We must be sisters. Alyce
and I don't like her either."
"I don't suppose she's all that bad," Vera replied. "You
might even spare her a little pity. She knew she wasn't
barren, because she has a grown daughter by her first
marriage, but Father wouldn't give her any more children.
He needed a wife, so that he could bring me into the picture,
but he didn't want to complicate the succession. In
hindsight, I think he gambled quite a lot on Ahern—an
unfortunate wager, as it happens, given his injury—but he
may be able to overcome it. And meanwhile, he had us." She
cocked her head at the parchment in Alyce's hand. "You
must be bursting to read that. Have you done this before?"
Alyce shook her head. She had been numbly TruthReading everything Vera said, and had no doubt that
everything was true. Truth-Reading was among the
rudimentary skills that their father and then Father Paschal
had taught her and Marie—and Ahern—during their early
years: a particularly useful survival skill for any Deryni, as
was the ability to block pain and to induce sleep—skills she
had used in easing her brother's discomfort en route here.
The procedure to which Vera was referring was simple
enough on the receiving end; it would not have been so
simple for their father, in the setting up. But now she was
eager to learn what instructions their father had left her.
"I know the theory," she whispered. "I can do it. And you'll
keep a lookout?" she added, glancing at the chapel door.
"We shall be the perfect decoys, if anyone should come,"
Vera said with a grin. "Now, Marie, we still have a lot to do.

You might at least try to look like you're enjoying plaiting
evergreen garlands."
Her ready smile brought a smile to Marie's lips as well,
and the other girl re-applied herself to the task as Alyce rose
and headed toward the altar. Vera took up a position just
inside the door, which she pulled slightly ajar.
Alyce could feel her heart hammering as she padded
softly down the chapel's short nave, the parchment packet
closed tightly between her cupped hands. Three days before,
at her father's interment, the air had been redolent of fine
incense and the more cloying perfume of floral tributes. Her
stomach stirred a little queasily as she skirted the slab
under which Keryell lay, doing her best to recall the incense
rather than any faint charnel scent she might imagine in
this part of the chapel.
Steadying herself against the altar rail, she genuflected to
the Presence signified by the lamp burning above the
tabernacle, then eased to her knees, stretching one foot
behind her, under her cloak, so that it touched the corner of
the grave slab under which her father lay. Then, after
mouthing a brief prayer, both for the occupant's soul and
her own blessing, she dipped her head briefly to kiss the seal
as she had been instructed—and hesitantly swept it with her
tongue.
Nothing happened—at least that she could detect—
though the taste of honey lingered as she carefully broke the
seal. Fragments of brittle wax showered the altar rail as she
opened the parchment. Between the penned lines of the
promised bequest, written in her father's tight, crabbed
hand, she began reading the glowing words, quite distinct in
the semidarkness of the silent chapel.
Beloved Daughter, it began. In receiving this letter, you will
already have made the acquaintance of your twin sister. I ask
your forgiveness for the deception I have carried out, in
keeping you apart thus far, but your mother and I agreed
before your birth that this solution, painful as it was for both
of us, represented the best hope of allowing at least one of our
children to grow up sheltered from the stigma so often
attendant upon those of our blood.
Happy coincidence suggested the means by which this
might be accomplished. It happened that, at about the time
your mother fell pregnant with you and your sister, she
learned that Lady Laurela Howard was also with child. After
a few months, we determined that your mother carried twin
girls—and conceived a daring plan.
Since your mother and Lady Howard had been friends
since childhood, it was arranged that the two should share
their confinements at Cynfyn, for one another's company and
so that Laurela might avail herself of the midwife serving my
household. Unbeknownst to Laurela or her husband, your
mother's second-born was then to be presented as a
supposed twin to the child Laurela carried—which is exactly

what was done, except that her own child was born still.
Thus, what began as a regrettable but necessary deception
chanced to have an unexpected and doubly felicitous
outcome, easing the sorrow of Laurela's loss as well as our
own—to surrender our beloved daughter into the keeping of
another, for her safety's sake.
I pray that you can forgive what I have done, and that you
may now make the better acquaintance of your twin sister,
Veralyn Thamar (de Corwyn) Howard. I have provided for her
such training as I could, in the hope that she may share this
legacy of our mutual birthright with you.
My devotion to both of you, my darling daughters, and to
dear Marie as well.
Your loving father, Keryell
Even as Alyce read the final words, through a blur of
tears, the glowing script was fading from the page. The last
line alone lingered for a moment longer than the rest,
superimposed over the more mundane message penned on
the page, before likewise dispersing like wind across water.

Chapter 15
"And ye shall read this book which we have sent unto
you." -BARUCH 1:14

A

LYCE shared what she had read with her sisters—Marie
first, since they were accustomed to working mind-to-mind.
Marie wept with emotion when it was done, then dried her
tears—glad ones, this time, unlike those of the previous
weeks—and gathered up the finished half of the garland to
take it to the altar rail, humming one of the more sprightly
antiphons of Advent as she carried it down the center aisle.
"She's quite amazing, isn't she?" Vera murmured to her
twin, watching Marie retreat. "And very young."
"She was always Father's pet," Alyce replied, smiling.
"And she is still just fifteen."

"Yes, I tend to forget that," Vera said wistfully. "Ahern is
so mature for his age." She shrugged and jutted her chin
toward the letter still in Alyce's hand. "Shall we?"
They returned to the bench where Vera first had found
them and settled in amidst the stockpile of pine boughs and
ivy, laying the ivy matrix and a few pine boughs across their
laps—diversion, in case anyone should enter.
Alyce had feared it would not come easily, for other than
with Marie, the greatest part of her previous contact with
other Deryni had been with Father Paschal, and then always
as pupil with teacher. Some little there had been with
Jessilde, as part of training exercises, but always under
Paschal's supervision. Interaction with Ahern had been
mostly during their childhood, when none of them knew
much; their mother had died young, and their father had
mostly left their training to Paschal.
Provision also had been made so that Jessamy might
tutor her and Marie, but the pair had been too short a time
at court for that to happen. In truth, Alyce had always
harbored a certain reticence concerning any too-close
interaction with Jessamy, godmother though she was—and
Tante" Jessamy, by her own mother's wishes.
She could not explain that reticence. It was not precisely
come of any mistrust she felt toward Jessamy herself, but
rather, an uneasiness over the apparent ambiguity of a
Deryni being openly tolerated at court, in the queen's own
household—though perhaps a woman was not deemed to be
so great a threat as a man.
Alyce had also heard tell of a brother of Jessamy, called
Morian, long assigned to the governor's staff in Meara, who
made discreet use of his powers in the service of the king;

she had no idea what the Bishop of Meara thought about
this bending of secular and canon law. Perhaps it was a
prerogative of kings, that sometimes it was acceptable that
some Deryni function openly, despite what bishops said.
Nonetheless, this apparent contradiction regarding
Jessamy and her brother had convinced Alyce that it was
probably safest not to invite any untoward scrutiny of
whatever abilities she herself possessed—and that included
scrutiny by Jessamy. The feeling had intensified once she
resumed her training with Father Paschal at Arc-en-Ciel. It
was nothing he or anyone else had told her; she simply
knew.
She also knew, in much the same way, that she need
have no such reticence with Vera, who was her sister and
her twin, and with whom she had shared their mother's
womb. Not that mere willingness or even eagerness to also
share their minds was sufficient to enable the easy doing of
it—not when most of the focus of Alyce's training thus far
had been geared toward keeping others out of her mind, or
only allowing access to selected parts of it—or, wielding her
power as the weapon it was, insinuating her own mind into
another's, to impose her will.
No, in this instance there must be a balanced melding of
senses, engaging the powers of mind as tool, not as weapon.
Turning more knee-to-knee with her twin, Alyce drew
another fortifying breath and laid their father's letter across
her open palms between them, blue eyes meeting sea-gray as
she invited contact. With the touch of Vera's hands on hers,
with their father's words between them, she bade her shields
to retract, flinching at the first brush of that other mind.
But Vera knew far more of such matters than she, and
had been taught how to ease the process.
"Don't resist," she whispered. "Relax your shields. You're
trying too hard." Don't make it happen . . .let it happen, she
went on, shifting easily into mind-speech. Good.. .just relax.
We can do this...
Once past that point, as Alyce yielded to her twin's
greater skill, their deepening rapport segued into a sharing
that was profound. It left both of them blinking back tears of
wonder, grinning and even laughing aloud as they embraced,
and brought Marie back to the rear of the chapel to see what
was so amusing.
"That's all very well for the two of you," she said,
flouncing onto a seat beside Alyce in mock resentment and
showing them her hands. "I'm all sticky with pine sap—
though it does smell rather nice," she added, sniffing at her
fingers, "and the two of you have just been gossiping away."
"Not gossiping—communing," Vera murmured. "Oh, it is
going to be wonderful, having sisters—though we'll have to
be very careful."

A

t first, they did, indeed, go very carefully, though the
friendship suddenly blossoming among the three of them
soon became obvious to all.
"I knew the three of you would get on wonderfully," Ahern
told Alyce, after Mass on Christmas Eve, as he hobbled
painfully beside her on his crutches. "I think she's always
been my favorite of Rosmerta's fosterlings. Father always
liked her, too."
Carefully shielding the reason for Keryell's fondness,
Alyce merely said, "She is great fun."
"She is," Ahern replied. "I shall hate to see her leave.
Unfortunately, Rosmerta will be taking all her household
with her, when she goes back to her father. You did know
that our esteemed step-mama is leaving ... ?"
"Well, there's nothing for her here, now that Father is
gone," Alyce replied.
"Yes, well, good riddance," he said, his voice brisk. "But
Sir Deinol’s wife has agreed to act as my chatelaine for the
time-being, since I know that you and Mares can't stay
indefinitely."
"You know that we would stay, if we could," she assured
him.
"No, I know that you must go," he said. "Just promise me
that you'll write often, and that you'll come to visit, when
you can."

L

ATER, when she told her sisters of the conversation, they
reluctantly agreed that Ahern should not be told of the
blood-tie that bound them, at least for the present.
"If he did know, though," Alyce said, "it would make it
easier in some respects. I think he thinks he fancies you,
Vera— but we can't have him courting his sister."
Vera rolled her eyes. "Did he tell you that?"
"No, but it's clear that he's fond of you."
"The dear boy. He is sweet—but in a few days, that won't
be a factor," Vera said. "He's right that I'll be going with
Rosmerta. Until my parents say otherwise, I have no choice."
She shrugged at their knowing glances. "Well, they think
they're my parents. Right now, the three of us are the only

ones who know the truth of the matter—and Father
Paschal, of course."
"Why can't we tell Ahern?" Marie asked.
"Because he's terrible at keeping secrets," Alyce replied.
"At least he always was, as a child. Anyway, he doesn't need
to know right now. It would be unfair to burden him with
such knowledge while he's still recovering his health—-and
figuring out how to be an earl. Once we've gone back to
Rhemuth, he's going to be very alone."
"I'm afraid she's right," Vera said to Marie. "This isn't the
time to tell him. Our parents paid too high a price to make
sure no one knows what I am. We mustn't do anything to
jeopardize that."
"Exactly," Alyce said. "But we can do something to get
Father's plans for you back on track. I thought to ask the
queen about bringing you to court, when we go back to
Rhemuth."
"To court?" Vera breathed.
"Why not? You've already been part of an earl's
household. Don't think for a moment that this wasn't part of
Father's plan for you. I'm sure he intended to arrange an
extremely advantageous marriage, so that your eventual
children—his grandchildren—would be in positions to
improve the lot of our people. And no one would know that
any of you are Deryni."
Vera was nodding by the time she finished, and Marie
was grinning.
“The queen is very kind," Marie said. "And so many
handsome young knights at court! Think what a fine
marriage you might make!"
"There is that," Vera agreed.
"Then, it's settled," Alyce said. "We'll make inquiries as
soon as we return.

T

HE household of the late Keryell Earl of Lendour kept the
feasts of Christmas at Castle Cynfyn, though the
observances were muted because of his recent death. Two
days after Saint Stephen's Day, to no one's particular regret,
his widow announced, from the back of a horse, that she
was departing at once for her father's lands near Dhassa.

"Madam, I am certain that my father did not intend that
you should be turned out of your home," Ahern said
dutifully, standing in the snowy yard with a hand on her
horse's bridle, and balancing on one leg and a crutch.

"No, I am resolved," Rosmerta replied. "I have had several
weeks to consider, while I waited for my husband's body to
come home. But God did not consent to give me children by
Lord Keryell, so there is nothing for me here. I wish you well,
Ahern, but you do not need my presence. You must make a
life of your own."
There was nothing he could say to that, for while his
relationship with his stepmother had been civil, at least in
his father's presence, there had never been true warmth
between them.
"At least permit me to send an escort with you," he said,
beginning to weave on his feet.
"I thank your courtesy, but my father has sent men of his
own," she replied, nodding toward the half dozen liveried
men interspersed among the sumpter animals and the
mounts of her household and servants. "I desire to greet the
new year with the family of my birth. God grant you health,
my lord."
With that, she headed out the castle gate, her daughter at
her side and with Vera among her household—hopefully,
only for a few weeks or months, until Alyce and Marie could
speak to the queen about her.

B

Y Twelfth Night, the customary time for formal transactions
of important business in any lord's hall, Ahern was
sufficiently improved in health to preside at his first official
court as Earl of Lendour—yet unconfirmed in his full
authority, because of his youth, but lawfully acknowledged
by the presence at his side of Duke Richard, who witnessed
the investiture of the new earl's council of advisors and took
their fealty in the name of the king his brother. Two days
later, Richard bade all farewell and departed for Rhemuth,
and life began to settle into some semblance of a pattern of
daily life for the new young earl.
Not for several weeks, as Ahern and his seneschal
reviewed the inventories of the late earl's possessions, was it
discovered that certain valuables had gone missing.
"You don't suppose that Rosmerta could have taken
these?" Ahern asked, as he showed the list of missing items
to his sisters. "Some of the jewelry was left to you in that
letter from Father."
"Then, I expect that Rosmerta's coffers have been
considerably enriched by the appropriated items," Alyce
replied. "Can aught be done about it?"
Ahern shook his head. "Probably not. Just be glad that
she didn't have any sons. If she had, I'd probably be dead—

and she'd be working on the two of you."
Marie wrinkled her nose. "I still don't understand why
Father married her."
" 'Better to marry than to burn,'" Ahern muttered,
coloring slightly as Alyce looked at him sharply. "Well, he
was a man of—passions," he added, somewhat lamely.
"Though, in this case, I think I'd rather he had diddled with
serving wenches."
Alyce only rolled her eyes, though she made a mental
note to ask their sister to look into the matter further.
Meanwhile, the winter snows swept in, rendering travel
difficult, especially for an invalid who must still travel by
horse-litter—though, in truth, young Ahem had made no
plans to move before the summer, when he would visit his
lands in Corwyn. Fortunately, he gained strength almost
daily, though his shattered knee continued to give him pain,
albeit tempered by the nursing of his sisters.
Early in February, however, Sir Kenneth Morgan arrived
with orders recalling the demoiselles de Corwyn to
Rhemuth—with his daughter Zoë at his side.
"The queen particularly asks for your presence," Kenneth
told them, when the girls' joy at their reunion had subsided
enough for him to get a word in edgewise. "Her lying-in will
soon be upon her, and she greatly desires that you attend
her.
"She also has graciously offered my dear Zoë a place at
court, as further incentive to speed your return," he added,
slipping a fond arm around his daughter's waist.
"Alyce, I was presented at Twelfth Night court!" Zoë
blurted, joy in her sea-gray eyes. "You should have seen my
beautiful gown! And I've brought a new gown for each of you
as well: presents from the queen and Lady Jessamy. We're
done with our school habits! I'm to stay at court with Father,
and attend the queen—and try my hand in the king's
scriptorium, if I desire it!"
Few developments could have cheered Alyce more—and
the queen's request underlined a more serious reason for
their return to court, for all were well aware of the dangers of
childbed. Still, Alyce turned to her brother in concern.
"Would you prefer that one of us remain with you?" she
said. "I know that your knee still pains you."
Ahern had graduated to a walking stick to help him
hobble around the castle, and thwacked it lightly against the
thigh of his propped-up leg, mustering a brave smile.
"No, the queen needs you more than I do," he said lightly.
“I’m not the one who's having a baby. Go to her. I'll
manage."

T

HEY left the following day, riding fast along the road that
skirted the River Molling, as it lazed its way westward across
the great Gwynedd Plain. They arrived in Rhemuth midFebruary, only days before the queen was brought to bed of
another Haldane prince. Eased by the ministrations of
Jessamy and Alyce, the latter grown considerably more
knowledgeable from her studies at Arc-en-Ciel, the queen's
labor was hard but short, at least some of her pains blunted
by Deryni magic—much to the annoyance of a new royal
midwife, who firmly believed that the travails of birth were a
woman's just recompense for the sins of Eve.
"You have another son, Sire," Alyce said, emerging from
the birthing chamber while Jessamy and Marie cleaned up
mother and child. "He is perfect in every way, and his
mother is well."
Bursting into a wide grin, Donal gave a relieved sigh.
“Thanks be to God!"
Later that evening, when the mother had rested and the
babe was rousing from sleep, the girls brought the rest of the
royal children to see the new arrival.
"Come and greet your new brother," Alyce said to Princes
Brion and Blaine as she shepherded them into their
mother's bedchamber.
Zoë was carrying their sister, the Princess Xenia, who
squirmed to get down as Jessamy helped the queen to sit
more upright and the midwife lifted the child from his cradle
to lay him in his mother's arms. The king had already visited
the pair, and now was gone to inform his council of the safe
delivery of the new prince.
"Isn't he beautiful?" Alyce whispered, as young Brion
stood on his tiptoes for a closer look.
"He's just a baby," piped Blaine, sounding a little
disappointed.
"Well, he was just born," Brion replied, quite reasonably.
"Mama, can I hold him?"
Richeldis laughed gently as the babe nuzzled closer to her
breast. "Maybe tomorrow, darling. Right now, he's very
hungry, and Mama is very tired."
"But, you been in bed all day, Mama," Blaine pointed out.
"Yes, but your mama has been working very hard,"
Jessamy explained, smoothing the younger boy's jet-black
hair. "Shall I lift you up so you can see him better?"
Nodding solemnly, Blaine held up his arms to be picked
up. Brion was already clambering up the side of his mother's

bed to see, assisted by Alyce. Xenia, too, was reaching
toward the baby and her mother, so Zoë obliged by bringing
her closer.
"Ba-bee!" Xenia crowed, reaching out to stroke the
infant's blanket.
"What're we gonna name him, Mama?" Brion wanted to
know, grinning as a tiny hand closed on his forefinger.
"Well, your father has suggested Nigel," Richeldis replied.
"What do you think?"
"Nigel's a good name!" Brion agreed, nodding. "Now I got
two brothers, named Blaine an' Nigel!"
"And a very pretty sister!" Zoë added, bestowing an
audible kiss on the cheek of the squirming Xenia.

T

he arrival of the new prince, coupled with having Zoë with
them again, helped both Alyce and Marie ease back into life
at court, now on a far happier note than the weeks before
Christmas, while they waited for their father's body to
return. And as spring eased toward summer, preparations
for the June wedding of another of the queen's ladies
likewise occupied both minds and hands, for the dashing Sir
Jared McLain, Earl of Kierney, had claimed the hand of
Elaine MacInnis.
"I still cannot believe my good fortune," Elaine confided to
Alyce and Marie, soon after their return to Rhemuth.
"Apparently our fathers made the arrangements at
Christmastime. He asked me on Saint Stephen's Day, and
our betrothal took place at Twelfth Night court."
"How I wish we could have seen it!" Marie declared,
honestly delighted. "What a couple you shall make—for he is
one of the comeliest men at court. Everyone says that he's
ever so brave and dashing!"
"More important, he is kind and gentle," Alyce agreed, not
giving voice to a vague misgiving, for Elaine was but fifteen.
"But—shall you live in Kierney, Elaine? I fear we shall never
see you!"
Elaine shrugged, a tinge of wistfulness crossing her fair
features. "It is far away, I know. But his sons must be born
on his own lands—and I hope I shall give him many!
Besides, when he is duke, he will be called often to court—
and I shall come with him, when I can." She gave them a
bright, delighted smile. "And both of you shall be married
and with families of your own, before you know it."
"Pray God that it will be to as much contentment," Alyce
said, with a glance at her friend, whose smile had turned a

little wistful.

T

o the relief of both girls, the king gave no indication that he
intended to rush the disposition of their marriage portions,
but allowed them to return to their previous pursuits in the
queen's household. Alyce focused on the education of the
royal children, while continuing to avail herself of the royal
library and the scholars who passed through court—and
delighted in executing commissions of special documents for
the king's chancery, for which Zoë provided illuminated
capitals and embellishments.
Marie's pure voice soon brought her to the attention of
the royal music master, who groomed her for performances
both in the chapel royal and as entertainment in the king's
hall; and her skills with loom and embroidery needle were
much sought by the artisans who spent their days creating
tapestries for the great hall. In addition, the sisters'
suggestions to the queen regarding Lady Vera Howard met
with royal approval, to the end that Vera soon joined the
ranks of the queen's demoiselles.
"Believe me, Lady Rosmerta was not happy to receive the
queen's summons," she told them privily, the first night after
her arrival, as she dug in the recesses of a capacious leather
bag. "She will have been even less happy when she
discovered that I left with these."
She pulled out a wooden box the size of a man's two
hands and opened the lid for Alyce's inspection. Inside,
wrapped individually in pieces of crumpled linen, were most
of the items of jewelry listed in their father's bequest: several
rings and brooches, a bracelet, and a necklace of emeralds
the size of a man's thumbnail, with blue fire at their hearts.
"Ooooh, Alyce!" Marie breathed, as Alyce lifted out the
necklace.
"I remember seeing our mother wear this," Alyce
murmured, turning it in the candlelight. "Family tradition
has it that it once belonged to the Lady Tayce Furstána, a
first cousin of the King of Torenth, whose son became the
first Duke of Corwyn."
"Then, it's good that it comes back into the family," Vera
said, looking pleased with herself as Marie plucked out a
gold bangle set with opals and sapphires. "And doesn't that
bracelet appear in that painting of Stevana at Cynfyn?"
Alyce nodded. "Aye, the one at the top of the main stair."
She watched her younger sister slide the bangle onto her
wrist and turn it appreciatively in the light.
"So much for Rosmerta," Marie said, smiling smugly.

"Not entirely," Alyce replied, taking the bracelet back from
her sister. "She'll probably try to claim that Vera stole them.
But we'll take them to the queen for safekeeping, and send
to Ahern for the letter Father left."

Chapter 16
"Then shall the lame man leap as an hart. . ."
-ISAIAH 35:6

M

uch to their relief, no complaint came from Rosmerta, but
Alyce sent to their brother anyway, that a fair copy might be
made of the bequest, witnessed by Father Paschal under
seal.
The next several months passed quickly, with all the
ladies of the royal household happily focused on the
upcoming nuptials of Elaine MacInnis and Jared McLain,
which took place at the end of June in St. Hilary’s-Withinthe-Walls, the royal basilica adjoining Rhemuth Castle. As a
personal favor for the wedding day, Alyce allowed Elaine to
wear the Furstána emeralds. It was an occasion of pageantry
and celebration, for Jared McLain was Earl of Kierney and
heir to the Duchy of Cassan; but it was a day also tinged
with sadness, for the newlyweds soon left for Kierney. The
new Countess Elaine would be sadly missed from the
queen's household.
That was the summer, in the fifteenth year of King
Donal's reign, that Donal Haldane began his great inquest of
all the lands in Gwynedd, even more ambitious than the one
carried out by his father, King Malcolm, to mark the twentyfifth anniversary of the great Battle of Killingford.
Then the royal commissioners had sent deputies only into
the heartlands of the kingdom: from the Purple March
southward across the great Gwynedd Plain as far as
Carthmoor and Corwyn, and northward along the Coamer
Mountains through Lendour and as far north as Eastmarch.
This time, the inquiries would include all of Old Kheldour:
the Duchy of Claibourne, the Kheldish Riding, and the
Earldoms of Marley and Rhendall. Donal had hopes for
including Cassan and Kierney as well, but they lay close to
rebellious Meara, so he was not certain that local conditions
would permit such activities—but that decision could wait
while the rest progressed.
That summer was gentler than some in recent memory,
so the commissioners were able to make good progress as
the lazy summer days eased into autumn. Likewise, as the
months wore on, the demoiselles de Corwyn made plans for
their promised visit to their brother in Cynfyn—with some
trepidation on Alyce's part, for her sister and Sir Se had
been exchanging letters with alarming frequency since
Easter, along with the progress reports that Ahern sent
regularly, first from Corwyn and then from Cynfyn once
again. Though Vera was obliged to remain behind, having no
legitimate reason to accompany them, Alyce enlisted Zoë to

come along and help her keep Marie in line regarding Se.
The news was encouraging, at least where Ahern was
concerned. Earlier in the spring, he had made his promised
visit to Coroth—by horse-litter and coach, much to his
disgust— again accompanied by Duke Richard as he was
presented to the council ruling Corwyn until he should reach
the statutory age of twenty-five.
From there, after escorting Ahern back to Cynfyn,
Richard had returned to Rhemuth, in case his presence
should be required in Meara that season—and Ahern had set
about recovering as much as he could of his former abilities.
It had caused him no little pain as he began to exercise
again, for he was constantly testing the limits of his strength
and endurance, but he was determined that his injury
should be as little an impediment as possible.
He had taken up the bow first, before he could even stand
for very long, for he could shoot while perched on a stool,
with his stiff leg propped in front of him. Competence with a
bow did not require agility of foot, but strong arms and a
steady eye.
By midsummer, his accuracy had surpassed even the
level it had been before he rode off to Ratharkin the season
before. When he could stand longer, he also resumed
whacking at a pell with his sword—dull drill, starting over
with exercises he had first learned as a small boy, but it
served the double purpose of building up his sword arm
again and venting his frustration at his limitations.
As the summer wore on, he began to shift his thinking to
his strengths instead. He would always find it more
comfortable to walk with a stick, and would never recover
the agility on foot that he formerly had enjoyed; but he
found, to his relief, that riding was not the impossibility he
had feared— though he must mount from the right instead
of the left, since he could not bend his left knee. In time, he
would learn to vault astride, unimpeded by the stiff knee.
His first few times back in the saddle—using a mountingblock, much to his disgust—his thighs had ached for days
afterward, and his seat had been atrocious. But lengthening
the stirrups improved his stability and his comfort, and gave
him the leeway to develop a different style and balance to
accommodate the stiff knee.
Soon, as his healing stabilized and his strength returned,
he was riding at the quintain again, resuming his drill with
sword and lance. Se and Jovett worked with him daily, and
Sir Deinol, his seneschal in Cynfyn, kept him to a disciplined
regimen of physical training. Early in the autumn, as
campaign season waned, Duke Richard again rode over from
Rhemuth, also escorting the young earl's sisters for their
promised visit, and, after watching Ahern train for several
days, declared his belief that, if Ahern continued his present
progress, the accolade of knighthood might not, after all, be

beyond his reach in another year's time.
No news could have lifted Ahern's spirits more, or those
of his sisters. Hearing Richard's declaration, Ahern resolved
to redouble his efforts, taking advantage of Richard's
presence to beg his personal tutelage, which Richard gladly
gave.
"He could do it, couldn't he?" Alyce said to Se and Jovett,
the day before she, Marie, and Zoë were to start back for
Rhemuth with Richard and his party. "He could still win the
accolade."
Standing along the barrier fence of the tilting yard, the
five of them were watching prince and future duke spar from
horseback with blunted swords. Both men were laughing,
and Ahern let out an exuberant "Aha!" as he scored a
stinging hit on Richard's shoulder with the flat of his blade,
much to Richard's consternation and delight.
Se smiled and nodded, watching every move of both men.
"There's precedent. Over a century ago, there was a King of
Gwynedd who mostly fought on horseback. Javan Haldane
was his name. He was born with a clubbed foot, so he had to
wear a special boot—which made him not very nimble when
it came to swordplay on the ground, but on a horse, there
were few who could match him. Mounted, his actual sword
and lance work were excellent, and he was a superb
bowman.
"Very sadly, none of that could save him, in the end. He
was betrayed by his former regents, ambushed in the field.
Archers shot his horse out from under him and then cut him
down without mercy, along with two of his closest friends. I
believe one of them was a distant cousin of yours, Lady Zoë."
"Charlan Kai Morgan," Zoë said, nodding quietly. "My
father shares a middle name with him. I remember being
taken to his grave when I was a child. He'd been King
Javan's squire when he was still prince. He died at Javan's
side, trying to defend him."
"Then your father is the latest in a long tradition of loyal
Morgan service to the Haldanes, isn't he?" Jovett said
admiringly. "Aside from Duke Richard, perhaps, I can't think
of anyone I'd rather have at my back in a fight than Sir
Kenneth. Well, maybe Se," he amended, with a teasing
glance at the other young knight.
"Well, now that Ahern is making such an amazing
comeback, we will make a rather formidable trio, won't we?"
Se said easily.
All of them gasped as Ahern evaded a particularly deft
maneuver on the part of Duke Richard and wheeled his
mount for another pass.
"Would you look at that?" Jovett cried.
"It's all thanks to you and Se," Alyce said, unable to take

her eyes from the field.
"No, it's all thanks to Ahern's determination," Se
countered. "We simply encouraged him to do what only he
could do—and we bullied him occasionally, in the beginning,
when the frustration made him falter. But his recovery has
been a result of his own hard work. A lesser man might have
sat back with his leg propped up and rested on the laurels of
his valor at Ratharkin. But just look at him!"
He gestured toward the field, where Ahern and Richard
were engaged in an astonishing display of horsemanship,
breathless with the sheer joy of partnership between rider
and steed, wheeling their mounts and darting, feinting,
neither ever managing to land a blow on the other.
"What more could one ask of any man?" Se went on.
"Especially one who has answered the challenges he has
done. And he is still only sixteen. What will he be two years
from now? I have little doubt but that Richard will urge the
king to grant him the accolade. On that day, you may be
certain that Jovett and I shall be present."

T

HEY stayed but another day in Cynfyn before heading back
for Rhemuth, arriving early in October. The children of the
royal household all were thriving, especially the newest
prince, but the choicest gossip stirring the queen's
household was the news that the Lady Elaine, wed in June
to the son of the Duke of Cassan, in distant Kierney, was
expecting their first child the following May.
"Goodness, they didn't waste any time!" Alyce said, as she
and Marie joined Vera in her room for a snack of cakes and
ale, to share the news from Cynfyn. Since Zoë was also with
them, and had not been told of Vera's true parentage, the
three sisters took care to guard their speech.

"Well, Jared will be duke someday, so he needs to secure
the succession," Vera said. 'The same could be said about
your brother. I don't suppose his eye was caught by any of
those pretty maids in Coroth?" she added, with a twinkle in
her eye.
Alyce shook her head. "Not that I was aware of. He seems
to have been far more focused on getting back his health—
and he's succeeding marvelously!"
In ever-more-delighted detail, she described Ahern's
dexterity on horseback, and his skill on the field with Duke
Richard.
"We talked about little else on the way back from Cynfyn,"
she concluded. "Duke Richard was most impressed by how
far he's come."

"It sounds like he'll receive his accolade after all, then,"
Vera said. "That's wonderful news. Now we just have to find
him a lovely girl to be his future duchess. How about you,
Zoë? Alyce, wouldn't you and Marie love to have Zoë for a
sister?"
"I would," Marie said promptly.
Zoë blushed furiously, flattered by the compliment, but
Alyce's smile of agreement had a more thoughtful cast to it.
In fact, she had noticed Ahern watching Zoë more than once,
when he thought no one was looking—and Zoë herself had
seemed somewhat taken by the young earl, and certainly
dazzled by his horsemanship and sheer determination.
"I would say that such a development is not beyond the
realm of possibility," she allowed. "He did seem—attentive."
"Alyce!" Zoë protested, blushing even more.
"I predict nothing ...," Alyce said, raising both palms in a
protestation of innocence. "I merely comment on what I have
noted, when neither of you thought I was watching. And I
would be willing to bet that a letter from him will arrive
before the month is out."
"Oh, you... !"
"No, you!" Alyce countered, as she glanced at Marie and
Vera and the three of them pounced on Zoë for a bout of
tickling that continued until all four of them were breathless
with laughter.
"Oh, stop, stop!" Zoë begged. "You'll have Lady Jessamy
in here, wondering what on earth is going on!"
Her caution was enough to deflate their brief digression
into childishness, though all of them were grinning as they
ranged themselves against the fat pillows piled at the head of
the bed and caught their breath.
"How I do love all of you," Alyce murmured, when she had
caught her breath enough to speak. "Promise me that we
shall always be friends and sisters—regardless of who Zoë
marries!"
"We promise," the others said in unison, taking Alyce's
hands and joining them, clasped in their own.
"Friends and sisters forever!" Vera added. "No matter
what happens."

O

NCE returned to Rhemuth, the four friends settled
quickly back into the routine of the court, now with Vera as
a welcome part of their circle. Now relieved of some of the
tutoring duties that previously had occupied her, Alyce

found more of her time freed up to pursue her own
interests, returning to her explorations or the royal library
and in the scriptorium. And these were interests shared by
Zoë.
During their absence in Cynfyn, the first returns had
begun to trickle in from the king's commissioners of inquiry,
and were being compiled by a battery of scribes and copyists
now filling the chancery and several additional chambers in
one of the garden wings. As she and Zoë became acquainted
with the compilations now starting to take shape, and
recognized the scope and importance of such a survey, the
two of them began to conceive a fitting acknowledgement of
the king's foresight in ordering such an undertaking.
"This really will be an incredibly useful document," Zoë
said, when they had pulled out several scrolls from King
Malcolm's commission of inquiry and compared selected
entries against the current commission's findings.
"It will, indeed," Alyce agreed. She leafed through another
packet of parchment scraps bundled together by baronies
and townlands. "I wonder if the king might like to have a
special, illuminated extract of the collated returns from some
small area, perhaps with fine calligraphy and some
illumination--nothing too ambitious. If we started right
away, we perhaps could have it ready to present to him at
Twelfth Night court."
"This is still very early in the process," Zoë replied,
holding one of the slips closer to a candle to read its
heading. "What area did you have in mind? What area is
complete enough, at this point?"
"I know it can't be perfect," Alyce said. "Compiling all the
returns will take several years. I think King Malcolm's
inquiry took more than two, and some returns were still
missing when they stopped working on it. But I thought we
might start with Dhassa. For some reason, that seems to be
fairly complete."
"I've heard they're very punctilious in Dhassa," Zoë
replied, scanning the cramped lines on an irregular scrap of
parchment. "I suspect it comes of keeping track of all those
tolls to get into the city, because of the pilgrimage sites. But
we could do an illuminated cover page, and fancy capitals for
the sections dealing with the actual shrines. Have you ever
been to Dhassa?"
"No. But there must be people at court who have."
"We can talk to them, then, and get some descriptions. It
would be fun to incorporate some of the local features. But
no scrawny lions!"
Alyce grinned. "I promise—but only if you promise not to
include any fat squirrels."
"Agreed!"

T

HEY enlisted the patronage of the queen to assist in their
undertaking, and had the thin volume ready for Twelfth
Night court. Alyce had compiled the text and copied it out in
her best court hand, Zoë had done the illuminations, and
Marie and Vera bound it in crimson velvet embellished with
silk and gold laid-work on the cover and along the spine.
They had wrapped it in white linen tied with a length of
creamy yarn, and Alyce hugged it to her breast as the four of
them waited at the back of the great hall.
But first came the business of the court: the formal
enrollment of new pages, including a proud Prince Brion—
Prince Blaine and Krispin looked on jealously; the pledging
of new squires, and several knightings, though the girls
knew none of the newly dubbed young men.
Late in the day also came Sir Rorik Howell to report the
death three days before of his father, Corban Earl of
Eastmarch, and to pledge his fealty to the king, thereby
obtaining the right to enter into his inheritance.
"We receive this news with much sadness, Sir Rorik,"
Donal told the muddy, exhausted young man who knelt
before him, offering up his father's seal as earl, as a sign
that he acknowledged the king's right to confirm the
succession. "Nonetheless, we understand that your father
was ill for many months, and that release will have been a
blessing, for him and for his family."
"God grant that he now rests in peace, Sire," Rorik
murmured dutifully—and Alyce could Read that his regret
was genuine. "I pray that I may be as wise a guardian of his
people."
"They are now your people, Rorik Howell Earl of Eastmarch," Donal said, enfolding the young man's joined hands
in his and raising him up. "Accordingly, before these
witnesses, I hereby receive your pledge of fealty and I
confirm you in your lands and honors. Go to bed now, young
Rorik, for I know you have ridden solid for three days, and
probably will have ruined several good horses in the doing of
it. Tomorrow, when you have rested, we shall make more
formal acknowledgement of your new status."
A murmur of sympathy and approbation followed the new
earl as he bowed and retreated from the hall, followed by a
squire who had been directed to see to his needs. There
came next an announcement by an emissary of the Earl of
Transha that the wife of young Caulay MacArdry was lighter
of a son and heir, born the previous October and christened
Ardry. The news of the birth somewhat lightened the sober
air left in the wake of the sadder news brought by Rorik of

Eastmarch, and left the king in mellower mood by the
time the formal business of the court had ended. As he and
his queen retired to the withdrawing room behind the dais,
for a break and light refreshment while the hall was set up
for feast to follow, the girls followed at the queen's
beckoning.
"Sire, I have conspired with the demoiselles de Corwyn
and their friends to produce a special Twelfth Night gift for
you," the queen said, as she and king settled into chairs
before the fire and the girls hesitated at the door.
"A gift?" the king said, setting aside his crown and
running both hands through his thinning hair.
"Aye, my lord. Ladies?"
At the queen's gesture, the four of them came to kneel at
the feet of the royal couple, Alyce still clutching their
precious manuscript to her breast.
"Sire, you will be aware that Twelfth Night marks the
Feast of the Epiphany, when, by tradition, three kings
brought gifts to the newborn Child in Bethlehem. This is why
we give gifts at this season, in memory of their gifts."
"That is true," the king said patiently, smiling faintly.
"This past year has marked the giving of another great
gift: your Majesty's great commission of inquiry, by which
the rights of lords and commons throughout this land shall
be safeguarded and preserved."
Tremulously she offered up her package in both hands,
placing it in his.
"In the spirit of this season, then, the four of us decided
to create a modest memento to commemorate the
importance of this latest inquiry—an extract of the findings
concerning the city and environs of Holy Dhassa—and we
have set it forth in a form befitting its importance in the
history and preservation of our land, and hopefully pleasing
to your Majesty."
She watched as he untied the yarn holding the linen
wrappings in place, his eyebrows rising as he turned back
the linen and caught his first glimpse of what lay within.
"My lord," said the queen, "Lady Vera and Lady Marie
created the binding and its fine embroidery. The
illuminations are Mistress Zoë's work, and the scrivening
was done by Lady Alyce. The balass rubies and the gold
bullion thread for the binding were my own humble
contribution. I hope you are pleased," she concluded, as the
king opened its cover, greatly touched, and turned the first
page slightly toward the queen.
"What a truly remarkable gift," he murmured, as
Richeldis ran an appreciative finger along a bit of the
binding. "I shall look forward to finding the time to examine
it properly. Dear ladies, I thank you. Now, where is my new

page?" he added, turning to look for Prince Brion, who
was standing proudly behind his father in his page's livery,
craning his neck to see.
"Boy, take charge of this, please—and mind your hands
are clean! Ladies, I see a squire lurking by the door, waiting
to unleash petitioners, but I shall charge my son and heir to
guard this well for me." He leaned forward to kiss the hand
of each of them, then nodded to the squire as he put his
crown back on.
"Let's have the first one, Gerald. I should like to see
everyone that I must, before the feast is served."

A

FTER Twelfth Night, the rhythm of life at court settled back
into its usual routine. The first months of the new year were
marked by heavy storms and freezing cold, leading to a late
spring. Perhaps because of the sharp lesson of two years
previously, Meara was still quiet, but Iolo Melandry, the
royal governor, warned that the peace was precarious, and
might not hold.
The peace did hold, all through that season, but word
came early in the summer that the newly married Countess
Elaine, a bride of less than a year, had died in childbed after
delivering a son. The boy's father had christened him Kevin
Douglas McLain.
"What a tragedy," said Queen Richeldis, hugging the
infant Nigel to her heart when she heard the news.
"Was she even sixteen?" one of the other ladies asked,
shocked.
Alyce shook her head sadly. "No."
"Her husband is to blame!" another muttered.
"No, she was unfortunate," the queen replied, for both she
and Jessamy had borne their first child younger than Elaine.
"Indeed," Jessamy said quietly. "Sadly, such is often the
fate of our sex."

Chapter 17
"So they oppress a man and his house, even a man and
his heritage." –
MICAH 2:2

T

HE peace looked likely to hold in Meara that summer,
perhaps partially because Duke Richard made a progress
into Kierney and Cassan, to show the royal presence at the
courts of Earl Jared and Duke Andrew. In May, he had
ridden up to the red walls of Jared's seat at Castel Dearg
only hours before the birth of the McLain heir—and had
mourned with Jared when pretty Elaine slipped away soon
after. He would stay on patrol along their Mearan borders for
several months.
The king took advantage of the respite to spend time with
his young family—fortunately, as it happened, for trouble
flared unexpectedly toward the end of summer: not in
Meara, as one might have expected, but in Corwyn, on the
opposite side of kingdom.
"Torenthi raiders crossed the river at Fathane and harried
as far south as Kiltuin," Sir Sé Trelawney reported,
addressing king and council in emergency session on a
steamy August evening. "Scores were killed or injured, and
Kiltuin town was looted and burned. It—ah—has even been
suggested that some of the raiders were princes of the blood,
and that rogue magic was employed. Ahern will be
investigating those claims," he added, with a speaking glance
at Alyce and Marie, who had been asked to sit in on the
session. "The bishop is said to be livid."
As his council muttered among themselves, Donal cast
another glance over the report Sé had brought from Lord
Hambert, the seneschal of Coroth. It was the same that
Hambert had sent to Ahern to inform him of the raid, and
was stark in its assessment of the situation.
My lord, your father would not have allowed this to go
unpunished, Hambert had written. The raiders destroyed
most of the town, looting and burning with abandon, and even
violated many of the women. In some cases, women and
children were ridden down in the streets. I chanced to be
traveling in the region soon after it happened, and was told by
the town's headman that those responsible were definitely of
Torenth, and had boasted that none could bring them to task
for their actions, since the king is an old man and his brother
is occupied with affairs in Meara. They also believed that,
with Earl Keryell dead, you would not be able to take up
Corwyn's defense, being young and unfit.. . .
"Lord Hambert and the Corwyn regency council have
already sent stiff letters of protest to the court of Torenth,

deploring the incident," Sir Sé was saying, "and Ahern
will be in Kiltuin by now, carrying out further investigation.
But this is not the first such border violation, as we all
know. One would think that the Torenthi would have learnt
their lesson in the Great War."
" ’Twas clearly a blatant venture of opportunity," said the
Archbishop of Rhemuth, forging directly into the discussion.
"They know that the king's attention has been focused on
Meara, and that Corwyn is in the hands of regents for its
duke, who is a minor and a cripple to boot!"
"More agile a cripple than many a man with all his
faculties intact," Sé said pointedly. "And crippled he was in
the king's service."
"Let be, Sir Sé," Donal said mildly. "What concerns us at
this time is a fitting response in Corwyn—which Lord Ahern
and his regents seem to have begun quite nicely. Kenneth,
how many ships have we at Desse?"
"I don't know, Sire, though I can have that information for
you by morning."
"Fair enough," the king agreed. "Jiri, how quickly can we
raise sufficient troops to take a policing force into Corwyn?"
"That depends on how many men you have in mind,
Sire—which, in turn depends on what ships are available."
"Let's plan for about forty. We'll ride down to Nyford for
ships, if we must."
Jiri Redfearn nodded. "In that case, perhaps a day or two,
then."
"Which?" Donal demanded. "One day or two?"
The king's sharp tone elicited a whispered conference.
"Tomorrow?" said Jiri.
Donal nodded. "By noon."
"Yes, Sire."
"See to it, then. Sir Tiarnán, you'll leave at once for
Kierney, to find my brother and inform him what's occurred.
He may well be in Cassan by now, but it would probably be
wise for him to return to Rhemuth. It’s late for any serious
trouble in Meara this season. Seisyll, I'll ask you and the
archbishop to form an interim council of regency with the
queen, pending Richard's return." He slapped his hand flat
against the table in annoyance. "Damn! I did not want to
campaign this season. Why couldn't those misbegotten
Torenthi stay on their side of the river?"

L

ATER that night, as the castle bustled with preparations for
a departure the following noon, Alyce and Zoë conferred
together in low tones while they waited for Marie to come in.
"You know she's with Sé," Alyce whispered, slightly
scandalized. "Please God she doesn't do anything stupid."
"She loves him," Zoë said simply. "I gather that he loves
her, too. He's going off to battle. Sometimes common sense
goes out the window."
"Well, it mustn't, if you're the sister of a future duke,"
Alyce muttered.
A fumbling at the door announced the arrival of said
sister, looking flushed and happy, giggling as she closed the
door behind her.
"And where have you been?" Alyce demanded, though she
kept her voice low.
"Well, I might have been in Paradise with Sé, if Lady
Jessamy hadn't come along when she did," Marie said pertly,
flouncing onto the bed with them.
"Mares, you didn't!" Alyce gasped.
"We didn't do what we both wanted to do, but it wasn't for
want of—well, wanting to," Marie replied. She hugged her
arms across her breasts and sighed.
"Oh, Alyce, it's so unfair! Sometimes I want him so badly,
I think I'll die if I can't have him. We were only kissing at
first. We'd found a quiet corner out in the cloister walk, well
away from prying eyes. But then he started touching me,
ever so gently, and I got all quivery inside. It felt. . .
wonderful! My knees started to go all wobbly, and—"
"Tell me that's when Lady Jessamy came along!" Alyce
begged, hanging on her every word.
Laughing aloud, Marie shook her head and threw an arm
around both of them.
"No, he started fumbling with the laces on his breeches
then, and that's when Lady Jessamy came along!"
"No!" Zoë breathed, as Alyce rolled her eyes heavenward.
"Sadly, yes," Marie said. "Had she not come when she did,
I'm not sure what might have happened—though I have
heard it said that there are many ways that a man and a
maid may pleasure one another. . . ."
Both her companions smothered groans at that, in a
mixture of sympathy and envy, but the telling had exhausted
all three of them. Only a little longer did they talk, before Zoë
betook herself to her own bed and the sisters settled down to
try to sleep.
Next morning saw many a tearful good-bye as the king's
expedition assembled in the castle yard, with wives and
children and sweethearts gathered to bid them Godspeed.

Sir Sé Trelawney, sitting his horse beside the king,
restrained himself from too effusive a farewell to the
demoiselles de Corwyn or their friend Zoë Morgan, whose
father also would ride with the expedition, merely bending to
salute each proffered hand with a chaste kiss.
But more than one sharp-eyed lady of the queen's
household noted that his lips lingered on the hand of the
younger sister of his lord, and several cast calculating
glances after Marie as she and Alyce left the yard with Zoë,
noting how the three then scurried to a vantage point on one
of the west-facing battlements, where they might watch the
column's progress southward along the river road.

T

HE king's party took ship in Desse, as hoped, sailing
uneventfully down the River Eirian and thence around the
head of Carthmoor, arriving in Coroth harbor in mid-August.
Young Ahern met them at the door to Coroth Castle's
great hall, walking with the aid of a stick, but on his feet to
welcome his king. Nor had he been idle in the fortnight since
the raid on Kiltuin.
Immediately upon hearing the news, he had directed his
Lendour regents to echo the complaint already lodged with
the court of Torenth by his regents in Coroth—the decision
of a mature and astute young man, and one that had been
heartily endorsed by his council. He then had taken horse
with Sir Jovett Chandos and some thirty men and ridden
directly to Kiltuin, to inspect the damage there and speak
with some of the survivors. He had found half a dozen of his
Corwyn captains and fifty men there before him, doing their
best to ascertain just what had happened.
By the time the king arrived in Coroth, Ahern had
assumed decisive leadership with both his councils of
regents and had begun orchestrating a diplomatic exchange
on which Donal himself could not have improved. In fact, his
respective regents had become sufficiently confident of their
young lord's judgment that they were beginning to function
as advisors rather than regents: a state of affairs not at all to
the liking of the Bishop of Corwyn, who pointed out at the
first opportunity that Ahern was yet a full eight years from
achieving the age at which a Deryni might lawfully exercise
the full authority of a ducal title.
In light of Ahern's undoubted ability and loyalty, Donal
found himself mostly unconcerned over this technical breach
of the law, but he did promise the bishop that he would
somewhat rein back his fledgling duke, for he did not want
to precipitate an incident with the religious authorities.
Shortly after his arrival, Donal met privately with young

Ahern for nearly an hour, then invited the Corwyn council
to join them.
Not that his reaction was all the bishop could have hoped
for. Assuring them that he could find no fault with anything
that had been done, the king confessed himself obliged to
make it dear that proprieties must be maintained, and that
their young lord must not presume to present himself as
duke in fact. Later, however, he observed to Lord Hambert
that Ahern, at seventeen, seemed easily capable of exercising
the full authority of his ducal rank . . . were he not Deryni.
Meanwhile, the flurry of exchanges between Corwyn and
Torenth was yielding interesting results. In noting the
protestations of outrage on the part of Corwyn, the chancery
of Nimur of Torenth, in turn, had acknowledged (in view of
the numerous affidavits of witness from Kiltuin) that yes, it
appeared that subjects of Torenth might possibly have
strayed across the border area adjoining Kiltuin, and
perhaps had been guilty of over-exuberance regarding
insults offered by the inhabitants of said town.
But it was flatly denied that King Nimur's sons might
have been among the culprits; and certainly, no reparations
would be forthcoming. The correspondence on this matter
was already voluminous.
"It appears that King Nimur means to smother the matter
in paperwork," Donal remarked, when he had gone over the
exchanges with Ahern and his council. "I don't suppose it's
possible that the witnesses might have been mistaken—that
it wasn't the Torenthi princes after all?"
"Not unless someone was impersonating them," Lord
Hambert said with a snort. "The local priest in Kiltuin is
something of an armorist; he knows what he saw. Most of
the men wore Torenthi livery—they made no attempt to
conceal who they were. But he was quite clear that two of
them wore variations on the Torenthi royal arms. He's
convinced they were two of Nimur's sons."
"And you trust his judgment?" Donal asked.
"I do, Sire. Furthermore, one of the ravaged women drew
out the device worn by the man who defiled her. She got
rather a better look at it than she would have wished. The
drawing is there on the bottom of the stack."
Nodding, Donal leafed through the sheaf of parchment
depositions and cast an eye over the last one in the stack,
noting the somewhat shaky sketch of the Furstán hart on a
roundel, differenced with a bordure. In a somewhat more
confident hand, someone had tricked in the colors: the
tawny field, the leaping black hart against a white roundel,
the white border denoting cadency, though the king could
not recall which particular Furstán owned the bordure
charged with five black crowns.
"Well, he certainly appears to have been presenting

himself as a Furstán," Donal observed. "That alone
should get him dealt with by his own folk—unless, of course,
that's exactly what he was."
"He was a Furstán, Sire," Ahern said confidently. "Believe
me, I know this." The look he gave the king as Donal glanced
up at this very positive declaration made it quite clear that
the boy had confirmed the information by Deryni means.
"Indeed," the king said softly.
Ahern merely inclined his head slightly, his eyes never
leaving Donal's.
"Well, then," Donal said. "We shall have to ensure that
King Nimur is not allowed to argue this point. Reparations
are required." He pushed back from the table and rose, and
the others likewise came to their feet. "Perhaps Lord
Hambert would be so good as to assemble a suitable foray
party, to ride with my own troops. I am minded to make an
incursion of my own into Torenth—to discover more facts, of
course. And if my men should find opportunity to seize
goods in recompense for what happened at Kiltuin—so much
the better. I will, however, require that they conduct
themselves in a more seemly fashion than our Torenthi
raiders. Is that clear?"
As Lord Hambert made a bow, Ahern merely smiled and
said, "Abundantly, Sire. And might I request that I may be
permitted to ride at your side?" He tapped his stiff leg with
his stick and cocked his head at the king. "I think you will
discover that this has not slowed me down."
"That has already been my observation," the king replied.
"And I am proud to have you in my service."

A

HERN'S service proved itself more than once in the days
that followed. His daring strategies, worked out with the
king, enabled Gwyneddan raiding parties to harry Torenthi
border towns with sufficient regularity that, by early
September, King Nimur's ministers were seriously discussing
the payment of reparations. Donal had hoped to call Nimur's
sons to account, at least tendering an acknowledgement of
their offenses and an offer of official apology, but it gradually
became clear that, on this point, Nimur remained
unbending.
But in all, the course of this late campaign—far different
from any prospect in Meara—was going satisfactorily.
Periodically Donal sent progress reports back to Rhemuth,
both to his queen and council and to Ahern's sisters.
Whenever these official missives were dispatched, additional
letters went along under Ahern's seal. Though, officially,
these came from Ahern, Donal was well aware that the

courier's pouch always included at least one letter from
Sir Sé Trelawney to Marie de Corwyn. In the course of the
sea voyage to Coroth, Donal had become well aware of Sé's
affection, from childhood, for the Corwyn sisters, and for
Marie in particular, and wondered how long it would take Sé
to approach him about asking for her hand.
Which permission he was inclined to grant, since he liked
young Sé Trelawney, and suspected that the young man
might even be Deryni—though he had never been able to
confirm this, for Sé religiously avoided any circumstance in
which it might be possible for the king to determine this by
casual means.
Donal knew of Sé's longstanding friendship with Ahern,
and trusted Sé's loyalty because he trusted Ahern's; but
actually calling the question might put Sé into danger that
was not necessary. Donal, unlike his bishops and clergy,
was disinclined to enforce the rigorous exclusion of Deryni
that had been the official policy of Gwyneddan law for more
than a century—perhaps because he suspected that his own
odd powers might be somehow related to those wielded by
the Deryni. He had once asked Jessamy about it, but she did
not know. She did know of his suspicions about Sé, and saw
no harm if it were true.

B

UT the letters themselves were gradually building on a
resentment that very much generated harm, though none
could have predicted it save for one affronted damsel of the
royal court, increasingly bitter as the summer waned and
letters continued to arrive for the Corwyn sisters. The Lady
Muriella saw how the face of Marie de Corwyn lit with
excitement whenever letters arrived from Corwyn, and how
she always drew aside for a private moment in the garden to
read the ones addressed to her, and how she then added
each new missive to the growing stack secreted under her
pillow, tied with a grass-green ribbon.
One day, when the sisters were safely away for the
afternoon, riding with the young princes in the castle's lower
ward, Muriella even dared to slip into the pair's room and lift
the pillow, carefully sliding out the most recent of the letters
to quickly scan its content. To her surprise, there was
nothing overt, but that did not lessen her resentment of the
attention Sé was lavishing on the pair, and on Marie in
particular.
Her resentment grew and festered as the summer wore
on, only intensified by her awareness that her rivals were
Deryni. And in the daydreams of many a long, sultry
summer afternoon, she found herself idly envisioning all

manner of dire fates for the pair.
In truth, she could scarcely imagine that the dashing Sir
Sé would truly prefer the pallid good looks of the sisters de
Corwyn over her own, more voluptuous dark-haired beauty.
She wondered whether they might be using their accursed
Deryni magic to ensnare his affection—a scandalous offense,
since the church held all use of the dread powers of the
Deryni to be anathema.
She didn't know whether a Deryni could be burned for
using his or her powers to secure another's affections, but it
was immensely satisfying to imagine the pair dragged to
stakes in the city square below, shorn of their bright locks
and trembling with terror as the executioners bound them
with chains amid the piles of faggots stacked high, and
brought the fiery brands, thrusting the fire deep into the
kindling so that the hungry flames soon rose to devour
them.
She had laughed aloud at that very satisfying image,
though she had soon dismissed it as highly unlikely to
happen, given the queen's affection for the pair. Besides
that, it would be most difficult to prove any misconduct on
their part without Muriella herself becoming involved—and
that might well put Sé off her for good, thereby totally
defeating the purpose of the exercise. No, getting rid of the
sisters was definitely desirable, but there must be some
more subtle way to do it.
It was on a showery afternoon early in September that the
idea came to her, as she puttered in the stillroom with a
decoction of fragrances derived from roses, lavender, and
honeysuckle. Muriella had amassed considerable knowledge
of herb lore during her several years at court, not only
aromatic and culinary herbs but medicinal ones. Sometimes
she assisted Father Denit, the queen's chaplain, in the
preparation of simples for use by the royal physician; and on
that day, as she and the priest checked the stocks of
medicinal herbs, she found her fingers lingering over those
substances whose use required extreme caution: substances
that could kill.
Shocked at her own audacity, she tried to put such
thoughts from her mind, forcing herself not to react, but the
notion would not leave her. The next day found her in the
royal library, poring over a particular herbal. And gradually,
a plan began to take shape, involving a confection of ground
almonds, honey, and certain other substances that might be
added to the almond paste.
It could be done, she decided. It would be dangerous, if
she were found out, but was Sir Sé not worth a little risk?
Her disdain for her rivals was well known, so she would need
to recruit an unwitting accomplice to her plan, but that, too,
could be done. The more she considered, the more possible
the prospect seemed. For with Marie out of the way, and
perhaps Alyce as well, Muriella was certain that she could

win the affection of the dashing Sé Trelawney ...

M
URIELLA seized her opportunity on a sultry day late in
September, when a series of seemingly unrelated events
chanced to spiral into disaster. It began as Lord Seisyll
Arilan strolled into the castle gardens, having spent the
morning in council with the queen and the Archbishop of
Rhemuth—always a less than pleasant prospect, because
Archbishop William made no secret of his dislike of Deryni.
Accordingly, Seisyll was always extremely careful never to
put a foot wrong, in his dealings with the man. He
understood that William MacCartney was likely to be the
next Archbishop of Valoret, when Michael of Kheldour died;
and while he had no particular quarrel with Gwynedd's
Primate, he knew he would be greatly relieved to have
William MacCartney as far away as possible.
That afternoon, however, Seisyll had aspirations in
another direction altogether. For with both the king and
Duke Richard away from court for the past several months,
Seisyll had been watching for an opportunity to have his
own look at Master Krispin MacAthan—or Krispin Haldane,
as Seisyll increasingly believed the boy to be. Not since
Michon's encounter with the boy in the cloister garden at
Arc-en-Ciel had anyone from the Camberian Council been
able to conduct even a cursory examination. But on such a
lazy, hazy summer afternoon, with formal training sessions
suspended and most of the children of the royal household
at leisure, who knew what might be possible?
He had chosen his time with care, at an hour when many
of the adults and not a few of the children were apt to be
drowsing, even napping—and who would suspect otherwise?
As Seisyll strolled, he took himself to the vicinity of the
castle's apple orchard rather than the more formal gardens
that lay adjacent to the royal apartments, for he had heard
mention that some of the younger boys, Krispin included,
had lately conceived a passion for toy boats, which they were
wont to try out in the fishpond that served the castle
kitchens.
He pulled an apple from one of the trees and began to eat
it as he passed through the orchard, peering beyond to
where he believed the pond to be. He saw the squire first: a
reliable young man in Haldane scarlet, reclining in the shade
of another tree and also partaking of the orchard's fruit as
he watched the three younger boys crouched at the water's
edge.
The tallest of the boys was definitely a Haldane prince, as
the second sable-headed lad might also be, all of them

dressed in a motley assortment of well-worn and nearly
outgrown summer tunics, sleeves rolled above the elbows
and tunic-tails ruched up between bare legs as they waded
ankle-deep in the shallows and shepherded the boats. The
creamy sail of the red boat was painted with a Haldane lion,
proclaiming it to be the property of Prince Brion. Another
boy with brown hair was fiddling with the saffron sail of a
blue-painted boat—the lad's name was Isan Fitzmartin,
Seisyll recalled.
Krispin MacAthan's boat was green, and sported a sail of
the dull red-ochre hue common to the Southern Sea. All
three boys straightened attentively as Seisyll approached,
and the squire sat forward and started to get to his feet, but
Seisyll waved him back as he nodded to the boys and came
to crouch down companionably at the water's edge.
"Good afternoon, your Highness—and Master Krispin,
Isan," Seisyll said amiably. "Those are very fine boats you
have there, but do you think Cook will mind that you're
frightening his fish?"
"Good afternoon, Lord Arilan," Prince Brion replied,
speaking for the three of them. "They are fine boats, aren't
they? Master Edward, the carpenter, made them for us, and
some of the queen's ladies sewed the sails."
His sunny smile clearly was meant to distract Seisyll's
interest in the frightened fish, and the impish grins of
Krispin and Isan were likewise endearing. As the young
prince turned to prod at his craft with a stick, and Isan set
his boat back adrift, Seisyll reached out with his mind to
gently nudge the red and blue boats out of reach of their
owners, as if wafted by a wayward breath of breeze.
Krispin's, by contrast, drifted a little closer.
"And very fine work it is, too," Seisyll agreed. "Krispin,
may I see that one?"
Nodding solemnly, Krispin plucked his boat out of the
water and waded closer to Seisyll to extend it for inspection.
"Ah, yes, indeed," Seisyll said, laying hands on the craft
but also overlapping the hands of its owner, holding it,
turning it to other angles, but not actually taking it—for by
doing so, he was able to make and keep contact, at the same
time extending a probe.
"Yes, that's very fine," he said, tilting the boat this way
and that. "When I was a boy, I had a boat very like this one.
My father made it for me—and one for my brother. We used
to race them across a millpond in the village green near TreArilan.
"I believe that was the summer I dreamed of becoming a
great sea-farer, for my father had taken us to Orsalia earlier
that summer, on one of the great galleys of the Duke of
Corwyn's caralighter fleet. As I recall, he made the boats for
us while we were on that journey. At the time, I didn't realize

that sea voyages can actually be quite tedious. To me, it
was sheer excitement."
All three boys had been listening with rapt attention as
Seisyll shared this boyhood reminiscence—which was time
enough for the master Deryni to note several startling
similarities between Krispin's psychic resonances and those
of the king.
"Was it very fast, my lord?" Krispin asked eagerly.
"Not very," Seisyll said lightly. "I expect your boat is far
faster. In fact, mine was appallingly slow. And it hadn't
nearly as nice a sail as yours."
He used the boy's pleasure at this compliment as cover
for deftly disengaging his probe, also setting a gentle blur
over any memory of the contact. It would not hold up to
close scrutiny, but no such scrutiny was likely if no
suspicion was raised.
"No, yours is far finer than the one I remember," Seisyll
went on. "The sail is particularly fine. May I ask who made it
for you?"
"Lady Marie did the stitching, my lord," Krispin replied,
beaming as he stood a little straighter. "She's ever so nice.
But Mother gave her handkerchief, and Lady Muriella helped
me gather the right herbs to dye it. And Lady Zoë painted the
lion on Brion's one." He cocked his dark head wistfully. "It
must be an awful lot of work to be a girl, my lord."
Chuckling, Seisyll gestured toward the other two boats,
now beginning to catch the breeze and move back toward
their respective owners. Glancing back in that direction,
Krispin smiled sunnily and turned to set his own boat back
in the water, giving it a gentle push to send it on its way. As
its sail caught a breeze and continued to move, the boy
straightened to watch it go. Beyond, a duty squire entered
the garden with a travel-stained knight in tow—apparently a
messenger carrying dispatches, for he was rummaging in a
leather satchel slung over one shoulder.
"Look, a messenger!" Prince Brion cried, pointing.
"Where do you think he's come from?" Krispin said.
"Let's go see!" said Isan.
Instantly the three boys bolted in that direction, leaving
the boats abandoned in the fishpond. Smiling, Seisyll bent
and willed the boats close enough to retrieve, then set them
in a row at the edge before following after. Unless he was
greatly mistaken, the just-arrived messenger was one of the
knights who served Ahern de Corwyn—which meant that
there would be news possibly requiring the attention of the
crown council.

D

EEPER in the main garden, not far from the royal
apartments, the arrival of the messenger was also noted by
Marie de Corwyn, as his attending squire led him in the
direction of the queen's solar. She had washed her hair
earlier that morning, and was combing it dry in the dappled
sunshine underneath a rose arbor. She rose expectantly as
the messenger drew near, about to pass not far away, and he
saw her and raised one gloved hand in greeting.
"Jovett!" she called. "Have you anything for me?"
"That I do," the young man replied, grinning as he held
up a folded and sealed square of parchment. "And your
brother also sends you his duty and respect."
She blushed prettily and ran to take it from him, standing
on tiptoes to kiss his cheek, then ran her fingertips over the
seal as he continued on. It was a scenario enacted half a
dozen times in the course of the summer, as the king's
expedition in Corwyn stretched on, and no one thought it
odd.
One discreet observer, in fact, welcomed it, for it provided
the opportunity she had been waiting for. A little while later,
when the queen had received the messages and assembled
the crown council to deal with them, one of her ladies
pressed a small package into the hands of a junior maid of
honor, with instructions to bring it immediately to the Lady
Marie.
"Say that the Corwyn messenger omitted to deliver this
when he first arrived," Muriella told the girl. "I believe he
said that it comes from her brother."
The girl's name was Brigetta Delacorte. She was a shy
young thing, only recently come to court. A child, really. One
who Muriella knew could be intimidated into silence, if the
need arose.
"You'd best go now," Muriella urged, with a sweet smile.

Chapter 18
"Hast thou children? Instruct them,
and bow down their neck from their youth."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 7:23

M

ARIE had returned to her arbor seat and was reading Se's
letter when young Brigetta Delacorte found her.
"Lady Marie, look what your brother has sent you," the
girl said, offering the package timidly. She was young and
petite, only barely come to womanhood, and awed with life at
Rhemuth. "I suppose it must have been at the bottom of the
messenger's pouch."
Marie looked up in some surprise at the small bundle the
girl extended, wrapped in a piece of fine ivory damask and
tied with a length of green ribbon. It was about the size of a
man's hand—a box, by the feel of it, as she took it from
Brigetta and hefted it in speculation.
“What on earth?" she murmured delightedly.
As she set it on her lap and pulled the tails of the bow to
untie it, Brigetta stood beside her, watching eagerly as the
length of green silk unfurled.
"What do you think he's sent you?" the girl asked,
craning to see.
"Well, I won't know until I open it, will I?" Marie replied.
She handed the ribbon to the younger girl, then began
unwrapping the box from its swath of damask. Beneath the
folds of fabric, the box was revealed as quite a handsome
item, polished smooth and lightly stained to a walnut shade.
The confectionary scent of honey and almonds and roses
drifted upward as she lifted the lid to discover more
damask—and under it, half a dozen rose-shaped sweets,
each adorned with real rose petals sticky with crystallized
honey.
"Ooooh, marchpane!" Brigitta murmured. "Wherever did
he get it? I love marchpane!"
Laughing, Marie took one herself and extended the box.
"Have one, then—but only one. And I'll want to share them
with the others."
"Mmmm," Brigetta sighed, as she bit into hers and
savored the flavor. "Heavenly!"
"Yes, indeed, very nice," Marie agreed, nibbling at her
piece. Across the garden, she could see Prince Brion
approaching with young Krispin and Isan; she wondered
what had happened to their boats. The crown prince was not
fond of marchpane, but she knew Isan fancied it; she wasn't

sure about Krispin. As they saw that she had noticed
them, they broke into a run to join her. Smiling, she
beckoned them closer, holding out the box as they came
crowding around.
"What's that, Lady Marie?" Prince Brion demanded.
"Marchpane, which you don't like," Marie replied, offering
the box to Isan. "But Isan likes it. And how about you,
Krispin?"
Grinning delightedly, Isan plucked out one of the pieces
and popped it whole into his mouth, cheeks bulging as he
chewed it and pleasure lighting his blue eyes. Krispin, less
adventurous than some, eyed the dwindling box of
marchpane somewhat dubiously.
"Go ahead and try it," Marie urged. "How else will you
know whether you like it or not?"
Thus encouraged, Krispin plucked out one of the pieces
and cautiously bit off half of it. But after a few chews, his
grin faded to dislike and he spat it out.
“Fah!

What is that? I thought it was made of almonds!"

"It is," Brion said. "Ground-up almonds."
"Then, what's this on top?"
"Rose petals with honey," Marie said. "You don't have to
eat it if you don't like it. Why don't you give the rest of your
piece to Isan, rather than waste it? He likes it."
"Here, take it!" Krispin said, depositing the remains of his
piece in Isan's somewhat grubby hand.
Hurriedly Isan finished chewing his first piece, swallowed
it, and popped the second piece into his mouth before
anyone could change their minds.
"And that's all there'll be, for you lot!" Marie said firmly,
replacing the lid on the box and setting it aside as she
finished her own piece. "I'll save the last two pieces for
people who will appreciate them. This has come all the way
from Corwyn."
"From Sir Sé?" Isan asked, a gleam in his eyes.
"Actually, this is from my brother," she informed him. "A
messenger just arrived from Corwyn."
Prince Brion grinned ear-to-ear. "But it could have come
from Sir Sé. He really likes you, doesn't he? Do you think my
father will let him marry you?"
Chuckling, Marie gave him a nonchalant shrug. "I don't
know, your Highness. I hope so."
"I'll ask him," Brion said, drawing himself up importantly.
"I think it would be a good thing. And you like him, don't
you?"
"Yes, I do," she admitted.

Krispin nodded toward the letter now weighted down by
the box of marchpane. "Is that from him?"
"Yes, it is," Marie replied. "And I hadn't finished reading it
yet, so perhaps you boys could be about your business.
What happened to your boats?"
Brion ducked his head guiltily and gave her a tentative
smile from under the ebon shock of his hair. "We left them
by the fishpond. Lord Arilan said we were scaring the cook's
fish."
"Well, if you were sailing them there, I suspect you were
scaring the fish," Marie replied. "And if Cook finds them, you
know what he'll do."
"He'll stomp 'em flat!" Isan declared, big-eyed with horror.
"We'd better go get them!" Brion said. "C'mon!"
As the three bolted in the direction of the kitchen yards
and the fishpond, Marie noted that Brigetta was still
standing awkwardly by.
"You'd better go dear. The queen is always famished when
she's come from meeting with the council of state," she said
to the girl.
Smiling, Marie watched Brigetta as she went on her way.
As an afterthought, she took up the ribbon from the
wrappings of the marchpane and tied it around her neck,
humming happily to herself. Then she took up Sé's letter,
helped herself to another piece of marchpane, and settled
down to read.
It was not until nearly half an hour had passed that she
began to feel a little queasy. At first, she found herself
regretting that second piece of marchpane; then she
attributed a faint abdominal cramping to the imminent onset
of her monthly courses.
She laid Sé's letter aside and rubbed distractedly at her
stomach, thinking that it was a little early for cramping.
After another minute or so, a much stronger cramp bent her
double, and a sudden bout of nausea caused her to vomit
unexpectedly—several times.
She felt no better when she had done so. As she tried to
stand, her legs gave way beneath her and she sank back
onto the arbor seat, overcome by a bout of dizziness as more
cramps doubled her over and a burning sensation began to
radiate outward from her stomach.
Instinctively she knew that this was no monthly
cramping. Could it, indeed, have been Ahern's marchpane?
Or—had the marchpane, indeed, come from Ahern?
Brigetta had said it did, but—
Dear Lord, Brigetta had eaten one of the sweetmeats,
too—and young Isan! Had Krispin eaten one? No, he had
tried it and spat his out—and Isan had eaten the remainder

of that piece!
She fumbled the lid off the wooden box and stared
stupidly at the remaining dainty. As she did so, the sickly
sweet scent of almond and honey and roses made her heave
again, gasping as she collapsed to her knees, clutching at
her middle. And she also seemed to be having trouble
catching her breath. She could feel a heaviness in her chest,
as if a giant hand were closing around her lungs to suffocate
her; yet when she clamped shaking fingers to the pulse-point
at her throat, her heart rate was so slow and so weak that
she could barely find it.
She thought to look around her then, searching for
someone to help her, but there was no one in sight.

I

N the queen's chamber, the council meeting being
concluded, the queen's ladies were helping their mistress to
partially disrobe for an afternoon nap. Alyce was attending
her, and also Jessamy, Brigetta, and Zoë. Muriella was
tuning a psaltery near an open window.
"Well, ladies, it appears that the king will be able to
return shortly," Richeldis said, pulling the pins from her
dark hair and shaking it loose before lying back on the daybed. "Alyce, he sends glowing reports of your brother, who
has acquitted himself quite admirably, both in the council
chamber and in the field."
Alyce smiled contentedly and settled at the foot of the
queen's day-bed to remove her shoes.
"I would be surprised if it were otherwise, Madam," she
said. "Zoë and I watched him ride against Duke Richard last
autumn, when he was only partially recovered from his
injury. He must be far better now. But he has had
exceptional teachers, including the king himself."
"True enough," the queen agreed. "Ah, Jessamy, that feels
so wonderful!"
Jessamy had begun massaging the queen's temples, and
smiled distractedly, though she said nothing, for she had
noticed that Brigetta was looking decidedly unwell.
"Brigetta, are you ill, child? You're suddenly looking very
pale."
Brigetta had been pouring a cup of chilled wine for the
queen, but set it shakily aside and turned away, clutching at
mouth and abdomen as she darted toward the garderobe.
"I do beg your pardon," she managed to murmur, just
before she was taken with a violent fit of vomiting.
Jessamy went after her immediately, as did Alyce. The

queen sat up in some concern. Muriella had stopped her
idle plucking at the strings of her psaltery, and stared after
the stricken Brigetta in horror.
Together, Alyce and Jessamy tried to comfort Brigetta as
she continued to heave, Alyce holding the girl's hair out of
the way and Jessamy venturing a probe.
"Child, child, what is it? Was it something you ate?"
"The marchpane! It must be—!" Brigetta managed to gasp
out, between gagging fits. "Lord Ahern sent it. S-some of the
boys ate it, too—and Marie. Dear God, I can't breathe!"
"Which boys? How much? Where are they?" Jessamy
demanded, as Alyce recoiled from the pain washing through
the stricken girl.
"She's poisoned!" Alyce blurted. "They’re all poisoned! But
Ahern can’t have sent poisoned marchpane!"
"Krispin!" Jessamy cried, for she saw Brigetta's memory
of all of them partaking. "And Isan—dear God! They're in the
garden!"
"Sweet Jesu, no!" the queen cried, trying to lurch to her
feet. "Jessamy, do something! Find them!"
Alyce was already dashing toward the door, heart
pounding, reaching out with her mind to Marie, calling, a
part of her sickly aware that it was already too late. And
even as she ran, Jessamy close behind her, she realized who
had given the marchpane to Brigetta to deliver: Muriella! And
suddenly, it all became horrifyingly clear.
She faltered, outrage drawing her back, but her sister's
need—and that of the children, the innocent children!—was
far greater than her desire for immediate justice.
"It was Muriella!" she said breathlessly over her shoulder
to Jessamy as they ran toward the gardens.
"I know," Jessamy gasped, and seized the arm of a guard
as they came abreast of him, pausing only long enough to
bark out a single command.
"Go to the queen's solar," she ordered, "and arrest Lady
Muriella!"
They had seen the location in the garden where Marie
had been reading her letter. At the path to the arbor, Alyce
split off in that direction, leaving Jessamy to continue on
toward the castle's fishpond.
As Alyce approached, she saw the rumpled blur of her
sister's peacock-colored gown, stark against the creamy
stone of the bench beneath the arbor, and the tumble of her
loose hair veiling her face. With a little cry, she ran to
Marie's side and swept the hair aside, but the blue eyes were
open and empty, the fair face already waxy pale. Sobbing,
Alyce gathered her sister to her breast and held her, weeping
for her loss—for Marie's loss—for all the tomorrows that now

would never be.
But urgency soon drew her from her own grief, to see
what help she might render to Jessamy, for she knew, from
the brief images she had read from Brigetta, that the tragedy
did not stop here. With a little sob, she gently shifted her
sister onto clean grass and scrambled to her feet, dashing off
the way Jessamy had gone—and found her beside the
fishpond in the kitchen yard, weeping as she cradled the
lifeless Isan in her arms. Young Prince Brion was hugging a
very frightened and wide-eyed Krispin, who at least did not
appear to be too affected other than being very shocked.
Jessamy's cries had brought several kitchen servants into
the doorway to investigate the source of the distress.
"Alyce—oh, thank God!" Jessamy sobbed, looking up.
'Take Krispin inside at once and make him vomit! Give him
the whites of half a dozen eggs, and then a great deal of
water with plenty of salt in it."
"But I didn't eat any! I spat it out!" Krispin insisted, as
Brion began dragging him toward the kitchen and Alyce
hesitated uncertainly.
"Is Isan-?"
"Yes, he's dead!" Jessamy cried. "And God knows what I
shall tell his mother. He had nearly twice as much as the
others. Dear God, how did we not see this coming?"
Suddenly very weary, Alyce started to sink down numbly
beside Jessamy, but the older woman seized her roughly by
the shoulder and gave her a shake.
"Don't you dare!" she whispered vehemently. "Go and
tend to Krispin. There's nothing to be done here. Save your
passion for the living!"
Half-dazed with shock, Alyce straightened and followed
after Brion and Krispin, pushing past the servants in the
doorway. In the bustling kitchen beyond, preparations were
underway for the evening meal.
Forcing herself to focus, Alyce herded the two boys ahead
of her until she spotted a basket of eggs. She seized a large
cup as she changed course in that direction, nodding toward
the nearest pair of kitchen maids.
"You," she said to the younger one, "fetch us some fresh
water—at once! And you," she said to the second, "separate
the whites from half a dozen of those eggs and put them in
this cup. Brion, bring Krispin over here!"
"But I didn't eat any of the marchpane!" Krispin
protested.
"We must make sure," Alyce replied. "Hurry!" she added
aside to the white-faced servant, who was breaking eggs and
tipping the yolks back and forth between the two halves of
each, letting the whites drain into the cup Alyce held. "My
sister is dead. By now, so is Lady Brigetta. And Isan."

The boys' faces drained of color, and anger flashed in
young Brion's gray eyes.
"Who did this terrible thing?" the crown prince
demanded.
"I don't know," Alyce replied. "I think it was Lady
Muriella."
"But, why?" Krispin wanted to know, tears spilling down
his cheeks.
"I don't know." Alyce took the cup, now half-filled with
egg-whites, and put it into his hands. "Now, drink this—all
of it!"
"No. It's slimy. It'll make me puke."
"That's the whole point. Drink it!"
At the same time, Prince Brion gave his shoulder a shake
and repeated, "Drink it, Krispin."
The younger boy braced himself and drank, forcing
himself to gag down the contents of the cup in three large
swallows. When he had finished, Alyce refilled the cup from
an ewer the younger servant had brought, added a generous
measure of salt and stirred it with a finger, and ordered the
boy to drain that, too—and then a second cup. As he labored
to finish the second draught, making a face, she pulled an
empty basin closer, nodding for Brion to hold it under
Krispin's chin.
"Revolting, wasn't it?" Alyce murmured, cupping the back
of Krispin's head with her hand. "Believe me, I do
understand. Now open your mouth."
Too startled to resist, Krispin obeyed, only to have Alyce
poke two fingers down his throat, at the same time pressing
his head over the empty basin.
The result was immediate and spectacular. When Krispin
had finished retching, Brion dutifully holding the basin and
looking scared, one of the kitchen maids brought him a
clean towel, another offering one to Alyce.
"Will he be all right, my lady?" the girl asked.
"I think so," Alyce replied numbly. "It doesn't appear that
he actually got a dose of the poison, but I couldn't risk not
doing everything I know to do. It was in some marchpane,
but he said he spat out what he tried."
One of the women was inspecting the contents of the
basin while Brion helped Krispin wipe his mouth and Alyce
washed her hands in another basin a young kitchen maid
had brought.
"Marchpane, y'say?" the woman said, shaking her head.
"Well, I don't see no trace of that, my lady. I doubt he'd had
anything since this morning."
"For which, God be praised!" Alyce murmured, drying her

hands.
Welcome relief flooded through her like a physical wave,
and she leaned heavily on the vast kitchen table. But this
momentary respite quickly gave way to recollection of less
favorable outcomes: images of her sister lying dead in the
garden, and the innocent Brigetta stricken in the queen's
chamber— and Isan, who had eaten more of the tainted
marchpane than any of the others, likewise dead. A sob
welled up in her throat, but she mastered it and laid her
arms around the shoulders of Krispin and the prince.
"That was well done, gentlemen," she murmured, hugging
both of them close. "You were very brave."
"What about Isan?" Brion asked hesitantly. "Is he
really ... ?"
"I'm afraid he is, your Highness," she replied.
"I want to see him!" Krispin said boldly.
"There is nothing you can do for him now," she said. "But
your lady mother will be frantic to know that you are safe!"

Chapter 19
"Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous,
but who is able to stand before envy?"
-PROVERBS 27:4

T

HE prince's mother was, indeed, frantic, but not alone for
worry over her son. Watching white-faced and silent as men
from the castle guard wrapped the body of the unfortunate
Brigetta in a cloak to carry it from the room, the queen
jumped to her feet as Alyce came in with Prince Brion and
Krispin. In the room beyond, Jessamy was trying to comfort
Lady Megory Fitzmartin, the mother of Isan, who was
holding her dead son in her arms and keening, rocking him
back and forth. Lord Seisyll Arilan stood just inside the door,
apparently enlisted to carry the dead boy back to his mother.
Seisyll turned as Alyce entered with the two boys, and the
queen tearfully held out her arms to her son. Brion ran to
her, burying his face against her waist, starting to cry at last
as his mother shed more tears of sheer relief.
Krispin held back at first, then pressed past Seisyll into
the room beyond and stared at the dead Isan as his mother
silently embraced him. Meanwhile, in the queen's chamber,
her other ladies were staring at Alyce, Vera and Zoë among
them, their eyes begging her to say that none of this was
real. All had been weeping.
"Majesty, I don't think Prince Brion has taken any harm,"
Alyce managed to murmur, not looking at Vera or Zoë.
"Krispin seems fine as well. Is Lady Brigetta—"
The queen bit at her lip and looked away, holding her
eldest more tightly. "Dear child, there was nothing we could
do. And your sister— ?"
Alyce shook her head, lowering her gaze and choking
back tears. Beyond the queen, Zoë gave a sob and Vera went
even paler than she had been, but dared not show the true
extent of her grief.
"Dear God ...," the queen murmured.
Alyce drew a deep breath. "What has happened to Lady
Muriella?"
"I don't know," the queen said dazedly. "She ran from the
room, heading toward the main keep, and I heard guards
running in that direction a while later. . . .
“But, do not tarry here, dear Alyce. Go to your sister, by
all means. I am so sorry! Oh, that spiteful Muriella! Why did
she do it?"
Alyce only shook her head and fled—but not to her sister,

who could not be helped in this world, but to see what
had become of Muriella.
The castle was in an uproar, with armed and angry
soldiers moving everywhere, purpose in their looks and
strides. When Alyce could make no immediate sense of what
was happening, she caught the sleeve of a passing sergeant
who usually had kind words for her.
"Master Crawford, please—can you tell me whether they
have found the Lady Muriella?" she asked.
"No time now, m'lady," he grunted, shrugging off her
touch and hurrying on. "She's run up the north tower, she
has."
He was gone at that, ducking into a turnpike stair to
clatter after others also headed upward. Heart pounding,
Alyce followed, gathering up her skirts to climb as fast as
she could, stubbing her toe on one of the stone steps and
nearly sent sprawling.
She heard shouting as she ascended, and a woman
shrieking, and—just before she reached the final doorway
onto the walkway along the battlement—a renewed chorus of
shouted demands by heated male voices, punctuated by a
woman's anguished scream that faded and then was cut
short by the distant, hollow thump of something striking the
ground far below.
"Christ, I didn't think she'd jump!" one of the men was
saying, peering over the parapet as Alyce pushed her way
among them.
"Well, she has saved herself from hanging or worse," said
another, cooler voice.
Steeling herself, Alyce forced herself to peer between two
of the merlons studding the crenellated wall, down at the
crumpled heap of clothing and broken bones now sprawled
in the courtyard below, where a pool of blood was rapidly
bleeding outward from Muriella's dark head. Gagging, she
turned away, one hand pressed to her lips and eyes screwed
tightly closed, grateful for the hands that drew her back from
the parapet.
"Lady Alyce, you needn't look at this," someone said, not
unkindly.
"She killed my sister, and Lady Brigetta," Alyce managed
to whisper, before gathering up her skirts to flee back down
the turnpike stair. "And she killed a little boy. . .."
By the time she got down to the courtyard, a crowd had
gathered: soldiers and courtiers and servants and a stranger
in priest's robes, who had just finished anointing the body.
Seeing him, Alyce pushed her way through the crowd and
stood there, numbly staring down at the dead woman, until
the priest glanced up at her.
"Child, there is nothing you can do," he said, closing his

vial of holy oil.
"And there is nothing you can do, either, Father," she
replied in a low voice. "Do you know how many lives she has
taken today, besides her own?"
The priest's face tightened, but he said nothing, only
shaking his head.
"She poisoned three people, Father," Alyce went on,
outrage in the very softness of her tone. "She murdered two
innocent women and an innocent child—and very nearly
killed another child. It could as easily have been one of the
royal princes! And you would absolve her of that?"
A uneasy murmur rippled among the onlookers, and the
priest slowly stood, looking her up and down.
"Are you not one of the heiresses of Corwyn, a Deryni?"
he said coldly.
"What difference does that make to the three she killed?"
Alyce snapped. "Does it make them any less dead?"
A soldier leaned closer to the priest to whisper in his ear,
and the priest's face went very still.
The deaths are regrettable, of course—as is hers," the
priest said. "But it is up to God to judge her—not me. And it
is not the place of a Deryni to instruct me in my duties."
Alyce only shook her head and turned away, closing her
eyes to the sight of him and the dead Muriella. She could
hear the muttering following her as she made her way out of
the crowd. When she found her way back to the garden
arbor where she had left her sister, the body was gone, but
as she glanced around in dismay, one of the gardeners
approached her awkwardly, cap in hands.
"Monks came to take her away, my lady," he murmured.
"Brother Ruslan said to tell you that she would lie in the
chapel royal tonight. I'm very sorry. She was very kind, even
to a mere gardener."
She stared at him blankly for several seconds, then gave
him a grateful nod. His name was Ned, she recalled, and he
had always had a gentle word for both her and Marie.
"Thank you, Ned," she whispered.
In a daze, she made her way to the chapel royal, where
two black-robed monks were setting up a bier in the aisle
before the altar. But of any bodies, there was no sign.
Forlorn, not knowing what else to do, she knelt at the
rear of the chapel and said a prayer for her sister's soul—
and for Isan, and for Brigetta, and even for the wretched
Muriella— then rose and went forward to where the brothers
worked.
"Could you tell me where the bodies have been taken?"
she asked.

The older man looked up pityingly and gave her a neutral
nod.
"You'll be asking after the women?" he said.
She inclined her head in return.
"We're told that some of the sisters from Saint Hilary's are
looking after them," he informed her. "But they'll lie here
tonight. Except for the one who took her own life, of course."
"What about the boy?" Alyce asked dully.
"There was a boy as well?" the younger brother asked,
shocked.
Mutely Alyce nodded.
"Dear Jesu," the elder brother whispered, as both crossed
themselves.
"In all fairness," she forced herself to say, "I do not think
the boy was meant to die—or the second woman. Or the one
who planned the deed—God forgive her, for I cannot. I can
only imagine that it was conceived in unreasoning jealousy,
and went disastrously wrong. The poison was meant for my
sister alone, but four now lie dead as a result of this day's
work." She shook her head. "I'll leave you to your duties,"
she murmured, as she turned and fled.
Grief urged her to look further for her sister, but reason
reminded her of other duties to the living. Lady Megory had
lost a son, and the young princes had lost a comrade. She
returned to the queen's solar to find Richeldis and her ladies
helping the bereaved mother wash and prepare her son's
body for burial.
Comforted by Zoë and Vera, Alyce wept with them and
watched as they tenderly laid young Isan Fitzmartin in the
queen's own bed, where the ladies would keep watch beside
him during the night. A little while later, now accompanied
by Zoë and Vera, she withdrew again to find the body of her
dead sister.

T

HEY found both Marie and Brigetta now lying in the chapel
royal, where the sisters from Saint Hilary’s-Within-the-Walls
had lovingly prepared the two for burial, laying them out
upon a bier strewn with rose petals. Each had been dressed
in her finest gown, crowned with a floral wreath and veiled
from head to toe with fine white linen, like brides arrayed for
their bridegrooms. Alyce was reminded of the veil Cerys
Devane had worn for her novice profession at Arc-en-Ciel;
but Marie had never sought such a life.
A lock of Marie's bronzy hair had tumbled loose from

under her veil and down the side of the bier, and Alyce
gave a sob as she saw it and came to touch it with a
trembling hand. At the sound, one of the sisters spreading
fresh linens on the altar turned a sympathetic face toward
the newcomers. She was hardly older than they, and looked
to have been weeping.
But before she could speak, her older companion inclined
her head toward Alyce.
"A terrible sadness," she said quietly. "But they are with
God now."
Gently Alyce reached out to lay one trembling hand on
the bulge of Marie's folded hands beneath the veil covering
her, her vision blurred by tears.
"Dear God, I had thought I had no tears left to weep," she
whispered, crumpling to her knees to rest her forehead
against the edge of the bier.
After a moment, blinking back tears of her own, Vera
sank down beside her, one arm around the shoulders of her
twin, and Zoë knelt on Alyce's other side.
"Could you please leave us for a moment?" Zoë said softly
to the two sisters.
In unison, the pair inclined their heads and padded
silently from the chapel, settling to wait outside until the
visitors should finish paying their respects.

N

OT far from the entrance to that chapel, Seisyll Arilan
watched for a long moment, then turned to make his way
toward the stables.
The day's events, of a certainty, required a report to the
Camberian Council, not only to share his impressions
regarding young Krispin MacAthan—which easily could have
waited until the next regularly scheduled meeting—but now
to report the untimely and quite senseless death of Marie de
Corwyn. The death of a Deryni heiress of her importance
would require the Council to considerably reshuffle their
careful strategies regarding desirable marriage alliances. But
before he went to tell them, he intended to have a look at the
body of the accused poisoner. Because the wretched Muriella
had taken her own life, she lay not in the chapel royal or
even in one of the side chapels of Saint Hilary’s-Within-theWalls but in the castle's stables, in one of the loose boxes
usually reserved for foaling, laid out on boards across a pair
of trestles. Two of the queen's maids had washed away the
blood and dressed her in a clean white shift, wrapping her
shattered head in linen bandages, so that she looked like a
nun.

Now one of the maids was sewing the dead girl into her
burial shroud while the other tucked bunches of sweet herbs
amid the folds of fabric. A wreath of rosemary lay beside the
basket of herbs. Both of the maids looked up guiltily as
Seisyll appeared at the stall door, and they dropped him
nervous curtsies.
"Is that the girl who fell to her death? Muriella, I believe?"
Seisyll asked, jutting his chin toward the corpse.
The girl sewing up the shroud gave him a fearful nod.
"Aye, m'lord—poor lady. She'll get nae better wedding
wreath," she added, nodding toward the circlet of rosemary.
"But she didna' mean to do it."
"She didn't mean to do it," Seisyll repeated, raising a
quizzical eyebrow. "What—she didn't mean to kill herself, or
she didn't mean to kill all those people?"
His rapid-fire questions silenced the speaker, but the
other girl boldly lifted her chin to him.
"She didna' mean to kill anyone, m'lord! 'Specially not the
boy." The other girl was now nodding emphatic agreement.
"But she was fair green wi' jealousy!"
"Jealousy of whom?" Seisyll demanded.
"Why, the Lady Marie," came the prompt reply.
"Everybody knew that—'cept Marie an' her sister, o' course.
Marie was fair smitten wi' Sir Sé Trelawney, an' too besotted
to notice that Muriella fancied him, too."
"Indeed?" Seisyll murmured. "So she did mean to kill her
rival, at least. And when that went all wrong, she killed
herself?"
Both girls nodded wordlessly, wide-eyed.
"Poor, stupid, cowardly child," Seisyll muttered under his
breath.
"Will she—burn in hell, m'lord?" one of the girls asked
tremulously.
"Probably," Seisyll retorted, then softened at the look of
horror on the two faces. "But perhaps not, if we say prayers
for her soul." He reached over the door to the loose box and
lifted the latch. "Why don't we say a prayer for her now?" he
said, coming inside to slip between the two, a hand on each
shoulder pressing them both to their knees.
At the same time, he extended his powers and took
control of both of them, kneeling between them then to reach
deeper memories from each. If anyone came upon them, it
would appear to be only what he had claimed: the three of
them kneeling in prayer for the deceased—and that was all
the girls would remember.
A superficial dip into both young minds gained him little
information beyond what they had already told him. And

even the more rigorous process of taking a death-reading
from the unfortunate Muriella failed to reveal much more.
The poisoned marchpane had indeed been intended for
Marie alone—or possibly her sister as well, for Muriella had
liked Deryni no better than she liked any rival for the
affections of Sir Sé Trelawney. But she certainly had never
thought that anyone else would sample the marchpane: not
young Isan or the other maid of honor, and certainly not
Krispin or Prince Brion. Seisyll shuddered at the thought of
how close the crown prince had come to death—spared by
the simple happenstance that he did not care for the sweet
confection.
Nor had Ahern de Corwyn had any part in the plan,
though he supposedly had sent the marchpane. Muriella
had invoked his name in order to allay any suspicion on the
part of Marie, never thinking beyond the initial stages of her
plan— for surely, even if the Delacorte girl had lived, and
held her tongue, it still would have emerged that Ahern knew
nothing of marchpane. And it had been blind fear of the
hangman's rope that had impelled Muriella to throw herself
from the castle wall, when she knew herself discovered and
her oh-so-clever plan gone horribly wrong.
"Stupid, stupid little girl!" Seisyll whispered under his
breath, as he came out of trance, having set his instructions
in the minds of the two maids.
Leaving them on their knees to pray a while longer, he
rose and gazed down at Muriella for a long moment, gently
shaking his head, then wearily picked up the wreath of
rosemary from atop the basket and put it on her bandaged
head.
Though the church taught that suicide was a mortal sin,
Seisyll had never been able to accept that teaching as an
absolute. Muriella had been frightened and desperate
enough to take her own life rather than face up to the
consequences of her actions—which had certainly been
horrendous—but he thought that if she burned in hell, it
would not be because she had loved and then had feared.
And even the murder of three innocents besides herself
could be forgiven, in time, if the murderer truly repented.
But that was for Muriella to sort out with her God. For
himself, Seisyll could only breathe a final prayer for her soul,
with an appeal to the Blessed Mother to take this foolish
child into her loving care and eventually restore her to grace.
Pityingly, he brushed his fingertips across the dead girl's
cheek in farewell, then bent to press a holy kiss to her brow
before turning to go.

Chapter 20
"May choirs of angels receive thee..."
INTROIT FOR THE FUNERAL LITURGY

T

HE following week would pass in a numb blur of grief for
Alyce de Corwyn, for she now must bury her sister, as she
had buried her father but two years before. As she had done
after her father's death, she traveled back to her ancestral
lands—not to Cynfyn, for Marie had been little a part of that,
but to Coroth, the Corwyn capital, where this latest scion of
the line of Corwyn's dukes would lie with her ancestors.
In this season of the year, still languishing in the heat of
the summer just ending, the cortege wound its way
southward only as far as Desse, following the royal road that
ran along the east bank of the River Eirian. Thence the party
transferred to the relative comfort of one of the king's galleys
for the voyage into the great Southern Sea and thence
around the horn of Mooryn, heading eastward then until at
last they sighted the twin lighthouses guarding Coroth
Harbor.
The news, of course, had reached Corwyn's capital well in
advance of the funeral party, sent by fast courier the very
day of the tragedy. The king had been out hawking on the
moors the day it arrived, with Lord Hambert, the Seneschal
of Coroth, and the Tralian ambassador, attended by Sir Jiri
Redfearn, Sir Kenneth Morgan, and Sir Sé Trelawney, along
with a handful of knights. It was a bright day in early
October, and the expedition was to have been the last such
junket before Donal's planned departure for Rhemuth in a
few days' time.
Ahern had begged off, declaring himself possessed of a
mild indisposition.
Donal had braced himself for bad news when he saw the
look on the messenger's face, as the rider in Haldane livery
reined in his lathered horse and sprang to the ground. The
man himself had known little of the tragedy beyond the stark
fact that several had died in Rhemuth as a result of poison
hidden in a parcel of sweetmeats, but Seisyll Arilan's terse
missive held a fuller story.
The poison appears to have been meant for the Lady
Marie, Seisyll had written, in a letter folded around another,
smaller square of folded parchment, but she shared the treat
with Lady Brigetta Delacorte and some of the children—none
of the princes, for which, God be praised, but young Isan
Fitzmartin is dead. Ostensibly, the sweets came from Lord
Ahern, in the diplomatic pouch from Corwyn, along with the
enclosed letter from Sir Sé Trelawney.

Donal's eyes darted to the folded square he had removed
from inside Seisyll's letter, then skimmed on down the page.
Young Krispin MacAthan tasted one of the sweetmeats but
did not like it, and spat it out, Seisyll declared. He came to no
harm. Not so, young Isan, who ate the rest of Krispin's share,
in addition to his own. He perished, along with Lady Marie
and Lady Brigetta. The poisoner, Lady Muriella, threw herself
from one of the parapets when she saw what she had done.
The king's relief that Krispin had survived was tempered
by regret at the names of the dead—the sad waste of it. And
but for the grace of God, any of his true-born sons might
have perished as well.
Very sadly, it now fell to him to inform young Ahern de
Corwyn of the death of his twin sister. Donal could not, for
the life of him, remember what the Lady Brigetta Delacorte
looked like, or even the jealous and spiteful Muriella, but
Marie de Corwyn, besides being a valuable heiress, had been
a delight to eye and ear, a notable adornment to the court of
Gwynedd. Furthermore, the loss of her marriage as coinage
of political expediency was greatly to be regretted. Sadly, no
one would ever know what might have become of young
Isan—an engaging and promising boy, now gone as if he had
never lived.
"Ill news, Sire?" Sir Kenneth asked quietly.
Slowly Donal nodded, not speaking as he opened the
second folded piece of parchment, addressed on the outside
to the Lady Marie de Corwyn. He recognized the handwriting,
for Sir Sé Trelawney had been serving as secretary for much
of the recent correspondence with the court of Torenth. The
content of the letter had largely to do with the minutiae of
life at the Corwyn court—nothing at all improper or
intimate— but he could guess how it would have thrilled the
fair Marie to receive it.
"Sir Se," he called, lifting his gaze and the hand with the
letter toward that young man, tending the hawks a little
ways away.
Sé gave the hawks into the care of a nearby squire and
came at once, curiosity in his eyes.
"Sire?"
“Yours, I think," the king replied, handing him the letter.
"May I take it that you know nothing about a parcel of
marchpane sent to the Lady Marie in the last diplomatic
pouch to Rhemuth, ostensibly from her brother?"
Sé shook his head distractedly, his face blanching as he
glanced at the letter and recognized his own handwriting.
"Sire, on my honor—nothing untoward—"
"I do not question your honor," the king said quietly,
briefly lowering his eyes. "And I know you are innocent of
anything besides the letter you wrote." Reluctantly he then

handed Sé the letter from Seisyll Arilan. "I'm very sorry,
son."
Only a faint breeze stirred, there on the moorland—that
and the soft whuffing of the horses nearby, and the screech
of a hawk—as Sé read what Arilan had written, his
embarrassment turning abruptly to stunned disbelief.
"No!" The word escaped his lips before he could stop it,
his breath catching in his throat as he raced through a
second reading of the letter in hope of finding some reprieve
that he had missed. Tears were welling in the blue eyes as
he then looked up at the king, every line of his body begging
for it not to be true.
"It can't be. It isn't possible."
Sadly Donal shook his head. "I cannot think Lord Seisyll
would make up such a thing, lad. I was aware of your
affection for Marie—though obviously, neither of us was
aware that the Lady Muriella had fixed her heart on you." He
sadly shook his head. "And how badly wrong it went. Not
only did she eliminate her rival, but two more innocents as
well—and then took her own life."
Sé screwed his eyes tightly closed, battling for control.
"Had I been there," he whispered, "and known her to do this
deed, I would have taken her life. Dear God, I was mustering
my courage to ask you for Marie's hand—little though I am
worthy of her. We had hoped we might be married!"
"Se, Se—dear boy," Donal murmured. Having lost his first
wife and many a friend, over the years—and nearly having
lost Krispin—he had an inkling what Sé must be feeling.
"We'd best go back to Castle Coroth," he said aside to Sir
Kenneth. "Young Ahern must be told, and I've no stomach
for any more hunting today."

W

ITH almost military precision, Sir Kenneth called in the
others of their party and organized the return to Coroth.
They found Ahern de Corwyn up on the castle's highest
parapet, leaning on his stick and gazing out to sea toward
the west, where any approaching ship from Rhemuth would
first appear. Gaining this vantage point could not have been
easy, for stairs were still a major challenge for Ahern's stiff
knee. But when the king saw Ahern's face, he knew that the
messenger must have given him at least the gist of the
message he carried, before heading out to the moors to find
the king.
"Ahern?" the king said quietly.
The young man turned his face toward the voice, his
profile still and drawn against the lowering twilight.

"I heard," he replied. "My sister Marie is dead."
The starkness of his tone had a finality about it that sent
a chill up Donal's spine.
"It's because she was Deryni," Ahern went on, in an even
softer voice. "Oh, I know Muriella was jealous. Both Marie
and Alyce had mentioned her in letters, over the past year or
so. She fancied Sé, I gather. But I can't imagine that she
would have acted, if she'd thought she was only competing
with another ordinary woman. And Marie was not ordinary."
"No, she wasn't," the king replied.
Ahern heaved a heavy sigh and turned his face back to
the sea. "I'd like to be alone now, if you don't mind. I expect
it will be a few days before the ship arrives with her body."
"Ahern, I-"
"You needn't worry that I'll do myself harm," the young
man said firmly. "Please, Sire. Go."

T

wo days later, just at dusk, a royal galley under bellied sable
sails glided into Coroth Harbor between the twin lighthouses
known as Gog and Magog, each with a signal beacon already
lit for the night. Amidships, beneath a striped canopy of gold
and Haldane scarlet, Alyce de Corwyn stood with a protective
hand atop her sister's white-draped coffin, gowned in
unrelieved black and with a black veil wrapped closely about
her head, covering her bright hair. Zoë Morgan and Sir
Jovett Chandos flanked her, and the ship's crew stood to
attention along the rails to either side, interspersed with the
men of the royal honor guard sent along from Rhemuth at
the command of the queen, black crepe tied to each man's
sword-arm, bared heads bowed in respect.
The long-drawn question of a lookout's horn floated
across the light chop with the clang of the harbor-buoys as
the galley skirted between the two sea jetties of tumbled
granite locks, answered by a deeper horn-blast from the
shore. The sounds had always welcomed Alyce home in the
past; now they cried out the sadness that accompanied the
ship like a cloak.
Her brother and the king were waiting on the quay with
Sé Trelawney and a contingent of Corwyn archers drawn up
as an honor escort, each holding a torch aloft. Ahern's
council and all the knights who had come with the king's
party stood among them, solemn and silent, as were the
townspeople gathered behind them, for Corwyn's people had
come to admire and respect their future duke and his
sisters.

Deftly the steersman brought the galley close to the quay,
where he turned the craft into the wind and the crew
scrambled aloft to furl the sable sail. At the same time, men
waiting ashore threw lines across to those on deck, so that
the vessel could be warped alongside the quay.
The king came aboard at once, not waiting for a
gangplank to be set in place, leaving young Ahern to stand
with Sé and the other royal officers. Alyce accepted the
king's condolences in silence, then moved to the rail and, as
soon as the ship was made secure, went ashore and into the
arms of her brother.
"I am so glad to see you!" Ahern whispered, as they clung
to one another. "I think I sensed that she was gone. The
night it must have happened, she was in my dream.
Actually, I dreamed about both of you. But when the
messenger arrived, a few days later, I know what the news
was that he brought."
She drew back a little and sadly shook her head—but
without tears, for she had spent herself of tears days before.
"You cannot imagine how awful it was," she said quietly.
"And it might have been far worse. As it was, two more died
with our sister—three, if you count Muriella. Poor, stupid
cow!" She drew a breath. "How is Sé bearing up?"
Ahern shook his head. "Not well. He was in love with her.
They hoped to be married, if the king agreed. And I think it
might have been allowed, if—"
He broke off, biting at his lip, and Alyce hugged him
closer. After a few minutes, Sé and four of the archers from
his honor guard came aboard to bring the coffin off the ship,
Jovett joining them, bearing it on their shoulders as they fell
into place in the funeral cortege that would take Marie to
Coroth Cathedral. There she would lie in state through the
following day, so that Coroth's citizens might pay their
respects.
Though the ship's escort joined that of the king, marching
solemnly in the foot procession that now started toward the
cathedral to a muffled drumbeat, Alyce accompanied the
king and her brother in the vast, boxy carriage that had
brought them down from the castle. Alyce sat next to Ahern,
hand clasped tightly to his; Donal was seated opposite. The
leather side-curtains were rolled up and secured, so that the
occupants could be seen, but the crowd gathered along the
Via Maris was there for the coffin, not the carriage that
followed it, quiet and respectful, men doffing their caps and
women dropping little curtsies as the cortege passed, a few
crossing themselves. Zoë rode behind with the maid who had
accompanied them, in a pony cart led by her father.
They rattled along in taut silence for several minutes, the
thud of the drums somewhat blurred by the clangor of ironbound carriage wheels on cobbles, until the king finally said,

"I would have given your sister to Sir Se, you know." He
gave an apologetic shrug at their looks of surprise. "Yes, he'd
made it clear that they were fond of one another. And after
word came of her death, he came to me and confessed
everything. And yes, I know what he is," he added, as both of
them became suddenly guarded. "I'd guessed, before, but he
confirmed it."
He glanced out the window briefly, then returned his
attention to the two of them.
"If I'd been what the bishops would have me be, as a king,
that could have been an end to him, of course—but I'm not.
Some would even condemn the fact that the three of us are
sitting here, having this conversation. Some would say that I
or my ancestors should have routed out the seed of Corwyn
years ago, root and stock, that I should have given the duchy
to a human line.
"But we Haldanes have always sensed the usefulness of
having a Deryni House in Corwyn, as a buffer with Torenth.
It isn't something I'd expect the bishops to understand—they
certainly don't approve—but they don't rule Gwynedd; I do.
And it's been my choice, and that of my predecessors, to
keep a Deryni line on the ducal throne in Corwyn—and to
shelter certain other Deryni at my court. I very much regret
that my sheltering of your sister was not sufficient to keep
her safe. But human jealousy is something that can't easily
be predicted."
"What—will happen to Sé, Sire?" Alyce asked pleating
together folds of her skirt.
Donal cocked his head at her. "Do you fancy him?"
She looked up sharply. "You mean—to marry him?" she
asked in a small voice.
"I told you I would have given him your sister. I shall do
the same for you, if you wish it."
She swallowed with difficulty, then gave a small shake of
her head.
"Then, is there someone else you fancy?"
"No, Sire. But Sé is like another brother to me. I could not
marry him—unless, of course, you desired it."
"Dear Alyce." The king glanced at her brother. "Your sister
knows her duty, Ahern. But this is not, perhaps, the time to
speak of marriages. One day soon, I shall ask both of you to
marry as I direct. But I think we first must bury your dear
sister."
Very shortly, the carriage rattled to a halt before the
cathedral's great west portal. When a footman had opened
the carriage door and set steps in place before it, the
occupants alighted, the king holding back briefly to admire
the six black horses hitched to the carriage, while brother
and sister followed their sister's coffin up the cathedral

steps.
It was Father Paschal who met them just inside, Coroth's
bishop having found excuse to be away from the capital for
the week, rather than preside at the funeral obsequies of a
Deryni. But the cathedral chapter had not scrupled to
receive the body of this latest daughter of Corwyn. They
waited now, lined up across the top step, before the great
doors, each bearing a thick funeral taper of fine beeswax in
his two hands. When Paschal had censed and aspersed the
coffin at the great west door, the monks led it inside, softly
chanting an introit borrowed from the priest's Eastern
heritage, intoned over a continuous "ison" or drone:
"Chori angelorum te suscipiat. . . In paradisum deducant te
angeli. . . Memento mei, Domini, cum veneris in regnum tuum.
.. ."
"May choirs of angels receive thee . . . May the angels
accompany thee to paradise . . . Remember me, O Lord,
when You come into Your kingdom. ..."
The haunting orison drifted on the stillness as Marie de
Corwyn was borne down a center aisle strewn with the
flower petals that should have led her to her marriage bed.
Young girls crowned with flowers accompanied the whitedraped coffin to its resting place before the altar, each
carrying a single red rose.
The catafalque waiting to receive her was likewise strewn
with flower petals, and the girls sweetly laid their flowers
atop the coffin when it had been set in place. After that, all
those in the funeral party knelt for prayers led by Father
Paschal.

T

HEY laid Marie de Corwyn to rest two days later, in the
crypt of the cathedral where her ancestors had worshipped
and married and where many of them had been buried. Her
tomb would lie between those of two other Corwyn women
who had predeceased her: their mother, Stevana de Corwyn,
and her mother, the incomparable Grania.

Afterward, as mourners filed back up the steps to the
nave, preparing to disperse, Alyce saw Sé hanging back from
the others, and felt the brush of his mind as he gazed at her,
willing her to look in his direction.
Disengaging from the company of her brother and the
king, she went back to her sister's sarcophagus and knelt
beside it, ostensibly to pray. Sé lingered until all the others
had gone, then came to kneel beside her, laying one hand on
the alabaster lid of the sarcophagus. There had been little
opportunity for private conversation until now.

"I wish I had known that the king looked kindly on the
prospect of our marriage ...," he said softly.
Alyce gently shook her head. "That would not have saved
her," she whispered.
"Probably not." Sliding his forearm onto the lid, Sé bent to
touch his lips to the cool stone, then straightened again, not
looking at her.
"Did she suffer?" he asked.
Alyce started to shake her head in automatic denial, then
drew a resolute breath. Lying to another Deryni was
fruitless, even if intended to give comfort.
"The poison . . . would have affected her breathing," she
murmured truthfully. "Little Isan and Brigetta as well. I—
don't know what they might have suffered."
"Dear God. . .," he whispered, his eyes bright with tears as
he lowered his forehead onto his arm.
"Sé, what will you do?" she asked, after a few seconds.
He raised his head, wiping across his eyes with the back
of his hand, not really seeing her.
"I'm not yet certain," he said dully. "I had begun to plan
for a future that no longer exists. Now that she is gone ..."
He shook his head, swallowing hard.
"Alyce, I may leave Gwynedd," he went on. "I don't know
that I care to live anymore where our people are so
despised."
"But—it was jealousy that killed her, not our blood, Alyce
protested.
"Is that really true?" he asked. "I'm not certain. If Marie
hadn't been Deryni, do you think Muriella would have dared
to do what she did? Hatred was certainly a factor."
"Perhaps. She certainly wasn't fond of me or Marie." After
a short pause, she said, "Are you aware that the king offered
to give you my hand, in place of Marie's?"
He nodded bleakly. "I sensed that he might. But I don't
think that's what either of us wants, is it, dearest sister?"
As he slid his hand over hers, she shrugged and smiled
faintly. "Probably not—though he's said that he intends both
me and Ahern to marry soon. Nor can I quarrel with his
reasoning. Ahern must marry and produce an heir, and I—"
She shook her head in resignation.
"Until the future Duke of Corwyn has produced his heir, I
am a valuable inducement for the loyalty of some ambitious
courtier. I wonder that he even offered me the choice to
marry you. But if I cannot marry for love—and I wish there
were someone I pined for—at least let my marriage serve the
interests of the King."

Sé smiled bitterly. "You have been bred too well to your
duty, Alyce. Fortunate the man who wins your hand."
She gave him a wan reflection of his own smile, then
looked away again.
"Sé, what will you do?"
"Well, I do intend to go away for a while." He turned his
gaze back to Marie's sarcophagus. "I thought to seek counsel
of my father, back at Jenadur."
"But—what about Ahern? He needs you."
"Only in a general sense," Sé replied. "He'll have Jovett—
and there are at least a dozen other good men, both here and
in Lendour, who are eager to help him become the man he is
meant to be. I think that his handling of this business up in
Kiltuin may well have turned the tide in his favor, to win him
his knighthood despite his knee.
"As for needs—I, too, have needs, Alyce." As does our
race, he added, in a tight-focused burst of mindspeech.
Both intrigued and caught off balance by this abrupt
change of direction, she laid her hand over his and invited a
melding of their minds, but he shook his head.
"I mayn't speak of it yet," he murmured.
She nodded, then turned her gaze back to her sister's
tomb.
"This touches on your threat to leave Gwynedd," she said
quietly. "If you did leave, where would you go?"
"That has yet to be determined," he allowed. "I have taken
counsel of Father Paschal, who suggests that a few years'
training at Djellarda would be useful; there is an inner
curriculum. I might even investigate the knights at Incus
Domini."
"The Anvilers?" Alyce looked up with a start.
"Well, some believe they may have been inheritors of at
least a little of the old knowledge, from the days before the
Restoration," Sé admitted. "Some of the Knights of Saint
Michael ended up there, you know. And maybe even some
Healers. Of course, that was generations ago."
The very prospect was intriguing. Alyce, too, had
stumbled across vague references to such connections, and
could readily understand how the allure of possible
rediscovery might appeal to the finely honed mind of Sé
Trelawney. But to pursue that quest would, indeed, take him
far away.
"I shall never see you again, shall I?" she whispered.
"It isn't my intention to stay away forever," he said gently,
lifting her hand to press it briefly to his lips. "On the other
hand, I honestly cannot say what God might have planned
for me. After you have left, I shall, indeed, go to my father for

a few weeks at Jenadur—Ahern knows this. In the spring,
I may ride east.
"But I shall write when I can; and I promise you that,
come what may, you shall see me at Ahern's side, when he is
called to his knighthood, whenever that may be. Beyond
that... I just don't know."

Chapter 21
"Whose hatred is covered, by deceit, his wickedness shall
be shewed before the whole congregation.1
-PROVERBS 26:26

A

NOTHER week the king's party remained in Coroth. By midOctober, with Nimur of Torenth having offered a token
payment of reparation to Kiltuin town—solely as a gesture of
goodwill toward its inhabitants, though he swore that his kin
had had no part in what had happened there—Donal of
Gwynedd was able to withdraw his troops and return to
Rhemuth, leaving Ahern and his council of state in Corwyn
to oversee a return to normal relations along that portion of
the Torenth border.
Alyce and Zoë returned as well, though they found the
rhythm of life at court much changed. Marie's absence was
keenly felt in the royal household—and Isan's as well, for his
mother rarely smiled in those next months. Prince Brion and
the other boys missed their playmate for a while, but Duke
Richard's return had ensured that the normal cycle of study
and practice at arms resumed. By early November, the
castle's squires, pages, and would-be pages had begun to
practice for their service at Twelfth Night court, which would
soon be upon them.
For the king, it was a time to assess both the events of
the summer and the likely events of the coming year, for the
chill winds of autumn whispered increasingly of the growing
disquiet in Meara. The intelligence Richard had gathered
during his summer progress north of Meara only confirmed
it; and Jared Earl of Kierney, who had traveled back to
Rhemuth with the duke the month before, was able to offer
further insights and speculations.
The Mearan prince born three summers before was
reported to be thriving, and rumors suggested that his
mother, the Princess Onora, might be once again with child.
Iolo Melandry, the royal governor in Ratharkin, declared
himself convinced that serious rebellion was brewing, and
Jessamy's brother Morian had uncovered several serious
instances of sedition.
The warning signs could not be ignored. Late in
November, once the snows had rendered any serious military
threat unlikely, the king began quietly summoning certain of
his key vassals and commanders from the north and west to
attend him in Rhemuth, soliciting their recommendations,
beginning to hammer out plans for a probable campaign in
the spring.
Among those summoned to the king's counsels was

Ahern de Corwyn, fresh from his successes of the
previous summer. After but a few days of watching him
interact with the other commanders, Donal of Gwynedd
began sounding out his brother about the possible reactions
to knighting Ahern at the upcoming Twelfth Night court.
"So, what do you think?" the king asked, after reeling off
his reasons. "Are there apt to be objections?"
"None that will be voiced," Richard replied. "Other than
from churchmen, perhaps, because of what he is. In any
other candidate, the knee would have put him out of the
running— it is a handicap, when he's afoot. But you'll find
few better in the council chamber, as we've seen this week;
and I've sparred with him often enough to know that he
swings a mean sword. Even with his bum knee, put him on
a horse and he can ride circles around me—and even around
you, when you were in your prime."
Donal chuckled, well aware that he was quite past that
prime, but gratified that there were others willing and able to
deal with the more physically demanding aspects of
rulership—and not really minding that that part of his life
was now behind him.
"I'll take that as a compliment to him, rather than a snide
comment by a younger brother on my advancing age," Donal
said. "But you're right—all that bashing and thrashing is for
younger men. Fortunately, young Ahern is well qualified for
both—and for the more subtle disciplines of the council table
and strategy board. If that business at Kiltuin had to
happen, I'm glad it happened the way it did, because it gave
me an opportunity to watch him at work. In time, he could
even be the equal of Damian Cathcart, or Jeppe Lascelles at
Killingford."
"Christ, I remember meeting General Jeppe when he was
a very old man," Richard murmured. "If you're comparing
Ahern to him, we've a real treat to look forward to, by the
time he reaches his prime. I'd definitely go ahead and knight
him, Donal—and I'd also confirm him in his Lendour title."
"Really? The bishops wouldn't like that," Donal reminded
him.
"Of course they wouldn't like it. He's Deryni, and they're
bishops, and by the letter of the law, no Deryni may come
into the full authority of high rank until he reaches the age
of twenty-five. Not fourteen, and not even eighteen, but
twenty-five. Those are stupid laws, Donal, and you should
change them."
"I've thought about it," Donal conceded. "And one day, I
might just do it. But in the meantime, I do have to keep at
least a reasonable peace with my bishops. Did I tell you that
the Bishop of Corwyn wouldn't even celebrate the Requiem
for Ahern's sister? The family chaplain did it.
"Fortunately, the bishops aren't going to excommunicate

me or him for confirming him to an earl's coronet before
he turns eighteen. We're only talking about a few months,
after all; and given his past services to my crown, there's no
question but that he's prepared to put his life and his talents
on the line again, in my service."
"It's the talents that the bishops don't like," Richard
pointed out. "And they'd happily take his life."
"Well, not until I've had his service in Meara again," Donal
declared. "And meanwhile, come Twelfth Night court, I
intend to knight him and confirm him as Earl of Lendour.
We'll save the ducal recognition until they've gotten used to a
Deryni earl."

A

LYCE de Corwyn was one of the few with advance
knowledge of the king's plans regarding her brother—
necessary, since it was she who had the privilege of girding
him with his white belt. Sir Jovett Chandos buckled on the
golden spurs, and it was Sir Sé Trelawney, arrived only
minutes before the ceremony, who presented him with his
sword, black-clad and silent as he knelt to watch the king's
Haldane blade flash above the head of his childhood friend,
the flat of it touching right shoulder, left shoulder, and head.

Ahern himself was not able to kneel as the three other
young men did, who were dubbed that afternoon, but the
king had made a point of reiterating the high points of the
new knight's exemplary service, both the summer previous
and three years before, and personally assisted him to rise
from the faldstool moved into place before he was called
forward.
And while the Archbishop of Rhemuth cast cold glances
at the king, both then and later, when Ahern was called
forward to be formally invested as Earl of Lendour, the king
again spoke of Ahern's sterling service hitherto, and kissed
him on both cheeks before placing the coronet upon his
brow and the gold signet on his finger, emblematic of his
new legal status.
When Ahern reiterated the fealty he had sworn at his
knighting, now pledging further leal fidelity as earl, several
dozen knights of Lendour and of Corwyn knelt at his back,
affirming their support and loyalty as well. Though
Gwynedd's clergy might have their doubts about this setting
aside of the law, Ahern's record spoke for itself among
Donal's other knights. If any disagreed, no one spoke out.
As for Sir Sé Trelawney, present as promised, he
appeared much changed in the months since Alyce last had
seen him. His long black robe, fastened at the shoulder, had
a vaguely eastern look to it, unrelieved by any color save the

white slash of his own knight's belt. In truth, he looked
as much the monk as warrior now, a close-clipped beard
exaggerating the leaner lines of a form that now was almost
ascetic in its sparseness.
Afterward, he had words of congratulation for Ahern, and
a kiss on the cheek each for Alyce and Zoë, but he did not
stay long after court, quietly riding off into the snow whence
he had come, while the hall cleared to set up for the feast.
I think he may have made profession with the Anvilers,
Alyce whispered mind to mind to Vera, who was seated
across from her and sharing a trencher with an exceedingly
attentive Earl Jared McLain. I had hoped he might stay
longer.
Vera, offering Jared a morsel of succulent pheasant
lavished with plum sauce, spared her sister a sympathetic
glance.
I'm sorry, she sent. I know you were fond of him.
Turning her attention back to the revelry in the hall,
Alyce forced a resigned smile as she lowered her head
slightly to listen to a comment from Sir Jovett, seated on her
other side.
Her brother, meanwhile, seemed to be quite enjoying the
company of Zoë Morgan. He had put aside his coronet, but
his gold signet flashed in the light of candle and torch as
they fed one another tidbits. Sometimes his lips nibbled near
her fingertips, or his hand lingered near hers, occasionally
caressing the back of a hand, brushing a wrist. Later in the
evening, Alyce saw the two of them standing in a shadowed
recess of one of the window embrasures, Ahern with one
hand set on her waist and she with her face upturned to
receive his chaste kiss, fingertips brushing at his chest.
"For someone who made little of our suggestion that she
might really become our sister," Alyce said to Vera much
later, in the room the three of them now shared, "it did look
like the two of them were getting along rather well."
Vera laughed and wrapped a shawl more closely around
her shoulders, settling down beside Alyce on the sheepskin
rug before the fire.
"It did, indeed. I noticed them well after dinner, sitting in
one of the window embrasures, just holding hands and
looking into one another's eyes. I—uh—don't think they
noticed me."
"I don't think they noticed much of anyone besides one
another." Alyce picked up an ivory-backed brush and began
brushing her hair, gazing into the fire.
"Oh, Vera," she said after a moment. "Six months ago, it
was Zoë and I who were waiting for Marie to come in. I hope
Zoë will be luckier in love."
"So do I," Vera replied. "I think Ahern is quite smitten.

And I think Zoë would make him quite a wonderful
duchess. Here, give me that and I'll brush." She took up the
brush that Alyce surrendered and fell to, saying, after a
moment, "What would you think of having two duchesses in
the family?"
Alyce turned to stare at her twin, eyes wide. "Jared
McLain?" she breathed. "Truly?"
"Well, it's early on, as yet," Vera said, smiling somewhat
self-consciously, "but he does need a wife—and a mother for
that baby boy of his. One would think he invented babies. At
first, he spoke of little else—until he started asking about my
family. Apparently, the daughter of a Lendouri knight would
be well regarded in Kierney—and Cassan."
Alyce found herself containing a grin. "Well, Keryell was a
Lendouri knight, among other things," she said. "And he
would have approved of such a match for you, I feel certain."
She cocked her head to one side. "Could you find
contentment as Jared's countess, and eventually his
duchess?"
"I think I could," Vera said softly. "He's very sweet and
gentle—and he isn't at all as grand as I'd feared."
Giggling together, they sat there, gossiping and brushing
one another's hair, for the best part of an hour before Zoë
came tiptoeing in, quite flustered to discover that they were
still awake.
"I'm not even going to ask," Alyce said, laughing, as Zoë
dropped onto the sheepskins between them and reached for
one of the cups of mulled wine set on the hearth. "We both
saw you with Ahern earlier this evening."
"Well, I might have been with someone else," Zoë said
slyly, gulping down some of the wine. "But I wasn't," she
added with a grin.
She set down the cup and hugged her arms across her
chest, closing her eyes in happy remembrance.
"We talked about Cynfyn, and Castle Coroth, and he
asked me if I liked them. He told me about growing up with
you and Marie—and Vera, I'd forgotten that you lived at
Cynfyn for a while as well, after Alyce and Marie came to
Arc-en-Ciel. He showed me the signet that the king gave him
today, and asked if I'd like to try it on."
"Now, that sounds serious," Vera said, grinning. "He's only
just got it, and already he's letting pretty girls try it on."
"Well, he will need a bride," Alyce said reasonably, "and
the king told us in Coroth that he intends to marry off both
of us soon. He thinks a great deal of your father, Zoë. That
might make you quite an acceptable wife for a future duke."
"Do you really think so?" Zoë asked, wide-eyed.
"More unlikely things have happened," Alyce replied.
"Remember when Marie and I asked whether you were

campaigning to be our sister?"
"But, that was just in fun. I never dreamed—"
"Well, you may well dream tonight," Vera said, grinning
as she poked Zoë in the ribs. "Alyce, you'll have to speak to
that brother of yours, and make sure his intentions are
honorable, where our dear Zoë is concerned. Dare we tell her
about my prospect?"
As Zoë looked at her in question, Alyce slipped her arm
around the other girl's shoulders and smiled.
"Zoë darling, it appears entirely possible that both of you
may be duchesses someday."

N

EITHER of the prospective dukes lingered long in Rhemuth.
By mid-January, both had returned to their own lands to
hold themselves in readiness for a war all hoped would not
be necessary. Their prospective brides pined through the
rest of the winter and into spring, though Alyce did her best
to divert their energies into the activities of the court and the
royal children.
Such diversion served her own purposes as well, as she
released her wistful affection for Sé Trelawnev to the reality
of what she had seen of him during his brief visit in
January. Friends they had been during their childhood, and
friends they remained; but now Sé had turned to dreams of
his own, and. a new life with the mysterious and ascetic
Knights of the Anvil. That life did not include her, and never
could.

T

O no one's surprise, insurrection flared again in Meara in
that spring of 1089, obliging Donal to mount the threatened
personal expedition into that rebellious land. By April, the
king had begun to assemble the local levies that would go
with him to Meara; the Kierney levies would meet him there,
on the plains before Ratharkin.
Though proclaimed Prince of Meara at birth, by right of
his Mearan mother, Donal Haldane had actually visited
Meara only half a dozen times in his life, and two of those
previous ventures onto Mearan soil had been under arms, to
put down rebellions. The present insurrection was again
centered around Donal's first cousin Judhael, eldest son of
his mother's sister Annalind, neither of whom had ever
accepted the succession intended by Donal's mother or,

indeed, his grandfather. More than a decade had passed
since a Haldane king last had ridden into Meara under arms,
and the present contretemps came of having stopped short
of finishing the task he then had set out to do.
This time his brother Richard rode at his side: a mature
and formidable general to whom he gladly had relinquished
active command of the Gwyneddan expeditionary force, a
generation younger than Donal. For his personal
safeguarding, the king had retained a crack bodyguard of
fast-mounted Lendouri cavalry captained by Ahern Earl of
Lendour, giving him the flexibility to go when and where he
sensed he was needed, to assess conditions for himself.
Among them, though not part of their number, was Sir
Kenneth Morgan, now restored to his function as the king's
aide, rarely far from his side since returning from the last
expedition into Meara, three years before.
Their advance into that turbulent land was swift and
focused, bringing them quickly into the heartland of the
rebellious province. Half a day's ride from Ratharkin, the
provincial capital, forward scouts made contact with the first
wary outriders from the city, where rebels had ousted the
royal governor and occupied part of the city. To the king's
dismay, initial reports regarding rebel numbers suggested
that Judhael of Meara had mustered far more support than
initially had been supposed. The prospect gave pause to all
previous assumptions that this would be any ordinary
quashing of a minor dissident insurrection.
That night, as the king and his army encamped between
Ratharkin and loyal Trurill, Donal called his commanders to
his tent for a council of war.
"I want to know how it's possible that Judhael can keep
alive such support, after so long," the king said, glancing
across the grim faces faintly illuminated in the torchlight.
"We've had nearly sixty years of wrangling about Meara.
Have I truly given these people cause to resent me that
much?"
Andrew McLain, senior among Gwynedd's dukes, shook
his grizzled head, infinitely patient. His son Jared was
already scouring the hills south of Ratharkin, seeking
intelligence regarding local opposition.
"Not at all, Sire," Andrew said. "This is a regrettable
legacy of your father's generation, and Jolyon of Meara, and
the Great War. Your parents' marriage was intended to
resolve the succession of the principality. It was your
grandmother who simply would not accept the loss of
Mearan sovereignty."
Richard snorted. "Meara was hardly sovereign, even then,
Andrew. It's been a vassal state for more than two hundred
years."
"A vassal state, yes," said Ursic of Claibourne. "But still
with its own prince, its own court. A royal governor is hardly

the same, no matter how well liked he may be—and Iolo
Melandry, while loyal and competent, has hardly been wellliked in Meara, as you know."
Duke Andrew grimaced and shook his head. "They
wouldn't have liked any royal governor. You know that,
Ursic. These stiff-necked Mearans only understand force."
Donal's sharp glance forestalled any further digression
into what was agreed by all present. He was well aware that
most of the troubles with Meara during his lifetime could be
laid at the feet of the maternal grandmother he had never
known. Widowed in the Great War, and beloved of the
Mearan people, the Princess Urracca had disowned Donal's
mother when, seeking an end to the slaughter, her daughter
Roisian had fled to Gwynedd and wed Gwynedd's king.
Annalind, she declared, was Meara's true heiress; and by
that reckoning, many Mearans regarded Annalind's son
Judhael as Meara's true prince. It was Judhael who had
sparked the present insurrection, as he had the previous
one.
"It won't end, you know," Ursic said. "Not until you've
killed off the rest of the line."
Several of the others nodded in vehement agreement, a
few murmuring to one another, but Donal set his jaw
defiantly, raking them all with his gray Haldane gaze.
"Ursic, these are my own people, my mother's blood kin. I
have no wish to slay them."
"But slay them you must, Sire—if not now, then at some
time in the future," Ursic replied. "For Mearans will never let
go of what they regard as theirs. They are a people of honor
and passion, with a vehement hatred for what they regard as
betrayal of loyalty. And in their eyes, that was the crime of
your mother—that she should abandon her lands and people
and give herself in marriage to an enemy of Meara."
"We were never enemies of Meara!" Donal snapped,
slapping the flat of his hand against the map table. "And my
mother was trying to avert the very kind of bloodshed that
seems inevitable on the morrow—for I will have what is
mine!"
"That may exact a heavy price, Sire," Duke Andrew said.
Then so be it!" Donal retorted, lurching to his feet. "Leave
us—all of you!" His ringed hand stabbed emphatically at the
tent flap, where Ahern stood guard with Sir Jovett Chandos.
"Except for Richard and Morian—and Ahern. You stay. And
someone have that scout sent in, who saw the Mearan array
at Ratharkin."
In a shuffle of booted feet and creaking harness, the
others filed out, leaving Richard, Morian, and Ahern to settle
on camp stools as the king motioned them closer and sank
into his own chair.

"Well, what is to be done?" he murmured, searching all
three attentive faces.
Richard glanced furtively at the two Deryni, then at the
carpet beneath his feet, faint apprehension in his
expression. At thirty-three, he was just coming into his
prime: lean and fit, his shock of sable hair only beginning to
silver at the temples, and visible mainly in his close-trimmed
beard and mustache.
"It appears you have already decided what is to be done,"
Richard said quietly, looking up at his brother.
"And you don't approve."
Glancing again at the two Deryni, Richard gave a shrug.
"That isn't for me to say. I'm not the king."
"No. You aren't."
Footsteps and the clink and creak of harness approached
outside the tent flap, just before one of the king's
bodyguards pulled back the heavy canvas to admit a
nondescript-looking scout in dusty tan riding leathers.
"You sent for me, Sire?"
"I did. Sit here, please." Donal hooked a stool closer with
a booted toe and indicated it with his chin. "It's Josquin
Gramercy, isn't it? Ahern, bring him that writing desk and
light, if you will."
Ahern complied without comment, moving the small
campaign chest before the stool and setting out parchment,
pen, and ink, then bringing a lit candlestick, which he set to
the left. Morian had risen to make room, and moved behind
the scout as he settled on the stool, one hand casually
coming to rest on the man's shoulder. The man started to
look up, then seemed to deflate slightly, chin sinking to his
chest and eyes closing. Ahern, unaccustomed to seeing a
Deryni work so openly, raised one eyebrow.
"Josquin, the king wishes you to sketch out as much as
you can remember of the rebel defenses," Morian said in a
low voice. "While you are doing that, you will see nothing
else and you will hear nothing until I touch you on the
shoulder again. Do you understand?"
"Aye, sir," came the whispered reply.
"Good man."
As Morian's hand left his shoulder, the man immediately
opened his eyes, took up a quill and carefully inked it, then
began sketching out a rough map of the area around
Ratharkin, his concentration evidenced by his tongue
contortions as he traced each line and letter. After watching
him a moment, Donal glanced at Richard and gave a nod.
At once, Duke Richard drew the ebon-hilted dagger from
his belt and casually passed its blade close beside the

scout's eyes, then let its point sink to lightly touch the
man's cheek beneath one eye. Eliciting no reaction, he
sighed and resheathed the weapon with a purposeful snick
of metal sliding on metal. At no time had the entranced
Josquin indicated in any way that he was aware of the test.
"I still find it amazing when he does that," the king said
aside to Ahern, as Morian smiled faintly and merely folded
his arms, overseeing the scout's work from behind.
Richard gave a snort that was at once skeptical and
resigned, casting a furtive glance at Morian as he crouched
down beside his brother. "I somehow doubt that yon Josquin
would find it so amazing, if he knew. Appalled, perhaps.
Donal, does it never give you even the smallest pang of
conscience, that you're obliging innocent souls to be party to
practices forbidden by the church?"
Donal gave a droll shrug.
"Does the church need to know? Surely, extraordinary
measures are justified, to protect the crown I swore to
defend."
"Still. . ."
They were watching the map take shape under Josquin's
pen when a guard called from beyond the tent flap and then
admitted another man to the royal tent, firmly escorted by
Sir Kenneth Morgan. This one was a nervous, bandy-legged
little individual of middle years, swathed in the upland
tweeds widely worn by the local inhabitants. As he caught
sight of the king, he snatched off a shapeless tweed cap to
reveal a balding pate and twin braids falling to either side of
his neck.
"Sire, this is Nidian ap Pedr," Kenneth said, keeping his
hand on the man's elbow. "He says he has ridden from
Ratharkin, and he claims to have important information for
you. He's unarmed."
"Indeed?"
With a glance at his three companions, Donal shifted his
camp stool a little to one side of where Josquin was working
and gestured for Kenneth to release the newcomer.
"Very well, Nidian ap Pedr, what is it you wish to tell me?"
he said.
Biting at his lower lip, cap clamped close to his breast,
Nidian dropped to his knees before the king, too frightened
to meet his gaze.
"Have mercy, Sire!" he blurted. "I beg you, do not punish
Ratharkin for the sins of only a few. I swear to you that we
are loyal there! It is the Lord Judhael who makes war
against you, and would deny you what is yours. He has men
before the city gates, and more who have occupied the
fortifications of the gatehouse and keep, against the wishes
of Ratharkin's loyal folk. I am come to offer you the

assistance of those who keep their oaths."
"Indeed. And how did Judhael manage to gain such a
foothold?" Donal asked.
Nidian ventured a quick, desperate glance at the king,
then ducked his head again, cheeks flaming.
"In truth, Sire, the Lord Judhael acted before his true
intentions became known to us. He has brought men down
out of the mountains to the west and raised the standard of
rebellion, claiming to be our true prince—and we were
content that he should make such claim in local things, so
long as he did you proper service as your vassal. But he has
seized your Majesty's governor, and I—fear they may have
hanged him."
“They've hanged Iolo Melandry?" Richard said
disbelievingly.
Donal, meanwhile, had seized the wretched Nidian by the
neck of his tunic and jerked him closer, cold anger flaring in
the gray eyes. As the man cringed under this sudden
onslaught of Haldane anger, hands fluttering weakly upward
in a futile warding-off gesture, Donal cast a sharp glance at
Morian for confirmation that the man was telling the truth,
though he knew from his own abilities that it was so. The
Deryni lord inclined his head minutely, but also flicked a
meaningful glance in the direction of the altogether too
attentive Sir Kenneth Morgan, still waiting near the tent flap.
"The Devil take him!" Donal murmured, enough recalled
to the need for caution that he released the hapless Nidian
with an apologetic smoothing of the rumpled tunic. "This
goes beyond what may be forgiven, even of kin. I should have
hacked off the last of that rotten branch the last time I
ventured into this stubborn land." He rose and, unable to
engage in the restless pacing that usually helped him defuse
anger or frustration, glanced back at the bearer of this
unwelcome news. "Who else rides with that traitorous dog?"
he demanded.
"I—I do not know their names, Sire," Nidian whispered.
"But many high-born lords answered his summons to
Ratharkin, beneath many a noble banner."
"Hardly noble, if they fly against their rightful king,"
Kenneth dared to mutter.
The words recalled the king to caution, for even the
trusted Sir Kenneth should not be allowed to witness what
Donal now had in mind,
"Well, I will know who they are," he said softly. "Kenneth,
please wait outside, and let no one disturb us for the next
little while. I feel certain that Master Nidian can tell us
more."
The Mearan looked briefly alarmed as Sir Kenneth
dutifully withdrew, but he was given no time to speculate on

his likely fate. As the tent flap fell into place, Morian was
already moving forward to drop a heavy hand to the back of
Nidian's neck, steadying with the other hand as his subject
collapsed back on his hunkers, head lolling forward.
"Ah, yes," Morian said after a few seconds, the look of
trance glazing the blue-violet eyes. "Master Nidian is, indeed,
deficient in the matter of names, but he has an excellent eye
for faces and those traitor banners. Judhael himself, of
course .. . the Earl of Somerdale and his brother ... Sir
Robard Kincaid and his eldest son .. . Basil of Castleroo ...
Blaise of Trurill... Sir Michael MacDonald . . . and curiously
enough, both Judhael’s daughters..."
"Both?" Donal said, surprised. "I had heard that the
younger one is with child."
"So she is," Morian agreed, seeing what the other three
could not. "Far gone with child. I wonder that they would
risk her in such an enterprise. But I cannot imagine what
other pregnant woman it might be, desperate enough to ride
with the royal party."
"It is said that she and her husband dote on one
another," Richard offered.
"So I have heard," Donal replied. "That would account for
young MacDonald's presence. Seek out such other details as
may be useful," he said to Morian. "How is it that he means
to assist us?"
After another long moment, Morian smiled and lifted his
head, returning his focus to the king.
"It appears that our Master Nidian can deliver what he
promises, Sire."
"Show me," Donal said softly.
With a nod, Morian glanced aside at Josquin, who was
putting the finishing touches to his map, at Ahern, then
gestured toward the remains of their meal, stacked nearby
on a silver tray.
"If Sir Ahern would be so good as to clear the supper
things off that tray, we'll see what can be done," he said.
Keeping one hand on the kneeling and entranced Nidian, he
reached across to touch the scout Josquin lightly on the
shoulder. "Have you finished, Master Josquin?"
The scout looked up with a start and smiled faintly,
setting aside his quill.
"I have, my lord. Will it serve?"
"I'm sure it will serve very well," the king said, rising to
delve into a pouch at his waist. "Here's a silver penny for
your trouble, Master Josquin—and my thanks for a job well
done." He pressed the coin into the scout's hand and
clapped him on the shoulder. "Now, go and get a meal and
some sleep. I shall need you on the morrow."

As the scout withdrew, grinning sheepishly at this
tangible sign of the royal favor, Donal glanced to where
Ahern was clearing the supper tray, then moved the
campaign chest closer and sat again on his camp stool,
picking up the new map. Morian, meanwhile, had hauled the
entranced Nidian to his feet and guided him to the stool just
vacated by the scout, pulling another stool near and sitting
knee-to-knee with him. At his gesture, Ahern set the silver
tray across both their laps and moved back to stand behind
Morian.
"You will be familiar with the basic principles of scrying,"
Morian said to Ahern, at the same time directing Richard to
stand before the tent flap. "This will be a demonstration of a
military application, for gathering intelligence."
He nodded to the king, who leaned back to snare a flagon
of wine from a camp table behind him. As he unstoppered it
to pour some onto the tray, the reflected torchlight made of
the silver tray a blood-dark mirror.
"Nidian, I want you to imagine that you're looking through
the wine and the tray," Morian said very softly, setting both
the other man's hands on the edge of the tray and holding
them there with his own. "Imagine that you can see your feet
through the tray. Don't try to focus; just relax and drift, let it
happen. I give you my word that you'll come to no harm."
The Mearan's eyelids flickered, but his gaze did not waver
from the shallow wash of wine. Cautiously Ahern set his
hand on Morian's shoulder, trying the most tentative of
contacts, so that he could better monitor what the more
experienced Deryni did—and deepened the contact as
Morian allowed it.
"Now recall what you've just told us, Master Nidian, and
what you saw," Morian urged softly. "Don't speak. Simply
allow your memories to flow, and try to focus on every detail
you can remember."
A faint sigh escaped the man's lips, and his head sank a
little lower as the tension eased into expectant silence. After
a few seconds, as Donal and Ahern watched and Richard
craned his neck to see past their subject, a faint miasma
seemed to rise from the surface of the wine, clouding the flat
expanse of burgundy with a silvery sheen reflected from
beneath, resolving then into misty images of stone ramparts,
bartizans with conical roofs, portcullises barring sturdy
gates, and defenders massed along the battlements of
distant Ratharkin.
The colors of old Meara fluttered above the walls of the
ancient city, rather than the scarlet and gold standard of
Donal's royal governor. And camped before the walls of the
city were the Mearan levies—far more than anyone had
thought Judhael could assemble.
At Donal's gesture, Richard came softly closer and the

two brothers studied what was shown, noting the troop
deployments and encampments, estimating numbers. After a
silent interval, Richard withdrew to one side to make
notations on the map. When it became clear that no more
was to come, Donal tipped the contents of the tray onto
grass at one edge of the tent while Morian adjusted Nidian's
memory of what had just occurred.
"What will he remember of this?" Richard murmured, as
Donal wiped off the tray with a cloth.
"Only that he was asked to report again on what he saw,
and that he did so, while notes were taken. That is what
happened," Donal added, cocking an eyebrow at his brother.
"As you say ..." Richard murmured.
When they had given Nidian back into the custody of Sir
Kenneth, still waiting outside, the king recalled his officers
and spent another half hour advising them of a revised
strategy for the coming day before settling down for a few
hours' sleep.

Chapter 22
"The Lord hath set at nought all my mighty men in the
midst of me."
-LAMENTATIONS 1:15

T

HEY rose before dawn, to prepare for a battle Donal hoped
they would not have to fight. After hearing Mass with his
officers in the open air before his tent, the king broke his
fast while Kenneth armed him and he gave final instructions
to his brother. Morian listened silently, already armed and
ready, the roundels and martlet on his green surcoat
gleaming in the early morning light. He did not ride with the
king when the royal party mounted up to make their way to
Ratharkin, departing in another direction with a squadron of
Claibourne cavalry and orders of his own. Dukes Andrew
and Ursic likewise had their orders.
An hour later, the king was drawing rein before the gates
of Ratharkin beneath his royal standard, his brother at his
side. Ahern and his Lendouri cavalry rode behind him, and a
herald rode well before him under a white flag of truce, to
carry his terms to the city.
The Mearan answer was an arrow through the herald's
heart, defying all conventions of honorable warfare and
unleashing the cold relentlessness of Haldane justice: justice
which Donal Haldane had the means to deliver. That the
rebels were betrayed from within the city they had thought
to hold was fitting judgment of their folly as, an hour later,
the king's loyal subjects in Ratharkin infiltrated the rebelheld gatehouse and threw open the city gates to their royal
deliverers, as Nidian ap Pedr had promised.
The next two hours saw heavy fighting in the streets of
Ratharkin, quickly focusing on the rebel-held fortress of the
city's inner citadel. Casualties were heavy on the Mearan
side and light among the royalist troops. Judhael of Meara
soon abandoned his position, seeing the futility of continued
resistance in the face of Ratharkin's betrayal. As the
vanquished prince fled deeper into Meara, Duke Andrew and
his Cassani cavalry in pursuit, some of the junior Mearan
royals made a dash southward toward the mountains of
Cloome. Donal sent Richard after them, himself remaining in
Ratharkin with Duke Ursic and an occupation force to
restore order. It was in the great hall of the recaptured inner
citadel that they found the body of Iolo Melandry, the city's
royal governor, hoisted to the full height of one of the main
hammer-beams.
"Damn them all," Donal said softly, as he gazed up at the
bloated body and blackened face of the saintly little man he
had called friend, who had upheld Haldane rights in Meara

for more than a decade. "Damn them!" Running a
trembling hand over his eyes, he turned to the men at his
side, trying to put the image of Iolo's face out of his memory.
"Kenneth, get him down from there," he murmured.
"Gently. Dear God, that man deserved a better end than
this!"
The king lingered in Ratharkin for another week, for a
new royal governor must be designated, at least for the
interim, and a sharp lesson must be delivered to the
Mearans, even though Ratharkin, in the end, had remained
mostly loyal to their king. Calling a council of the great lords
who had accompanied him on the Mearan campaign, Donal
heard their recommendations and assessments of the
situation, told them what he would have liked to do to the
Mearans, then allowed his righteous anger to be tempered by
the practicalities of those who would have to keep the peace
once he departed.
"Very sadly, I am now short one royal governor,
gentlemen," he told them. "At least for the interim, it will
have to be one of you. Do I hear any volunteers?"
The men around him exchanged glances. Such an
appointment was an honor and an opportunity for
advancement, a chance to prove one's worth to the Crown,
but it was also a virtual exile; and all were well aware of the
fate of the last royal governor of Meara, lying in his coffin in
the nearby chapel.
"I know what I'm asking," Donal said, when no one spoke
up. "And I don't expect the post to be permanent. We all
know that a Mearan is best suited for the position. But I
don't know that I have any Mearans I can trust right now.
And none of us can go back to Rhemuth until I have
someone in place here."
Ursic Duke of Claibourne glanced around the table, then
cleared his throat. "If I might make a recommendation, Sire,"
he said tentatively.
All eyes turned in his direction, for the advice of a duke
always carried heavy weight. Donal merely smiled and gave a
wave of his hand.
"All right, out with it, Ursic. Who's to be the lucky man?"
"Well, he is, perhaps, a bit young for such responsibility,"
Ursic allowed, "but he has been well tutored at his fathers
knee. And that father would not be far away, if he needed
assistance from time to time. Until a permanent royal
governor can be appointed, of course."
By now, all eyes had turned toward the man obviously
fitting Ursic's description: Duke Andrew's son, Jared Earl of
Kierney. Though but five-and-twenty, Jared McLain was also
a battle-seasoned soldier and a man exceedingly well
schooled in the duties he would eventually take on when he
succeeded his father as Duke of Cassan—which lands did,

indeed, border on rebellious Meara. Said Duke of Cassan
had raised one eyebrow at this nomination of his son for
such an important appointment, nodding faintly. The
prospective appointee looked thunderstruck.
"Well, what do you say, Sir Jared?" the king asked. "Are
you willing to take it on?"
Jared's astonishment shifted from shock through
consternation into pleased satisfaction. "I am, Sire—if you're
sure I'm ready for it. I know that I am young."
Donal snorted and gave the younger man a grim smile.
"Old enough to be husband, father, and widower as well as
warrior. It occurred to me that you might value some
worthwhile work to take your mind from your loss."
Jared glanced at his folded hands on the table before
him.
"So long as it does not leave my young son fatherless as
well as motherless, Sire."
"Well, we shall certainly endeavor to make certain that
does not happen," the king said. "And when I have relieved
you of this burden by appointment of a permanent governor,
we must see about finding you a new bride. Meanwhile, I
trust that you will not be aggrieved to be parted awhile from
your infant son?"
Jared fought back an impulse for a grin, and Andrew
covered a smile with his hand.
"Sire, I have considered taking a new bride," Jared
allowed. "But even were I to remarry tomorrow, I would be
hard-pressed to quickly reclaim my son from my mother and
his doting aunties."
"'Tis true," his father agreed. "My wife and my sisters
would be inconsolable, were young Kevin to leave my
household just yet. And indeed, since he is my only
grandson at present, I confess that I should be less than
happy myself."
Sir Kenneth Morgan had snickered at the mention of
doting aunties, and shrugged as the king looked at him in
question, still smiling.
"'Tis all true, Sire," he said. "One of those doting aunties
is my dear mother. At least if the worst were to befall, young
Kevin McLain would never lack for kinfolk."
"Then it appears that a tour of service from Jared in
Meara would not place undue stress on your domestic
arrangements," Donal said to the McLains, father and son.
"Aye, Sire. So long as he fares better than Meara's last
royal governor," Andrew replied gravely. "He is my only son,
and I shall not get another."
"With one like Jared, you shall not need another," the
king replied. "And accordingly, I shall be pleased to make

him my governor in Meara, at least until next spring."
In one thing only would the king not be moved—and that
was the manner in which he chose to pay tribute to his late
former governor. Taking counsel of his lords who knew
Meara better than he, he agreed to exact no retribution
against the citizens of Ratharkin for the killing of Iolo
Melandry, knowing that to be the crime of Judhael and his
rebels. But on the day appointed for installing Jared Earl of
Kierney as Ratharkin s new interim governor, the king
summoned all those holding Mearan offices of any
description to attend him in the great hall of the citadel and
there renew their oaths of loyalty upon Iolo's body, laid upon
a bier in the center of the hall and draped to the waist with
the king's own Haldane standard.
Only then, after each man had bowed to the body and
kissed its slippered toe in homage, were they allowed to
approach the new governor and press their foreheads to his
hand, in token of their obedience to him and the crown he
would henceforth represent. Morian being still in the field, as
was Duke Richard, Ahern Earl of Lendour was requested to
stand with the king at the side of the hall and gauge whether
his subjects were earnest in their acknowledgement of
Meara's new governor—for while Ahern was still new in the
more subtle applications of his powers, such as Morian
regularly employed, he could certainly Truth-Read.
But neither Ahern nor the king could detect any duplicity
among the men who came forward to swear; and no one
refused to comply. Still, it was with a heavy heart that the
king prepared to return to Rhemuth, the immediate crisis
having been resolved.

M

EANWHILE, they must wait for Richard and Morian, for the
resolution of that part of the tale had yet to be learned. It
was late in May, on the afternoon before they were to depart,
that both Richard and Morian returned. The king had been
walking on the ramparts of the inner citadel with Duke
Ursic, Ahern, and Sir Kenneth Morgan, having spent the
morning going over administrative matters with Jared and
the local sheriff, one Wilce Melandry, nephew of the slain
Iolo.
It was Ahern who first spotted the banners at the head of
the column clattering into the yard below, and touched the
king's arm to direct his attention there. Foremost among the
banners was that of the king's brother, with his three golden
demi-lions replacing the Haldane lion on the scarlet field,
though there could be no doubt that Richard Duke of
Carthmoor was entirely a Haldane.

"Ah, here's Richard," Donal murmured, and immediately
headed down to the yard.
But Richard's news was mixed, and he had brought back
none of the important Mearan prisoners for which Donal had
hoped.
"We never even got a glimpse of Judhael," Richard
muttered, as he and Morian walked with the king into the
day-room Donal had appropriated during his stay in
Ratharkin. "Morian caught up with Francis Delaney and a
few of the others, who'd been escorting Judhael’s daughters,
but they were odd men out in what turned out to be a
suicide stand, so that the women could get away. The only
good news on that front—and it sounds calloused, saying
this—is that Onora apparently went into labor along the
way, and died giving birth, or soon after."
"What of the child?" Donal demanded, waving both of
them to chairs.
"Probably dead," Morian replied. "It was a girl, but my
informant didn't think it would survive."
"Well, there's a blessing, at least," the king muttered.
"One less Mearan 'princess' I'll have to contend with. I don't
suppose you saw any bodies."
"Not of any Mearan princesses," Morian replied. "I was
riding separate from Duke Richard, as you know, and we
were the ones to catch up with the rear guard they left
behind to create a diversion. We killed most of them
outright, gave the coup to the wounded, and questioned the
rest before executing them. There were two of note: the Earl
of Somerdale's brother and a Sir Robard Kincaid—kin, I
believe, to your late aunt's husband. At the time, we thought
we might catch up with the others, so we didn't try to bring
along any prisoners. They were small fish, in any case."
"No, you did as I would have done," Donal murmured. "I
take it that Somerdale had been with them?"
"Aye, and Michael MacDonald, the Princess Onora's
husband. They took her body with them, and Princess
Caitrin had the babe."
Donal sighed and shook his head, genuinely distressed.
"It's bad business, Morian—not that there was any help for
it. And no sign of any of the others?" he asked, returning his
attention to Richard.
"None. They might have evaporated into thin air, for all
we saw of them, once we'd left the area around Ratharkin.
“Those mountains to the south are among the most rugged
in this part of the country, as you know. And Judhael knows
them; we don't."
"No, I'm not faulting you," Donal said. He sat back with a
sigh and ran his hands through his hair. "God, I'm getting
too old for this—and killing women and children has always

been bad business."
"It was their own folly that killed them, Donal—you know
that," Richard said.
"I know; they chose to rebel. At least Onora did. But not
the babe."
“The sad fortunes of war," Richard said.
"Aye, the fortunes of war," Donal agreed. "And they stink!"

G

IVEN the new news Richard and Morian had brought, the
king determined to remain in Ratharkin somewhat longer
than he had first intended—though, as spring gave way to
summer of 1089, Donal of Gwynedd had good reason to be
hopeful about the future. While his Mearan campaign had
fallen short of the complete success he had sought, several
of the principal trouble-makers being still at large, he had
dealt expeditiously with the most immediately troublesome
of the Mearan dissidents and left a promising lieutenant to
take on the duties of interim royal governor, with at least the
short-term prospect of enforcing a lasting peace on that
rebellious land.
It was well into June by the time the king at last judged it
safe to depart for Rhemuth, with the levies of Andrew of
Cassan and Ursic of Claibourne ordered to linger in the
Ratharkin area before withdrawing for the winter. The king
and his party departed at a leisurely pace, for the weather
was fine, and more tangible evidence of the royal presence
could do no harm in the wake of the Mearan troubles.
But three days out of the Mearan capital, the morning
after what everyone had judged quite a respectable meal at a
manor near Old Cùilteine, Ahern of Lendour took ill.
At first he tried to dismiss the dull discomfort in his belly
as mere reaction to something in the previous night's fare
that had not agreed with him, gamely mounting up with the
others and falling in beside Sir Kenneth Morgan as they
pressed on toward Rhemuth. But within a few hours, the
cramping had worsened, obliging him to rein to the side of
the road and slide from the saddle for a bout of vomiting.
He had hoped that would ease him, but it did not.
Someone muttered about the possibility of poisoning, but
the battle-surgeon who probed at his belly shook his head,
grim-visaged as he gauged the patient's rapid pulse rate and
felt for fever in the stricken man's armpits.
"What is it?" Donal asked quietly, when the battlesurgeon had completed his examination, leaving Sir Kenneth
and Jovett Chandos to contend with another bout of Ahern's
gasping dry-heaves.

"Not good, Sire," the man admitted, glancing also at Duke
Richard, who was listening anxiously. "He should not travel.
Is there a house of religion nearby, where the brothers or
sisters might tend him?"
"There's an abbey a few miles hence," Richard replied.
"Then I suggest that someone be sent to fetch a wagon. I
fear that he could not bear the pain, to ride the distance
ahorse."
"Is the danger mortal?" the king asked.
"I fear that it may be, Sire," came the reluctant reply. "We
must make him as comfortable as may be, and pray mat
God may spare his life."
"But—can nothing be done?"
Richard laid his hand on his brother's sleeve, shaking his
head. "Only to entreat heaven for a miracle," he said.
"Having kept his leg on this same road, however, I fear he
may not merit a second miracle, in this life. I have seen
these signs before."
They sent a rider ahead to the abbey at once, Richard
taking the returning army on to make the next night's camp
in the abbey's vicinity. Donal and Sir Kenneth Morgan
stayed at the stricken man's side, along with the battlesurgeon, Sir Jovett, and a dozen of Ahern's Lendouri cavalry
for protection. The wagon arrived at midafternoon, with two
gray-clad sisters riding amid a pile of featherbeds, ready to
receive their patient.
Ahern's condition, meanwhile, had continued to
deteriorate, his fever now accompanied by chills. The sister
who examined him before they loaded him into the wagon
looked no more hopeful than the battle-surgeon had been,
and tsked to her companion as the stricken man was lifted
up and settled, groaning.
"Such a handsome young man," she murmured
regretfully, shaking her head.
"Is there no hope?" the king asked her, suddenly
convinced of the seriousness of the situation.
"There is always hope, Sire," the sister replied. "But you
must prepare yourself, as must he…"

T

HEY reached the Abbey of Saint Bridget's just at dusk,
where the sisters ensconced Ahern in their infirmary and did
what they could to ease his pain. When the king and his
officers had taken a hasty supper for which few had appetite,
they conferred outside the stricken man's door.

"I regret to inform you, Sire, that he is not likely to
survive," the battle-surgeon told them, after conferring with
the abbey's sister-chirurgeon. "He has a sister, I believe? She
should be told."
"And brought here to be with him," Sir Kenneth blurted,
greatly disturbed. "They are Deryni; she may be able to do
something."
"And your daughter had hopes of a future with him as
well, did she not?" Donal said quietly, for the word had
gotten out, in the course of the campaign, that Ahern was
much taken with Sir Kenneth Morgan's daughter and, on the
night after their victory at Ratharkin, had asked him for her
hand— and been granted it.
For answer, Kenneth only closed his eyes, jaw clenching
as he gave a jerky nod.
Go, Kenneth," Donal whispered, clasping the other man's
shoulder. "Bring back both of them."

Chapter 23
"And he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchres of
his fathers."
-II CHRONICLES 35:24

T

wo days later, on a sunny morning late in June, Sir Kenneth
Morgan urged his lathered steed up the final approach to
Rhemuth Castle's gatehouse and clattered into the yard.
Summoned by a page, the castellan left in charge in the
king's absence came out to meet him as he trudged wearily
up the great hall steps.
"Is it ill news from Meara?" the man demanded. "Shall I
summon the council?"
"Nay, there's naught amiss with Meara," Sir Kenneth
assured him. "The king is on his way back, unharmed, and
Jared of Kierney acts as governor in Ratharkin. Where shall I
find my daughter, and Lady Alyce de Corwyn?"
On learning that the latter was likely to be in the castle
gardens with some of the children, he headed there first,
following the page who scampered on ahead of him.
Unshaven and stinking from two days in the saddle, he
slicked at his hair and tried to make himself more
presentable as they passed through a side door of the hall
and along a cloistered walkway toward the wider spaces of
the parkland beyond. In truth, however, with the news he
brought, Kenneth guessed that the finely bred Alyce de
Corwyn would take little notice of the bearer of that news.
Indeed, she did not notice him at all at first, lounging in
the shade of a fruited pear tree and deeply absorbed in a
book, the Princess Xenia and a large black-and-white cat
sprawled with abandon amid Alyce's skirts—a splash of
vibrant lavender against the green of the lawn.
Farther beyond, at the edge of the duck pond, a
squawking of waterfowl marked the location of two more
maids of honor crouched down beside young Prince Nigel,
turned two the previous February, pointing out the line of
newly hatched cygnets strung behind a pair of swans gliding
toward them on the water. Behind the three, various ducks,
several aggressive geese, and a pair of peafowl were
squabbling for scraps of bread that the boy had cast along
the water's edge.

Kenneth's precipitous approach sent alarm among the
assorted poultry flocked around Prince Nigel. As the peacock
suddenly fanned its tail feathers and emitted a raucous
screech that sounded like a child crying for help, young Nigel
burst into tears and both Alyce and Xenia looked up—and
saw Sir Kenneth Morgan approaching fast, a red-faced page

running to keep up. Sir Kenneth looked positively grim,
dust-streaked and still lightly armed for travel, and Alyce
scrambled to her feet at once, dislodging princess and cat
and sending the latter scurrying for safety into the sheltering
branches of the pear tree.
"Sir Kenneth, what is it?" she cried. "Is it Ahern?"
"Alyce, I am so sorry," he said, reeling as she flung herself
into his arms, searching his eyes for some sign of hope. "He
was uninjured in the campaign, but he's taken ill. "The king
bids me bring you to his side. He lies at an abbey near
Cùilteine. He bade me bring Zoë as well. Ahern had asked
for her hand when the campaign was finished, and I—had
given it," he finished, faltering at his own last words.
"He isn't going to die, is he?" Alyce demanded, desperate
for details, but not daring to probe for them—not Sir
Kenneth, who was the father of her dearest friend.
"Dear child, I don't know," he murmured, embracing her
awkwardly, a detached part of him desperately aware of his
disheveled state, concerned that she was ruining her lovely
gown.
Alyce left Princess Xenia in the care of the two girls with
Prince Nigel. On the way to the queen's chambers to find
Zoë, Kenneth told her what he could of her brother's illness,
not sparing her any details, for he had too much respect for
her not to be honest, even were she not Deryni.
"I have occasionally seen men recover from this, but the
outlook is not good. It is an inflammation of the gut, which
often ruptures—and then the belly fills with corruption, and
the victim dies."
"How long?" she asked breathlessly, as they raced back
along a cloister corridor.
"God willing, he will recover. But if not. . . another week
or two, perhaps—no more."
"Sweet Jesu, no ..."

T

HEY had crossed almost the width of the formal part of the
gardens as they spoke, and were approaching a set of double
doors opening onto the gardens from the queen's summer
apartments. Within, in the sunny morning room, the queen
lay half-reclining on a damask-draped day-bed, her dark
hair caught in a loose plait over one shoulder of her loosefitting gown and a cool compress held against her forehead.
She was bearing again, this new pregnancy discovered
shortly before the king's departure for Meara, and she was
still much afflicted with morning sickness, as she had been
for all but one of her previous pregnancies.

Jessamy sat attentively beside her, hands busy with a
drop spindle as she and the queen chatted. Behind them, in
a sunnier window, Zoë and Vera and several others were
stitching on an embroidery frame, and the ladies Miranda
and Tiphane were practicing a new lute duet, albeit
somewhat badly, the former making grimaces of distaste
whenever the latter plucked a false note, which was often.
The pair stopped playing as the page bowed and entered
to state their business, and the other ladies stopped
stitching. Zoë rose apprehensively as she saw the expression
on her father's face. Alyce held back a little as Sir Kenneth
ventured into the room apologetically and bowed to the
queen.
"Sir Kenneth, what is it?" Richeldis asked, laying aside
her compress and sitting up. "What has happened?"
"I beg you to pardon me, your Majesty," he said. "The king
is well, but Earl Ahern is taken seriously ill." Zoë gasped,
one hand flying to her lips. "His Majesty bids Lady Alyce to
come at once, to care for her brother, and asks for you as
well, dear Zoë'." He held out his hand to her. "Ahern had
asked for your hand, daughter, and pending your consent, I
had given it to him."
She flew to him, weeping in his arms while the rest plied
him with questions, few of which he could answer. Vera
came to Alyce and clutched her hand, offering her silent
support.
"My news is two days old. I wish I could tell you more,"
Kenneth said, as horrified speculation shifted to the
practicalities of immediate travel. "I have arranged for horses
along the way back. Travel as lightly as you can, but we may
be gone for several weeks."
They were on the road again before an hour had passed,
dressed in stout travel attire, now accompanied by an escort
of four fresh lancers for the protection of the women. Later,
both Alyce and Zoë would remember that ride only as a blur
of pounding hooves and aching backs and legs, quick meals
snatched at intervals along the way, less frequent stops to
try to catch a few hours' rest.
For the latter, at least, Alyce could offer assistance of a
sort, by means of fatigue-banishing techniques she had
learned years before from Father Paschal. For herself and
Zoë, this posed no dilemma, for Zoë was well-accustomed to
her touch. In the case of Kenneth, though he was already
exhausted from his ride to fetch them, she was reticent to
offer it; but Kenneth surprised her by asking whether she
could do it.
"It doesn't frighten me," he told her candidly. "On those
campaigns in Meara, I've often watched Sir Morian work,
and occasionally, he's even lent a hand when some of us
were dead on our feet and needed to stay alert. It was quite

an extraordinary experience, and I don't know why the
bishops keep insisting that this sort of thing is wrong."
"Well, they do," she said, half-disbelieving his trust. "Lie
down and let me see what I can do."
She took care to go no deeper than she must, for her
experience had been largely confined to herself and Zoë,
Vera, and of course, Father Paschal. But Kenneth was a
good subject, and woke much refreshed an hour later, when
they must mount up again.
For herself, her attempts at rest were less successful, for
her worry for her brother deepened with every mile they
traveled; and though she tried several times to touch his
mind, she could not, at such distance and unassisted. She
wished Vera was with her, but since their true relationship
was still not known, that had not been possible, just as it
had not been when she had laid dear Marie to rest.
They passed through the returning army half a day before
reaching the abbey, and picked up a fresh escort and fresher
horses. Duke Richard had brought the army forward, and
reported that Ahern had still been alive when they left him at
the Abbey of Saint Bridget's. The king and several dozen of
his men had remained behind with the stricken Ahern, to
await the arrival of Alyce and Zoë.
Even with the use of Alyce's fatigue-banishing spells, all
three of them were exhausted by the time they reached the
abbey where Ahern lay. Seeing him huddled in his sickbed,
his bedclothes damp with his sweat, did little to lift their
spirits.
"Alyce, thank God!" he gasped, as the sisters admitted her
and Zoë to his sickroom. "And darling Zoë . .. Alyce, I pray
you, help me...."
But there was only so much she could do, even when she
had sent the sisters from the room and stationed Sir
Kenneth outside the door to keep intruders at bay while she
employed her powers as best she could. Zoë held his hand,
and bathed his fevered brow, but there was little else she
could do.
The king's battle-surgeon now held out little hope. Curled
on his side, with his good knee drawn up to his chest, Ahern
periodically was racked by rigours, now burning with fever,
grown far worse in the four days since Kenneth had left to
fetch her. When Alyce tried to examine his belly, it was taut
and hard, and extremely tender. Her powers told her only
that something was very wrong.
"I fear the bowel has ruptured," the surgeon told her,
after she came out of his room. "We have tried to keep him
quiet, and have given him nothing by mouth save a little
water, but his agony has been intense. And his breath—the
foetor oris." He shook his head. "It is only a matter of time."
She cried a little then, weeping wearily against Sir

Kenneth's chest, then dried her tears and went back into
her brother's room. After putting him to sleep—and
breathing a silent prayer that a miracle might yet come to
pass—she gave her grim report to the king, then fell
gratefully into the bed the sisters provided and slept through
the night, Zoë curled dismally beside her.
Ahern was no better the next morning, though at least his
night had been peaceful. In truth, he was now slipping in
and out of coma, and his features had begun to take on a
waxen, transparent quality. A priest had been summoned to
administer the last rites, and was waiting outside the room
with the king and Duke Richard. Sir Jovett was changing a
compress on his forehead, in an ongoing attempt to ease his
fever.
"I don't want to die here, Alyce," he told her, rousing at
about midday as she and Zoë held his hands and Kenneth
tried to comfort both of them. "And I wanted to marry Zoë. I
still do!" he declared, turning his burning gaze first on her
and then on her father, then lifting her hand to his lips.
"Zoë Morgan, will you consent to do me the very great
honor of giving me your hand in marriage?" he murmured.
"I will, she breathed, tears streaming down her cheeks. "I
will!"
"Then, someone, fetch that priest," he rasped. "And there
should be other witnesses. Is the king about? And Jovett—
call Jovett, my faithful friend. . . ."
Kenneth had already gone to fetch the priest, waiting
outside with the king and Duke Richard, and returned
immediately with all three of them, Jovett following behind.
"But, my lord," the priest was protesting, "he should
receive Unction first. He may not have much time."
"Time enough to marry this fair lass," the king replied,
grasping the priest's sleeve and propelling him to the
bedside. “Do it, Father!"
Trembling, the priest put on his stole and joined their
right hands, leading them through a much abbreviated form
of the wedding vows.
"Ego conjugo vos in matrimonium: In Nomine Patris, et Filii,
et Spiritus Sancti, Amen," he concluded, when they had taken
one another for better and for worse, for richer and for
poorer, in sickness and in health, until death did them part,
and Ahern had given her his name and the gold ring
engraved with the arms of Lendour—not yet impaled with
the Corwyn arms, as had one day been his expectation, but
token, nonetheless, of his intentions.
Only then did he allow the priest to anoint him for his
final journey, and give him viaticum to speed him on his
way. When he slipped again into coma a little while later,
Alyce sealed him from pain and gently kissed his forehead in

farewell, then left him in the care of his bride of but an
hour, herding everyone else out of the room.
It was but another hour later when Zoë appeared at the
door, eyes downcast, and stood aside to let them look
beyond to where he now lay at peace.

L

ATER that morning, after Ahern's friends had paid their
respects, the priest who had married him, shriven him, and
given him the Last Rites of his faith sang him a Requiem
there in the abbey, his soul uplifted by the angel-voices of
the sisters who had cared for him in his final days.
Few mourned more profoundly than his king, who knelt
beside Ahern's grieving sister and his bride of only hours
with his face buried in his hands, pondering what would
become of the gaping hole left by the dead man's untimely
passing. In his all too short life, Ahern de Corwyn had taken
on the mantle of his noble inheritance with passion and
courage, overcoming adversities that might have seduced a
lesser man into accepting the life of a wealthy and privileged
cripple.
Only recently had the first stirrings of a born military
genius begun to blossom—along with a quiet self-confidence
regarding his Deryni gifts. Both had been of inestimable
value in the campaign just past—and both had been lost
with his death. Ahern had been but eighteen.
In sum, had he lived, he would have become a formidable
Duke of Corwyn, in time. Instead, the mantle of that noble
heritage now fell upon his sister Alyce—or rather, her
eventual son.
Ensuring that she took a suitable father for that son now
became yet another burden that Donal Haldane must bear,
for Alyce de Corwyn shared the same blood and heritage as
the dead man, and likely with similar potential. Any son of
Alyce must be mentored by a father of unimpeachable
integrity, with the ability to guide up the boy in the way he
should go—a pair of safe hands in which to entrust the
power that came with eventually taking the reins of ducal
authority in Corwyn.
No such considerations yet stirred the mind of the
potential mother of such a duke. For Alyce, the losing of her
beloved brother represented a shock not unlike what she
had experienced after the death of their father, three years
before, and the loss of their sister, not a year past.
Once again, Zoë' Morgan knelt at her side, but this time
not merely as bosom companion but as sister, briefly bound
to Ahern in law and spirit, but fated never to consummate
that union. If Alyce now wept, she wept for Zoë as much as

for Ahern—and for herself. Her brother's death changed
many things. Some things, however, remained sadly and
always the same.
The cheerless journey back to Rhemuth with Ahern's
body was eased somewhat by Zoë's presence, sharing her
grief. Again, the robes of mourning must be pulled from
coffers, and again a Requiem was sung for a departed earl of
Lendour in the chapel royal, before sending his body home
for burial. Though Duke of Corwyn by birth, Ahern de
Corwyn had never ruled in his ducal lands, so the decision
was taken to inter him at Cynfyn with his father and other
scions of the Lendour line.
Much of the next few weeks seemed like a repeat of the
obsequies for Keryell three years before, though with an even
larger turn-out. Ahern had won the hearts of all his Lendouri
subjects during the months of his convalescence and the
mastery of his injury’s aftermath, and his people had been
well proud when the king consented not only to knight him
ahead of custom but to confirm him in his Lendour title, also
departing from what the law ordinarily allowed.
Corwyn, too, paid him homage in death, in far greater
numbers than they had for his father, for Ahern would have
been their duke in fact, had he lived; Keryell had never been
aught but caretaker, where Corwyn was concerned.
His young widow they took to their hearts as well, with
wistful regret that she now would never carry on his line.
The knights who would have been his support and mainstay
as he took up his duties—Deinol Hartmann, Jovett Chandos,
and even Sé Trelawney come from his unknown duties in far
R'Kassi—rallied to the support of his sister, promising to
keep safe in trust the lands that now would pass through
her line instead of Ahern's.
Both Alyce and Zoë were exhausted by the time they
arrived back in Rhemuth, though their return at least was
marked by happier anticipation as the time approached for
the queen's latest lying-in. In addition, the king had
appointed a permanent governor for Ratharkin, a baron from
the Purple March called Lucien Talbot, which had relieved
Earl Jared to return to Rhemuth and make his formal
declaration to Vera to become his wife. Very shortly after,
Vera had journeyed to her family home near Cynfyn, there to
make preparations for a wedding in Kierney the following
spring. Letters were awaiting Alyce and Zoë, telling of the
wedding plans and inviting their participation in the happy
event.
That news, and the birth of a healthy daughter to the
queen, early in September, did much to raise the spirits of
the court. The baby's christening a few weeks later, as Silke
Anne, was cause for rejoicing: renewal of life in the midst of
death. Gradually the pain of Ahern's passing began to fade,
and gradually, both Alyce and Zoë began to smile again.

It was early November when what began as a day's
pleasant diversion set off a chain of events fated to have farreaching results. The weather, too, had changed, not many
days before, and a light powdering of snow lay on the
ground: the first of the season. The king was preparing to
lead a hunting expedition out into the forests north of the
city, and had invited the queen and her ladies to accompany
him. It would be her first such outing since the birth of
Princess Silke. Richeldis, a fine rider, had been delighted to
agree.
Accordingly, certain of her ladies were asked to ride with
the royal party, Alyce and Zoë among them. It was an
activity usually declined by the older ladies of the court, but
the younger ones always relished a day in the field,
surrounded by handsome men and handsome horses and
with far less scrutiny than was possible within the castle
walls.
On this particular day, the king's party included his
handsome and unmarried brother Richard, nearly a dozen of
Duke Richard's most promising squires, some to be knighted
at the Twelfth Night to come, and many of the members of
the king's council—perhaps twenty in all, along with as
many huntsmen and men-at-arms. Sir Kenneth Morgan rode
at the king's side: steady and reliable, attractive enough, but
more of an age with Richard's generation than that of the
king's other aides and the squires.
The day was sparkling, the sunshine bright and brisk,
the horses frisky. They had a good ride for the first two
hours, and good luck against the stag. One of the senior
squires in the party brought down an eight-point buck, and
the falconers totted up a good day's bag in pigeon and
rabbit.
The ambush had been planned by someone with
disturbing foreknowledge of the king's movements.
Fortunately, the archers who carried out the attack were far
less efficient. The first arrow only grazed the back of the
king's hand, ruining a perfectly good pair of hawking gloves
and his good humor; the second took Sir Kenneth Morgan
solidly through the back of his thigh, pinning him to his
saddle and sending his mount into a fit of bucking affront at
this wound to its back. Before a third could be loosed, the
king's men had their master on the ground and protected by
a layer of knights and squires, and more of them were
surging into the trees to isolate and overwhelm the
attackers.

Chapter 24
“He shall flee from the iron weapon,
and the bow of steel shall strike him through:
-JOB 20:24

A

LYCE would recall the next few minutes as a confusion of
screaming and fighting and fear. Riding with Zoë at the
queen's side, she heard the king's exclamation and Sir
Kenneth's startled cry as his mount began bucking, and saw
the riders nearest the king bear him to the ground for safety,
others spurring toward the trees, and the source of the
attack. At the same time, other men grabbed the queen's
reins and drew her away from the confusion, one of the
squires kneeing Alyce's mount aside to follow them.
It was all over very quickly. As the king's men dragged
several belligerent men from the trees, somewhat the worse
for wear, others helped the king to his feet while more men
swarmed around Sir Kenneth's plunging horse and
wrenched its neck downward, one throwing a cloak over its
head to hoodwink it and, hopefully, calm it while others
went to the aid of the wounded man.
"Careful! His leg is pinned to the saddle!" one man
warned, as Kenneth cried out and groped at the grasping
hands when someone started to help him down. "Somebody,
make this damned horse stop dancing!"
"The barb's gone right through the saddle," another man
said, sliding a hand under the pinned leg. "I think it's into
the horse's back as well."
"Well, make him stand still, or we'll have to put him
down. Someone loose that girth! Easy!"
The horse was still snorting and prancing, trying to buck,
to rear, but its handlers mostly kept it with all four feet on
the ground. Kenneth was gasping with pain, for every jigging
movement of the animal tore at the shaft through his leg.
Boldly Alyce broke away from the queen's party, a horrified
Zoë following, and rode to where the drama was being played
out, jumping down to join the rescuers.
"Let me help," she murmured, pulling off her riding gloves
as she pushed her way through to the horse's head and
reached for it.
"Stay clear, m'lady, or you'll get kicked!" one of the men
warned, as she skittered back from a flailing hoof. Another
was drawing his dagger, obviously intending the coup de
grâce to still the animal's plunging.
"Let me touch him," she said, shouldering past the man's
blade, already focusing her powers as she slipped her hands

under the muffling cloak. "I'm Deryni. I can calm him."
A few of them backed off a little at this reminder of what
she was, but the horse subsided immediately under the
touch of her hand and mind, still whuffling and snorting but
with all four legs now firmly planted, head dropping
obediently.
"Easy, boy . . . That's it. Good boy. . . . Now, brace the
saddle and pull it off with him," she ordered, slipping one
hand along the horse's neck to grasp Kenneth's nearest
wrist, flesh to flesh. "Give it good support, and try not to
hurt him too much. Sir Kenneth, look at me!"
He did, concentrating through his pain—and found
himself captured by her eyes, caught by a sensation of
falling into them, even as the men began lifting him and the
saddle clear of the horse. The movement still hurt him—and
he cried out as they carefully lowered him to the ground—
but she moved with him, still grasping his wrist, wary of the
horse as it was led out of the way, snorting.
Two men continued to support the heavy saddle as two
more examined the angle of the arrow jutting from Kenneth's
leg. Zoë had crowded in behind Alyce, craning to see her
father's condition. As Alyce scrambled to his head, laying
both her hands along the sides of his face and taking him
into unconsciousness, one of the men carefully wrapped
both hands around the feathered end of the shaft, obviously
intending to attempt withdrawing it.
"Don't try to pull it," one of the other men warned. "The
barb's gone all the way through."
"Just break off the fletching," another man said. "It's
going to be easier on him if the shaft is pulled on through,
once it's free of the saddle."
"Wait," said another man, working with one hand
squeezed flat between saddle and pinned flesh. "I've nearly
got it loose .. . there!"
At his nod, men lifted the saddle clear, those closest
bending for a closer look at the arrow transfixing Kenneth's
thigh. A knot of observers had gathered to give suggestions
for separating man and saddle, and now eased forward
warily as Alyce, too, shifted her attention to the damage
done. Zoë dropped to her knees at her father's head, casting
anxious glances between him, Alyce, and the wound.
The tip of the arrowhead, a wicked-looking barbed affair
made for bringing down large game—or men—was just
protruding from the back of Kenneth's thigh, and would
surely do additional damage as it exited, whichever way it
was removed. Alyce knew he would also bleed a great deal,
though at least the arrow had passed through deep muscle,
well away from the great vessel whose severance meant
almost instant death.
"I wouldn't break off the arrow just yet," she said, moving

one hand to stay the man about to do so. "It may be
better to cut the arrowhead off cleanly, back at the castle,
and then back the arrow out of the wound, with plenty of
shaft for a handgrip. He's going to bleed a great deal."
"Do as she says," came the voice of the king, suddenly
among the onlookers. "I won't lose him because we rushed
things here in the field. Can he ride?" he asked, crouching
down between Alyce and Zoë.
"Not really, Sire. He'd be far safer and more comfortable
in a litter or a wagon, if one can be arranged."
"See to it," Donal ordered two of his men. "And go gently,
Rannulf. He took that arrow for me."

T

HEY were several hours getting Kenneth home, carrying
him in a litter until they could commandeer a wagon and
bed him down in that. They padded out the wagon bed with
hay and wadded cloaks to keep the injured leg supported,
and Alyce settled down beside him to keep careful watch
over his condition. The king had ridden on ahead with the
prisoners, and another party had taken the queen and the
rest of her ladies back to the castle by the most direct route,
though a junior maid had been left behind for propriety's
sake, riding just ahead of the wagon with Jiri Redfearn. Zoë
rode anxiously alongside the wagon, and half a dozen of his
knights behind.
After a while, Alyce allowed Kenneth to regain
consciousness, blurring as much as she dared of his pain.
She could feel the eyes of the king's men upon her as she sat
there—judging, assessing, many of them disapproving—for
she had been obliged to use her powers far more openly than
was her usual wont; but it was not in her nature to let any
living thing suffer, if she was able to do something about it.
Sir Kenneth Morgan was the father of her dearest friend, a
kind and gentle man, and had always treated her with the
utmost courtesy and even affection, though he knew full well
what she was.
"I must be dead," he murmured, after a long interval of
jouncing along in comparative silence, accompanied by only
the rumble of the wheels, the jingle of harness, and the
occasional low-voiced converse of their escort.
She looked at him sharply.
"Are you in pain?"
He gave her a faint, strained smile and a slight shake of
his head.
"No worse than before, dear girl. But since I am in the
keeping of an angel, I can only suppose that I have passed to

the next world."
She raised an eyebrow and gave him a genteel snort,
along with a faint smile of her own.
"I doubt these gentlemen would agree, my lord." She gave
a slight jut of her chin in the direction of the men
accompanying them. "Most would judge me anything but an
angel. But I am glad that your discomfort is not too great."
He raised his head slightly to glance down at his leg,
lightly touching the shaft of the arrow with his fingertips,
then lay back with a grimace and a sigh, casting a
reassuring glance at his daughter, riding along beside them.
"Is the arrowhead embedded?" he asked, returning his
gaze to Alyce. "Will it have to be cut out?"
She shook her head slightly. "I think not, my lord—or,
only a little, perhaps. It mostly went through—though I fear
that your saddle is ruined. And your horse is in a very ill
temper—though he is only slightly injured."
He chuckled bleakly at that, smiling faintly as he looked
back at her. His eyes were the same shade of sandy steelgray as his hair, though with a hint of sea-blue in their
depths. Though his face was weathered and tanned,
bespeaking much service in the field, she sensed that the
crinkles at the corners of his eyes came mostly of good
humor.
"He isn't a very good horse anyway," Kenneth confided.
"I'd meant to ride another today, but the vile beast cast a
shoe and there was no time to have it reset." He glanced
away with a snort. "Not that that horse is much better. When
the shoe came off, the nails ripped an almighty chunk out of
the edge of his hoof. I suspect he'll be lame for weeks. And I
reckon it could be months before a smith will be able to keep
a shoe on that foot. But I don't suppose that I shall be riding
again very soon anyway. . . ."
He was talking, she knew, to take his mind from his
injury. In fact, Sir Kenneth owned excellent mounts, some of
them given him by the king. All the horses had been
fractious before they rode out that morning, for the weather
had turned very cold in the past few days, and a hard frost
had been on the cobbles. She had seen Sir Kenneth's first
horse cast its shoe in the stable yard as they were mounting
up to leave, jinking and kicking out at any other animal that
got too near—and somehow managing to catch the edge of
the shoe with its own hoof, so that it very nearly fell.
Alyce smiled and nodded knowingly. "I was aware of the
incident, my lord. The queen was convinced you were both
going down. They should spread more straw on the cobbles
when it's frosty."
"A sensible horse wouldn't act up like that on slick
cobbles," Kenneth retorted. "But he is fast—at least when he
isn't trying to kill himself and me."

He fell silent at that, tensing as he shifted in the hay,
trying to find a more comfortable position. Alyce checked his
wound, but he did not seem to be bleeding—though he
would, when the arrow was drawn. When he grimaced and
closed his eyes, obviously concentrating on trying to ease his
pain, she considered nudging him back into sleep; but there
were too many eyes upon them.
They rattled into the forecourt of Rhemuth Castle just as
the shadows were lengthening. The king's physician and
Duke Richard's battle-surgeon were waiting as they carried
Sir Kenneth through the hall and into one of the groundlevel guest rooms that opened off the royal gardens. The
queen joined them very shortly, and directed Alyce to assist
the physicians as they dealt with the wound, she and Zoë
holding basins and towels as the surgeon eased the arrow
through far enough to cut off the arrowhead and then drew
out the shaft.
Though Kenneth uttered not a sound as this was done,
and bled less than they had feared, his face went gradually
more and more taut and pale, until Richeldis nodded
minutely to Alyce to intervene. The patient had been given a
draught of strong spirits before they began, and now Alyce
gave him more, at the same time brushing his mind with
hers as she lifted his head to put the cup to his lips, nudging
him gently into sleep.
If the surgeon noticed how quickly the draught worked,
he said nothing, only bending to his work of cleaning and
bandaging the wound, backing off then to wash his hands as
the queen laid a hand on the sleeping man's forehead.
"The test will be whether a fever develops," she said,
shifting then to help Alyce and Zoë pull the blankets up to
cover him. "It appears we should have given him more drink,
and sooner. It would have spared him some discomfort. We'll
let him sleep now," she said to the room at large. "Alyce, I
know you and Zoë will wish to sit with him and keep him
comfortable. I'll send someone to relieve you in a few hours."
The guarded look that passed between her and Alyce
made it clear what she meant, having experienced the ease
of Deryni powers during childbirth and other times of
discomfort—though usually from Jessamy. The church did
not approve, of course, but it was a perquisite of royalty to
ignore certain of the laws that governed ordinary folk,
though discretion was always essential, even for a queen.
Still, the wife of the king and the mother of future kings
could be forgiven certain lapses, so long as they did not
occur too often or too flagrantly; and none could dispute that
Sir Kenneth Morgan was the king's good servant, and had
taken an arrow meant for his sovereign. Alyce saw the
hardening of Father Denit's expression as he watched from
the doorway, and guessed that he suspected what had just
transpired, but she did not think he would countermand the

queen's order, under the circumstances, though he might
well mention his displeasure to the king—or to the
archbishop. He gave them a stiff nod in lieu of a bow before
turning on his heel to leave the room.
"I'll send Jessamy to you a little later. Be careful," the
queen whispered to Alyce, briefly hugging her and Zoë
around the shoulders before herself departing, along with
the physician.

T

HE care they had taken in dealing with Sir Kenneth's injury
soon reaped dividends, for he never developed the fever the
queen had feared, and his wound healed cleanly. After a few
days, he was allowed to sit with his leg propped up before
the fire in his room, where he received daily visitors: Sir Jiri,
with a favorite cardounet board and playing pieces, and
sometimes ladies sent by the queen to sing for him while
they strummed at lute and psaltery and crwth.
He also read a great deal, and was read to, sometimes by
his daughter, but more often by Alyce. With the latter, it was
usually histories borrowed from the king's library—and
sometimes, correspondence sent by the king for his review.
But occasionally, she found copies of popular ballads and
poetry lying on the cabinet beside his chair. He colored when
he saw that she had noticed.
In truth, the convalescent was finding himself most
agreeably distracted by the gentle attentions of the queen's
ladies, and entertaining such thoughts as had not crossed
his mind since the death of his wife, several years before.
Oh, there had been the occasional flirtation with tavern
maids and farmers' daughters when he was in the field, and
gentle dalliance with certain ladies of his sisters' households
when he went home to the ancestral estates of Morganhall to
visit his younger daughters, who were being raised by their
aunts. But largely, he had thrown himself into his military
career, with increasing service to the king himself, growing
mostly resigned to the likelihood that he would live out his
life as a widower. He was but a simple knight, albeit a
trusted servant of the king. What could he offer a woman?—
he, whose meager income from the Morgan estates must go
to support the children of his youth.
Yet now he was surprised to find himself thinking
decidedly domestic thoughts, little though there was any
practicality to such thinking. He had not the wherewithal to
support a wife and possibly a second family. Even so, the
idea began to surface more and more often during those
weeks of convalescence, daily in the company of the
beautiful and accomplished ladies of the queen's household,

and of one young lady, in particular.
Alyce de Corwyn . . . heiress to one of the richest duchies
in all the Eleven Kingdoms. She was so far above him as to
be the embodiment of a fantasy he could hardly even
conceive, at least in this life. When first they had met at Arcen-Ciel, he had esteemed her as his daughter's friend,
almost as another daughter of his own. Now, as their
association shifted into adult friendship, he decided that he
had not been far off the mark when he had compared her to
an angel, during that long, pain-filled journey back to the
castle after his injury.
Of course, she was Deryni. He had no idea what that
might mean in practical terms, but he knew that it put her
all but outside the pale where the Church was concerned.
Being who she was, she had the protection of the Crown for
so long as she walked a narrow path of propriety and care,
keeping her powers securely leashed and curbed—she could
not help what she was. But were she to stray from what the
Church regarded as acceptable for those of her race, even
the king's favor might not be enough to save her. Oddly, he
had never felt threatened by close proximity to her—or if he
had, it was because she was so beautiful, and so beyond his
reach.
Further time spent in her company during the weeks of
his convalescence only underlined both his longing and the
uselessness of it—but still, he continued to catch her image
invading his thoughts in many an unguarded moment, and
gradually his dreams as well. Once he was back on his feet,
walking with a stick at first, he would find himself gazing
after her as he took a turn in the royal gardens of a sunny
morning, while she and his daughter and the other ladies
played with the younger royal children.
He threw himself into his work with a vengeance,
spending many a gray morning or afternoon in the king's
chancery, reviewing diplomatic correspondence, and
attending meetings of the royal council when called by the
king. Often he and the king worked long into the night on
drafts of documents that needed to be prepared, taking a
private supper in the king's apartments while they worked.
It was on one such stormy evening early in December
that the queen intruded to inquire about certain
arrangements for Christmas court, now in its serious
planning stages. Attending her that evening was Alyce de
Corwyn.
"My lord, you simply must do something about your
sons," the queen announced, before she and Alyce were even
properly through the door. "Brion and Blaine are pestering
me to distraction about those ponies."
"I told you that I was considering the matter," the king
began.
"Well, it simply won't do to keep putting it off," the queen

replied. "You aren't the one who has to listen to them, day
in and day out—"
"Perhaps we should continue this discussion in private,"
he said under his breath, as he set a hand firmly under the
queen's elbow and escorted her into the next room, closing
the door behind them.
After a few seconds, Kenneth exchanged bemused glances
with Alyce and he remembered his manners enough to
gesture toward the chair at the other end of the table where
he and Donal had been working. As had begun to happen
increasingly of late, he found himself reacting to her
presence like some green adolescent. Each time he saw her,
he found her more intriguing, and was struck by her beauty
of soul as well as form.
"I do beg your pardon," he said. "Please, sit down. The
king is in one of his stubborn moods this evening, so their
meeting may take some time. May I offer you some
refreshment?"
He nodded toward the flask of wine toward the center of
the table, but she shook her head as she sat.
"I thank you, no," she said. "Zoë and I supped with the
queen and the royal children earlier. It was hardly fancy
fare, but her tastes are simple when she is not required to
preside at the king's table."
He nodded agreement and took his seat, several places
down from her.
"They are all well, then?" he asked, after a slightly
awkward pause, suddenly at a loss for words.
"Aye, they are," she replied. "Except that Prince Brion
does long for a R'Kassan barb at year-end. It is all he talks
about lately. That was the source of the queen's comments,
when we entered."
Kenneth gave a snort, unbending a little. "He is not yet
nine. The king will never allow it."
"I have tried to prepare him for disappointment in that
regard," she replied, smiling. "He rides well, but I fear that a
R'Kassan would be quite unsuitable. On the other hand,"
she added, "I believe that the queen has been making
inquiries about Llanneddi mountain ponies for both the
older princes."
"Ah, I know them well," Kenneth agreed, warming to the
subject of horses, which were one of his own passions. "I
rode many a Llanner when I was a boy. Most of them stand
only about twelve hands at the withers, but they look a lot
like miniature R'Kassans—though with a mountain pony's
more sensible temperament. They'd be perfect for the
princes, at this point in their training."
"Aye, that's what the queen thought," Alyce replied. "She
told me she'd grown up riding them—and her brother still

maintains quite a fine herd. . . .
They continued to discuss horses—a safe topic, Kenneth
felt—for most of an hour, until finally the king and queen
emerged from their meeting, both of them smiling. The
queen, in fact, looked slightly flushed, her hair somewhat
less tidy than when she and the king had withdrawn. Both
Kenneth and Alyce rose as the royal pair entered.
"That's settled, then," the queen was saying, as she clung
to her husband's arm. "You won't forget, now?"
"Of course I won't forget," the king replied. "Now, off with
you—both of you," he added, with a nod toward Alyce. "Sir
Kenneth and I must finish this document."
The queen arched an eyebrow at him and kissed the air
in his direction, smiling, then headed for the door, Alyce
hurrying to keep up. When they had gone, Donal sat back
down at his place, grinning as he topped up his cup of wine.
"I do love being married, and to that woman," he confided,
lifting his cup to Kenneth and then taking a sip. "Kenneth,
have you never thought to remarry? You're still a young
man."
Kenneth reached for his own cup to cover his
discomfiture, wondering whether his interest in Alyce was
that obvious.
"Hardly young, Sire. I am three-and-forty, and I have two
daughters to support besides Zoë—and I assure you that I
am exceedingly grateful of her place here at court. My sisters
are raising the younger ones, so I need not worry for their
daily care, but they all must be dowered. Hardly room there,
I think, for a new wife and children."
"Humph. Then it seems I must find you a rich heiress,"
Donal said lightly. "You've certainly earned some more
tangible mark of my favor than a mere thank-you. How
many times is it, now, that you have saved me or one of my
family?
"I was only doing my duty, Sire, as your liegeman,"
Kenneth protested.
Donal gave a snort. "More than that, I think." He cocked
his head at the younger man, considering. "I don't suppose
you might fancy that lovely filly who was just here with the
queen? We heard you talking about horses."
Kenneth felt himself flushing, momentarily at a loss for
words. Did the king think he had been campaigning for this
all along?
"I would—never aspire that high, Sire. The gift of Lady
Alyce's marriage is a powerful bargaining tool. You must use
it to bind some great lord's loyalty. You already have my
loyalty—and my life, if needs be."
"Yes, I'm aware of that," the king replied, his gaze going
distant as he mulled the possibility. "That's why the notion

suddenly makes a great deal of sense. For such a
marriage would also bind the loyalty of your sons—one of
whom would be the next Duke of Corwyn."
Kenneth could feel his pulse pounding in his temples,
hardly able to comprehend what he was hearing—and tried
not to let himself even begin to hope that it might come to
pass.
"Allow me to consider this further," the king said then,
standing in his place as Kenneth also got hastily to his feet.
"We'll finish this tomorrow. Meanwhile, think on the
possibility—that is, if the idea appeals to you."
"It does, Sire—how could I not be honored that you would
even think it? But I—I am old enough to be the lady's father.
She may not wish—"
"Nonsense. She shall marry where I say she shall. She
knows her duty." The king picked up his wine cup and took
a deep quaff. "Go now. I must give this further thought. We
shall speak again on the matter."

Chapter 25
A wise man shall promote himself to honor with his words,
and he that hath understanding will please great men."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 20:27

N

OTHING more was said for many days. It was well into
Advent before Sir Kenneth Morgan again found himself in a
setting that permitted private conversation with the king.
He and Tiarnán MacRae had spent several hours that
morning with the king and Seisyll Arilan, reviewing a sheaf
of commissions delivered earlier from the royal chancery, all
requiring the royal assent and seal. The snug withdrawing
room was the perfect refuge from the weather outside, with a
goodly fire on the grate and tapestries hung on the walls to
keep the damp at bay: a favorite place for the king to work in
wintertime. The scent of cinnamon, cloves, and lemons
spiced the air, wafting upward from a pot of mulled wine
warming near the fire.
"Thank you, Seisyll, Tiarnán. I think that will be all for
now," the king said, leaning back in his chair to stretch.
"Kenneth can help me deal with the rest of these. How is
your leg this morning?" he added to Kenneth, as the others
withdrew. "It's a dreadful day outside. Does the cold make
your wound ache?"
Kenneth busied himself gathering up the documents,
trying his best to be casual as he jogged them into a tidier
stack and placed them in front of the king for signature. He
had tried not to think too much about what they had
discussed the last time they spoke privily—and especially,
had tried not to get his hopes up.
"Thank you for asking, Sire. I'm mostly mended, I think. I
rode for an hour yesterday, though I am feeling the effects
today. But I attribute that more to a month out of the saddle
than to the actual injury. In all, I am content."
"And I am happy to hear it." Donal scrawled his signature
to a commission, glanced at the next, then pushed the
remaining pile back to Kenneth. "There must be an easier
way to deal with these. If you'll lay them out in a line, on
that table over there, I'll move along behind you and sign
them. They're the new year appointments, for Twelfth Night
court. I approved them weeks ago."
Kenneth did as he was directed, then fetched a wax jack
and lit it from one of the candles set on the table where they
were working, for the documents must next be sealed. As
Donal moved back to the first document, removing his signet
ring, Kenneth brought the wax, tipping a little of it at the
foot of the first decree.

“Thank you," the king murmured, setting seal to the wax
and then moving along the line with Kenneth. "I've done
some further thinking on that matter we discussed earlier."
He imprinted his seal again. Kenneth had stiffened, the
wax jack in his hands, and turned his gaze cautiously on the
king.
"Sire?"
"I am minded to give you the hand of Lady Alyce de
Corwyn." He looked up as Kenneth froze. “That is what we
were discussing, was it not?"
Kenneth found himself going scarlet, and only belatedly
moved on to the next document, fumbling slightly as he
drizzled the next dollop of wax.
"Sire, I—I had not dared to hope. I am—most grateful, but
this still does not address the question of whether the lady
will have me."
"If I say she'll have you, she'll have you," the king
retorted. "It will be up to you to make the match work.
You're a good man, Kenneth, and I should very much like to
have your sons serve my sons. If they were also half Deryni,
that would please me even more."
"Half Deryni," Kenneth repeated dazedly. "I confess that I
had almost forgotten that."
"That the Lady Alyce is Deryni?" The king snorted. "I
think that means far more to churchmen than to sensible
folk like you and me. It doesn't frighten you, does it?"
"No, of course not," Kenneth replied hastily.
"She'd be an adornment for your arm," the king pointed
out. "And her son will be Duke of Corwyn. Your son would be
Duke of Corwyn, and you would be his principal regent—
which means that you would enjoy all the benefits of being
duke yourself, other than the title. Alas, I can't give you that,
but your descendants would have it."
Kenneth found himself grinning ear-to-ear, hardly able to
take it all in. "That isn't what attracted me, Sire."
"No, of course it isn't. But it doesn't hurt if one's
prospective bride is rich."
'True enough."
"Good. Then, it's settled. I'll have the necessary
documents drawn up. The betrothal can be announced at
Twelfth Night court."

A

LYCE learned of the king's decision several days later, just

before Christmas. Quite unexpectedly, Zoë had been sent to
Morganhall to spend Christmas with her younger sisters and
aunts, so Alyce let herself be caught up in the preparations
of the queen's household for the Christmas and Twelfth
Night festivities to come.
The Llanneddi mountain ponies for the elder princes had
arrived the week before—and one for Krispin as well—so
Duke Richard had organized an equestrian display for the
squires and pages under his tutelage, inviting the queen and
her ladies to observe an impromptu competition.
Alyce was sitting with the queen, watching the young
princes tilt at rings on their new ponies, when the king came
to sit beside her. Somehow, the queen's other ladies had
found things to do that took them out of the royal enclosure.
"A pity it's so cold," Donal said, not taking his eyes from
where Prince Brion was preparing to take another run at the
rings. "Other than that, are you enjoying the afternoon?"
"I am, Sire," Alyce replied. “The princes are riding very
well today."
"So they are," Donal replied. "We have their mother
partially to thank for that." He paused to lift the queen's
hand to his lips in salute. "It was she who insisted that only
Llanneddi ponies would do."
Alyce smiled. "For their size, Sire, they are the finest
mounts one could wish—better, even, than R'Kassans, to my
way of thinking, if only they grew somewhat larger. I had one
when I was young. I adored her."
“There is another who would be adored by you," the king
murmured, smiling as he took her hand in his and kissed it.
"Oh, not I—or, only in the sense that I adore all the beautiful
ladies in my queen's household."
Alyce looked at him sharply, then at the queen, whose
expression declared her exceedingly pleased with herself.
"Alyce, dear, he is trying to tell you that he has chosen
you a husband," she said. "And in that bumbling way of
males, he is trying to be mysterious about it."
Suddenly she glanced out to the field, where Prince Brion
was now galloping down the tilting lane, taking one—two—
three rings in a row. Both his parents had risen to their feet
as he passed, but sadly, he hit the fourth ring a glancing
blow and missed taking it.
"Oh, well done, son!" Richeldis cried, waving her kerchief
and bouncing up and down on her feet. "Donal, he has never
done that well before! Wasn't it a brilliant run?"
The king sat back down, tugging at her to sit as well, but
he was smiling.
"He did well," the king admitted. "Did you not think so,
Lady Alyce?"

Alyce, who had also come to her feet, likewise sank back
to her seat beside the king, still reeling from the queen's
announcement. Surely they could not be referring to Prince
Brion.
"You have chosen me a husband, Sire?" she managed to
murmur.
"I have. He was riding earlier. In fact, you commented on
his horsemanship, and his skill with the lance."
Numbly Alyce made herself review the last few hours, but
no one came immediately to mind. If the man had been
riding at the tilt earlier, it was not likely that he was one of
the much older men at court—for which she was grateful—
but who?
"Alyce," the queen murmured, leaning across the king
conspiratorially, "he's referring to Sir Kenneth Morgan. Did
you not remark that he rode prettily? And I know that the
two of you got on well, while he was convalescing."
Alyce sat back in her chair, somewhat stunned. Though
she had much enjoyed his company, it had never occurred
to her to think of him as a potential husband.
"You needn't look so surprised," the king said. "I owe
Kenneth Morgan my life, more than once—and I must be
certain that Corwyn is in safe hands. When I am gone, I will
lie easier in my grave, knowing that his sons—and yours—
will follow on the ducal throne."
"Oh, pish!" the queen said, with some feeling. "That isn't
what a young maid wants to hear about her future husband.
Besides, that's years away. Have a care for the child's
feelings. It's she who must marry him, after all."
"Hmmm, so she must. But I'm sure he'll make you a fine
husband, my dear. You've seen him ride today—and you
know that he can carry on an intelligent conversation. What
more could a woman want?"

T

HAT night, lying sleepless in her bed, Alyce reflected that,
though her own wishes had little to do with her eventual
fate, she was, in fact, quite content with the king's choice for
her—especially when she considered how differently it might
have gone. Though he might, indeed, be more than twice her
age, Sir Kenneth was kind, intelligent, better read than
most—and the difference in their ages would become
increasingly less apparent as the years passed. Furthermore,
unlike many of the gentlemen of the court, he could converse
on a wide variety of subjects besides battles and coursers
and hounds.

But he did not converse with her of anything the next
day, or even the next—though she watched for an
opportunity to speak with him. In truth, the king seemed to
have taken a perverse pleasure in sending him off on
obscure errands, as the feasts of Christmas approached.
Indeed, just before Christmas itself, he disappeared
altogether for several days.
She wondered whether he might have gone to Morganhall,
to visit Zoë and his other daughters and sisters. She
wondered whether Zoë yet knew—darling Zoë, who briefly
had been her sister and now, it appeared, was to be her
stepdaughter as well. Though she longed to write and tell her
friend, she had refrained, knowing it was Kenneth's place to
tell his daughter first. Neither could she write to Vera, not
until the betrothal was announced.
Christmas Eve came and went, with no word, and
Christmas itself. Nor was Kenneth present on Saint
Stephen's Day morning, when the king and his family
usually made a public appearance, processing down to the
cathedral in their festive attire.
After Mass, if the weather was not too bad, it was the
king's custom to hold informal audience on the cathedral
steps, where citizens of Rhemuth might approach with
petitions. To one side, the queen and her children always
distributed largesse to the poor: clothing, and parcels of
food, and a silver penny to each mother who approached
with a babe in arms.
That Stephen's Day morning, Alyce was among the ladies
attending the queen, helping distribute the gifts to the poor.
The day was bright and sunny, if very cold. It was toward
noon, when the largesse had nearly been exhausted and the
servants were beginning to pack up to leave, that she
glanced down into the square, at the bottom of the cathedral
steps, and noticed Sir Kenneth and Zoë sitting on a fine pair
of red-bay R'Kassan barbs.
She straightened to look more closely. Kenneth was
wearing a sumptuous cloak of fine black wool lined with
sable, the edges gold-embroidered with a double bordure of
flory-counterflory, and had a velvet cap well pulled down on
his sandy hair. He was fiddling with the ends of his reins,
but Zoë was looking right at her, and lifted a gloved hand to
wave furiously when she saw she had caught Alyce's eye.
Alyce waved back, and started down the stairs toward
them, but it was Kenneth who dismounted and hurried up
the stairs to meet her, offering her a tentative smile as he
doffed his cap and inclined his head in greeting.
"Good morrow, my lady," he murmured. "Alleluia, the Son
is born."
"He is born indeed, alleluia," Alyce replied, with the ritual
response.

"My apologies for being absent without word," Kenneth
said quickly. "I had urgent business with my daughters." He
glanced around them, then gestured awkwardly toward the
cathedral door. "May we speak inside?"
She inclined her head nervously and preceded him up the
steps and through the postern door, her heart pounding in
her breast. She had known this moment must come. Faced
with it now, she was not certain how she felt.
Not speaking, Kenneth led her through the narthex and
into the nave, glancing around and then guiding her toward
a side chapel that appeared to be unoccupied. When they
had entered, he pulled shut the barred gate of wrought iron,
not looking at her, then went to the rack of votive lights
before the statue of a saint. Cocking her head, Alyce realized
that it was Saint Albadore, a patron of lost things. As she
drifted closer to the little altar to join him, she saw that he
was lighting one of the candles stuck into a pan of fine sand.
"Have you lost something, Sir Kenneth?" she asked softly.
"I have," he admitted. He lifted his wax spill from the
lighted candle to blow it out. "I have lost my heart to one of
the queen's ladies." He carefully set the spill back into a pot
of them, still not looking at her. "Fortunately, she is also one
of the king's wards. And to my utter amazement, he has
given me leave to ask for her hand in marriage."
"To ask?" she repeated neutrally, though unaccountably,
her heart had begun to flutter in her breast. "And suppose
that she were not to agree?"
He looked at her then, unreadable emotion flickering
across his calm, earnest face, and lowered his eyes. "A less
honest man would say that it did not matter," he said softly,
"for she would be bound to accept the king's wishes in this
regard, and to marry where he chooses."
"And what would you say, Sir Kenneth?" she said very
quietly. "For I know that you are an honest man."
He turned his face toward the statue of Saint Albadore,
biting at his lower lip.
"I would say that I hope she would agree. I would say that
I have come to regard her with great tenderness and respect,
and that I would cherish her all the remaining days of my
life." He turned his gaze to her longingly. "I would say that I
know I am old enough to be her father, and that I have little
to recommend myself so far as fame or fortune are
concerned. Nor am I the dashing young swain she might
have dreamed of. But if she were to accept my suit, she
would find me a kind and loving father to our eventual
children, and she would never want for loyalty or
compassion."
She had been Reading him as he spoke, and knew that
he believed what he was telling her. She had prepared

herself for this moment since her conversation with the
king, for she knew that he desired this match. She had not
expected to be so touched by Sir Kenneth's words.
"These are all commendable virtues in any man," she
said. "Indeed, I should think that any woman courted by
such a man would regard herself as extremely fortunate."
"Would she?" he murmured, hope lighting his sea-gray
eyes. "Would you?'
She ventured him a tiny, nervous smile.
"Sir Kenneth, we are both aware of the king's wishes in
this matter—and you know full well that, if he has decided to
give you my hand, then I am obliged to abide by his
decision." Seeing him start to turn away, she reached out to
take one of his hands in hers, clasping it between her two.
"Having said that, however, I want you to know that,
though I have dreaded this moment since the day my father
died—knowing that my marriage would be arranged to best
suit the needs of the Crown—I find that, now that it is here, I
am both relieved and content that it should be you, asking
for my hand."
“Truly?" he managed to whisper.
She gave him a demure glance from under lowered
lashes, along with a dimpled smile. 'Truly. I must confess
that, in my worst nightmares, I feared the king might give
me to some horrible, elderly curmudgeon residing in the
wilds of Meara or the Connait. But you are hardly such a
man."
Still disbelieving, he dared to take both her hands in his,
searching her blue eyes with his grayer ones as a faint smile
began to lift the corners of his mouth.
"You did not find me a difficult patient, while I was
recovering from my wound?" he asked.
"No more difficult than anyone in discomfort, and
impatient to be healed and off about his life. In truth, our
hours together were a welcome diversion from my usual
duties in the schoolroom, dealing constantly with children
under the age of ten—and I greatly enjoyed the opportunity
to delve deeper into the king's library, in my quest to keep
your mind occupied while your body healed.
"Or—no, that is only partially true," she amended. "It was
not my pleasure alone, for I do believe you were as eager as I
to browse in the old accounts. I came to admire and respect
your mind in those weeks of your convalescence. To be
courted by you now—and to have the king bless your
aspiration—is a development I could not have dared to hope
for."
"You truly do not mind that I am so much older than
you?" he asked.
She laughed gently, shaking her head. "Truly I do not, my

lord—though it has crossed my mind that your daughters
may find it passing strange, to be acquiring a stepmother
who is hardly older than they. I assume that will have been
the reason for your recent absence, to inform them."
He allowed himself an easy smile. "Zoë is delighted, as
you must have gathered from her greeting outside. Geill and
Alazais are unperturbed—and look forward to meeting you in
due course. They are fifteen and thirteen," he added, "and
quite certain that they are very grown up, indeed."
He flushed slightly in embarrassment and ducked his
head briefly, then bent to kiss the back of her hand before
he released it. "We'd best join the others, before they begin to
talk."
"Do you think they will not talk anyway, when they learn
that we are to wed?" she said teasingly. "Oh, they will, my
lord—and hardly kindly, some of them. It is one thing for a
Deryni heiress to reside quietly in the king's household,
under his protection, and even to make discreet use of her
powers in the King's service. It is quite another for her to
take a husband, and to bear others of her kind. There are
some who will resent this match."
Kenneth allowed himself a faint smile. "If they resent it, it
will also be because they envy me," he said. "You must wed
someone, Alyce. Mayhap, if you marry me, there will be less
resentment against our eventual sons.
"Or daughters," Alyce murmured, thinking of Zoë and the
sisters she had not yet met. "You could sire more
daughters."
A flicker of pain came briefly over Kenneth's face. "I have
fathered sons," he said quietly. "Sadly, none of them
survived. Zoë's mother . . . was not strong."
"I'm sorry," Alyce whispered, Reading his pain as she
lightly touched his hand. "I shall try to do a better job. Sons
are important to me as well—and to the king. He will expect
us to produce a proper heir for Corwyn, you know."
He smiled faintly and covered her hand with his, lifting it
to press it tenderly to his lips. "Dear, gentle Alyce, you are a
brave young woman, to take me on."
She laughed gently and shook her head. "No, you are
brave, my lord, to take on a Deryni wife. Whatever else may
befall, I think it very unlikely that we shall ever find life
together boring."
He, too, laughed at that, still half disbelieving his good
fortune, and the two of them made their way back out to the
cathedral steps, where the royal party were mounting up,
preparing to depart. Zoë' had dismounted during their
absence, and came flying up the steps to throw herself into
Alyce's arms with a glad cry.
"Can it really be true?" she whispered.

Laughing, Alyce returned her embrace, as Sir Kenneth
looked on indulgently.
"More true than either of us could have dreamed," she
replied. "And right glad am I of it. Will you mind that we
shall be mother and daughter as well as sisters?"
Laughing, Zoë shook her head. "You shall always be my
sister, darling Alyce. And I shall be happy and honored to
own you as my stepmother as well. Papa, we are truly blest,"
she added, shifting her embrace to her father. "I hope you
may be even half as happy as you have made me."
"Well, with that for a recommendation, we can hardly go
wrong, can we?" Kenneth replied, bestowing a kiss on the
cheek first of Zoë and then Alyce.

Chapter 26
"For I was my father's son,
tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother." –
PROVERBS 4:3

I

T had been a foregone conclusion that the betrothal of Sir
Kenneth Morgan and Lady Alyce de Corwyn at that Twelfth
Night court of 1090 would meet with less than universal
approval—not because of any failing on Sir Kenneth's part,
but because his affianced bride was Deryni. But no one
could have predicted the terrible unfolding of other hatreds,
as the day progressed.
The day began with the usual sequence of ceremonials
customarily conducted at Twelfth Night court: knightings,
squirings, and the enrollment of new pages for training in
the royal household. Five new knights received the accolade,
from diverse parts of the kingdom, and seven senior pages
were promoted to squire.
Krispin MacAthan was among four new pages enrolled
that day, finally allowed to exchange the play-tabard he had
worn in aspiration for the full page's livery such as Prince
Brion had donned the previous year. Both the young prince
and the boy's mother had made much of young Krispin, to
the notable disapproval of a delegation from Carthane.
However, this was hardly surprising, since it was widely
known that Jessamy and her son were Deryni, and Carthane
was the principal venue in which Bishop Oliver de Nore
continued to pursue his campaign of harassment against
Deryni who stepped at all out of line.
As the king placed the scarlet page's tabard over Krispin's
head, he was aware of the minor flurry of disgruntlement
generated by this public distinction accorded a Deryni, but
he also noted its source: several men in the party of a portly
baron called Deldour, who had long been known for his
antipathy toward Deryni. The man had been a minor irritant
for years down in Carthane, his name periodically linked
with the odd incident of Deryni persecution—but nothing
serious. He was mostly a complainer and a boor.
His plaint this year, when the time came for presenting
petitions for the king's justice, had to do with grazing rights
along the Eirian, far from the troubles in Nyford. While he
was known to be friends with Oliver de Nore, one of the
itinerant bishops active in the ongoing persecution of
Deryni—and had even taken Bishop Oliver's younger brother
into his service as a chaplain—Deldour himself was
considered to be a mere irritant rather than any particular
threat. The presence of the bishop's brother hinted at
potentials for more serious unpleasantness—and Zoë noted

him, and recognized him as Alyce's old nemesis from Arcen-Ciel, Father Septimus de Nore—but she was not about to
intrude on the betrothal of her father and her dearest friend
by bringing up past unpleasantness.
Lord Deldour's ire had only increased at the feast that
followed court, when the king summoned Sir Kenneth
Morgan and Lady Alyce de Corwyn to the high table and
there joined their hands, lauding Kenneth's faithfulness and
valor and, in token of his esteem, declaring his intention that
the two should wed. A royal chaplain had been holding
himself in readiness, and came at the king's beckoning to
seal the betrothal with the blessing of the Church, to much
astonished murmuring among the assembled lords and
ladies and a renewed wave of mutterings within Lord
Deldour's party.
For the most part, however, Sir Kenneth Morgan's change
in fortune was lauded as just recompense for faithful
services rendered, and brought him many a heartfelt
expression of congratulation from friends and colleagues.
The king observed this reaction with no little relief as the
active feasting gave way to divers entertainments: minstrels
and dancing, a troupe of jugglers and a fire-eater, and even a
masque prettily played by some of the ladies of the queen's
household and several of the older squires, recounting the
courtship of Malcolm and Roisian.
Jared Earl of Kierney played the part of King Malcolm,
wearing a tinsel crown that looked a good deal like the real
state crown that Donal had worn earlier at his official court,
with crosses and leaves intertwined; and his own betrothed,
Lady Vera Howard, briefly returned to court for Twelfth
Night, played the role of Roisian of Meara with sweetness
and verve. When "King Malcolm" finally swept his princess
into his arms and kissed her heartily, in front of Sir Jovett
Chandos dressed as an archbishop in a tall miter, all the
audience applauded wildly, shouting and hooting with
delight, for the widower Jared and the lovely and spritely
Vera were to be married in early May, and the match was
popular.
Alyce and Kenneth watched from seats that had been
vacated for them at the high table, at the king's right hand,
Zoë sitting happily to her father's other side. Dancing
followed the masque, interspersed with more boisterous
minstrelsy, and the freely flowing wine slowly shifted the
atmosphere from decorous to earthy, as couples sought out
the shadows of hall and cloister garden. No doubt reminded
of the Twelfth Night previous, Zoë grew more wistful as the
night wore, and made no objection when her father quietly
opined that perhaps it was time to retire.
When the three of them reached the door to the room that
she and Alyce shared, she accepted her father's gentle kiss
and then disappeared inside. Alyce would have followed her,
but Kenneth caught her hand.

"Stay a moment," he murmured, drawing her back from
the door. "She will be missing your brother, and probably
would like to weep a while in privacy."
Saying nothing, for she knew Kenneth was right, Alyce
only nodded and let herself be led into the recess of the next
closed doorway, her hand still in his. She, too, was missing
her brother, and all the promise lost with his passing—and
the night had made her far more aware of the weight that
had passed to her own shoulders, with his death. When her
own tears started to flow, Kenneth drew her into the circle of
his arms and gently pressed her to his chest, simply holding
her while she wept, one hand caressing the tumble of her
hair.
She began to reclaim her composure after a few minutes,
lifting her head to knuckle at her tears with the back of one
hand, a little embarrassed by her lapse.
"I'm sorry," she whispered, daring to look at him. "I
suppose I needed a good weep as much as Zoë."
"You are surely entitled to weep," he murmured.
He caught her left hand and pressed it his lips, tasting
the salt of her tears. As he lifted his eyes to hers, she felt his
thumb caressing the ring he had given her only hours
earlier, at their betrothal—and the subtle tightening of the
arm that still surrounded her, almost a spasm, as if marking
some momentous shift in their relationship.
"Alyce," he dared to whisper, so softly that she almost
could not hear him, "I should very much like to kiss you."
Her heart had begun thumping in her breast, and her
eyes anxiously searched his as she managed a faint nod.
Releasing her hand, he brushed reverent fingertips along the
curve of her cheek, then gently tilted her chin upward to
receive his chaste kiss.
At least it began that way, though that first kiss soon
gave way to another that was not chaste at all. The touch of
his lips seemed to ignite a delicious tingling from head to
toe, and her arms slid up around his neck, pulling him
closer. A tiny moan escaped her as his lips nuzzled briefly
down one side of her neck and then back to her mouth, his
embrace hardening.
She could feel her body answering as he kissed her again,
far more thoroughly this time. When, finally, he drew back
with a shudder, turning his face slightly away from her, she
was trembling and breathless, weak-kneed, and only
reluctantly let her hands slip back onto his chest as he
dared to meet her gaze again.
"I—think, perhaps, you should go to your room now," he
said quietly. "For if you stay here much longer, dear Alyce,
I—cannot guarantee that you shall go later with your virtue
intact."

She had dared to Truth-Read him as he spoke, and
suddenly realized by what little margin he had pulled himself
back from taking full advantage of her inexperience. And
while her trembling body still declared its willingness—nay,
its eagerness—to resume the delicious dalliance of the past
few minutes, this was hardly the time nor the place.
Sufficient, for now, to know that their eventual union would
be no mere coupling out of dynastic duty, but something far
more. Just what, she was not certain, but for now, both of
them would have to be content to wait to discover it.
"You're right, of course," she whispered, stepping a little
back from him, though her one hand lingered on his sleeve
before surrendering the touch of him. "I should see if Zoë is
all right."
Smiling tremulously, she kissed the fingertips of her right
hand, then touched them to his lips as she murmured,
"Good night, dear Kenneth."
With that, she made her way quickly back to the door of
her own room and went inside, closing and barring it after
her.

V

ERY early the next morning, shortly after first light, a furious
pounding on the door brought both Alyce and Zoë boltupright in their bed.
"What on earth?" Zoë murmured.
Alyce was already tumbling from the bed and padding
toward the door, pulling back the bolt, wrenching the door
wide enough to reveal a very frightened-looking squire—one
of those promoted from page the day before.
"Lady Alyce, you're to come to the stable yard at once," he
blurted. "The king commands it."
"The king? Whatever for?" Zoë asked, coming up behind
Alyce.
"There's been an accident, miss," the boy replied.
"What kind of accident?" Alyce wanted to know.
"Just come, my lady, please!" The boy looked scared and
desperate. "I'm not to give you any further details."
"Why ever not— ?" Zoë began.
"We'd best get dressed," Alyce cut in, starting to close the
door and then looking at the boy again. "It's Trevor, isn't it?"
"Yes, my lady." The boy immediately calmed at this
remembrance of his name. "You'd best wrap up warm, my
lady. It's bitter cold out there. And poor Krispin—"

He broke off, frightened-looking, biting at his lip, and
Alyce exchanged a glance with Zoë before closing the door.
"What do you suppose happened?" Zoë whispered, as she
and Alyce hastily pulled on warm woolen gowns over their
nightdresses, then set about donning stockings and sturdy
boots.
"I don't know," said Alyce. "But Trevor was in a dreadful
state."
They finished dressing, pulled on warm cloaks and caps
and gloves, and raced down to the stable yard right behind
Trevor. But to their surprise, he led them on toward the
secondary yard, where about a dozen men were clustered
around the well-head next to a large watering trough. The
king and his brother were watching Sir Tiarnán MacRae and
Sir Kenneth help a very young page out of the well itself,
where a rope disappeared over the edge.
When the boy had cleared the edge, to be bundled in a
warm cloak by Richard, two burly stablemen started to haul
on the rope, obviously raising something heavier than a
mere bucket of water. The king's physician and Duke
Richard's battle-surgeon, Master Donnard, were there as
well. All of them looked dreadful.
Pushing down a queasy sensation in the pit of her
stomach, Alyce made her way to the side of Sir Jiri Redfearn,
Zoë close behind her.
"Jiri, what's happened?" she murmured.
Jiri shook his head, never taking his eyes from the
wellhead. "Bad business, my lady. Apparently, one of the
pages fell down the well and drowned."
"Dear God, which one?" Zoë murmured.
"I'm afraid it's Lady Jessamy's lad, milady," Jiri said.
"We've been looking for him most of the night."
"But—how could he fall down the well?" Alyce asked.
"Surely it's too narrow."
Jiri shrugged. "We wondered that, too. He went in
headfirst. They had to send another boy down to tie a rope
around his ankles. Only way to get him out."
As he said that, two booted feet appeared over the edge of
the well-head—a child's feet—and a flash of crimson page's
livery, just before the men closed in around him to block any
further view by the two young women.
"Stay here!" Jiri ordered, turning briefly to face them and
pointing emphatically at the ground, before heading toward
the well at a brisk trot.
Alyce and Zoë could not hear what the men were saying,
but the king himself came to wrap his cloak around the little
body as it emerged fully from the well, letting Richard and
Kenneth help lay the boy on the ground. The two physicians

moved in quickly, but only crouched briefly before
reluctantly withdrawing, shaking their heads. Master
Donnard looked particularly stunned. After a moment, the
king himself came over to where the two young women
waited, his face white and drawn. His glance at Zoë allowed
for no appeal.
"Leave us, please. I would have a word in private with
Lady Alyce."
When Zoë had withdrawn, wandering closer to where two
young pages were anxiously craning their necks to see more
of the fate of their young friend, the king turned back to
Alyce, though not without a backward look over his shoulder
in the direction of the well.
"Dear Alyce, I must ask a very great favor of you," he said
in a very low voice. "There's been murder done here during
the night, and I will know who is responsible."
"It was Krispin?" she murmured, stunned. "He was
murdered?"
Donal closed his eyes briefly and nodded. "Aye, and worse
than just murder. And it is I who must tell his mother. And
because she is his mother, I cannot ask her to do what I now
must ask of you."
"What would you have of me, Sire?" she whispered.
"If Morian were here, I would ask him, but—" Donal made
a gesture of dismissal of the thought with one hand and
returned his stunned gaze to her face, almost as if he had
not heard her. "Alyce, I do not know the extent of your
training, but I am hoping it will be enough to do what needs
to be done. Do you know of a procedure called a deathreading?"
Cautiously she gave a nod.
"And have you had training in its use?"
She allowed herself a slight, ironic smile. "I know the
theory, Sire. But I had little opportunity to apply it, at the
convent. However, I am willing to do what I can."
He sighed and gave a nod. "I shall have the area cleared,
then, so that you may work undisturbed—for I am given to
understand that much can sometimes be learned from the
place where the crime took place. And I would not expose
you to any more notoriety than is necessary, by asking you
to work before witnesses who, quite probably, would see
such magery as a demonstration of demonic powers. Sir
Kenneth, I believe, is somewhat accustomed to seeing you
work, from having had you tend his injury last autumn?"
"Yes, Sire."
Donal allowed himself a snort of something approaching
relief. "That is well, since you are to be wed. I shall ask him
to attend you. Will you need other assistance?"

"His daughter and I are very close, Sire," Alyce ventured.
"If I have the assistance of those two, and the yard is
cleared, I shall do my best to discover what I may." She
could not ask for Vera, for to do so might reveal her secret.
"Excellent. I will have the identity of his killers, Alyce,"
the king warned, fixing her with his gaze. "They used him
most cruelly before they threw him down that well. Do you
understand what I am saying?"
Speechless, she gave him a nod, trying to keep at bay the
image that had flashed into her mind's eye.
"Good. I would know whether it was that or the drowning
that killed him. In either case, such men do not deserve to
live!"
She bowed her head in acceptance of his instructions. "I
shall learn as much as possible, Sire."
Donal sighed and touched her hand with his. "Thank you.
It is well—or, as well as it can be, given what has happened.
I go now to tell Lady Jessamy. When you are finished here,
you might come to her, for I think she shall need the healing
sleep that comes best from one of your kind."
"Yes, Sire."

F

IVE minutes later, the yard had been cleared and the two
stable-arch doors closed, with men standing outside to
prevent intrusion. On so bitter a winter day, it was not likely
that many would seek the lower gardens or the tilting yard
beyond. Kenneth had brought a low bench from the stable
and set it close beside the shrouded form of the dead boy.
There Alyce sank down, Zoë beside her, Kenneth kneeling on
the opposite side.
"This will not be pleasant," Kenneth warned.
'That's why I am here," she said softly. "Let me see him."
At her nod, Kenneth drew back the cloak from the boy's
head. The sable hair had streamed away from his face as
they pulled him from the water, and lay matted and
stiffening with frost at the top of his head, bits of straw
spiking it here and there. The gray eyes were open and
staring, the fair skin marred by several raw-looking scuffs,
probably incurred as he fell down the well. Any bleeding had
been washed away by a night in the water.
"Show me the rest," Alyce whispered.
Biting at his lip, Kenneth flipped the rest of the cloak
back off the boy's crimson-clad body, which lay in an icy
puddle still leaching outward from the water-logged page's

livery of which he had been so proud. Again, there were
bits of straw stuck to his clothing and freezing in the puddle,
and ice was beginning to glitter on his clothing. His scarlet
britches were bunched around his knees. Though they had
folded his arms across his chest after pulling him from the
well, the hands were badly scuffed and raw, some of the
nails broken, and several of the fingers jutted at odd angles,
as did one wrist.
"Dear God, he did fight them," Alyce breathed.
"Aye, but what could a child his age do against grown
men?" Kenneth murmured, his voice catching. "And to use
him thus—"
Choking off a sob, he drew the cloak back over the boy's
body, leaving only the head exposed.
"Get on with it, then," he said roughly. "Find out who has
done this to him!"
She slid to her knees beside Krispin's head, stripping off
her gloves and handing them to Zoë, then laid her hands on
the boy's head, feeling in his hair for skull injuries, opening
his mouth to look at his teeth. One of the bottom ones was
missing, but she thought the gap might have marked a shed
milk tooth rather than one lost during his ordeal. He had
several lacerations that might have occurred in the fall down
the well, and one depressed fracture, but given the probable
sequence of his assault, she thought it unlikely that the blow
had killed him before he could drown.
Hoping for a clue to that, at least, she slipped her hands
under the cloak and inside his shirt, probing with her
powers to check the lungs—yes, filled with fluid, so he had
still been alive when he went into the water. But if God had
been merciful, the boy had been unconscious by then, or
soon after. She hoped it had been quick.
"All right, that's the easy part," she murmured, shifting
her hands back to his head.
Without further remark, she took several deep breaths
and closed her eyes, shifting into trance and extending her
mind into what remained of that of Krispin MacAthan. To
her surprise, his shields had been fairly well developed for
one so young. But in death, little remained of what
protection those shields had given him. Slipping past them
easily, she began casting for recent memories that she knew,
focusing on the glittering festivities of the Twelfth Night
court, and Krispin's personal highlight of receiving his
official livery as one of the king's pages.
He had been so proud—had been looking forward to this
day for several years, and especially since Prince Brion had
assumed the royal livery the year before. He had served at
table early in the feast, bringing towels and basins of warm
water to the worthies at the high table when they first sat
down: the traditional first table-service of any new page,

offering hospitality to a guest. He had served the queen
and then his own mother, both of whom accepted his service
with grave attention.
He had enjoyed the feast then, sampling the dainties
brought by the older boys and stuffing himself with his
favorite things. A little later, he had slipped out to the
stables to visit his new Llanneddi pony—the gift of his
mother, Alyce, and Zoë, so that the lad would have a mount
as good as those of his princely companions.
That had been the beginning of a fatal sequence of events.
He had been picking out the pony's feet, bracing each dainty
hoof against his lap while he used a hoof pick to rake out
muck from the frog.
Excessive zeal seemed, in turn, to have loosened the shoe
on the off hind hoof, but he had promised the pony that they
would see the farrier in the morning, and even made up a
song about clip-clopping across the stable yard to have it
fixed. When the two strangers appeared on the other side of
the stall door, drawn by his singing and his chatter, they
had seemed friendly enough, and had even offered to come
into the stall to take a closer look at the delinquent shoe.
Though she tried not to tense, Alyce braced herself for
what she knew must surely be coming next, what she did
not wish to know, for the critical moments were surely
approaching. And unlike the few death-readings she had
performed in the past, usually on bodies come to the convent
several days after death—too late to really winkle out much
detail—this death was very recent. Furthermore, overnight
immersion in the cold water had greatly retarded the entire
dispersal process. There was plenty of detail—far more than
anyone should have to endure, and especially a child so
young.
The two men had come into the stall and closed the gate.
Once inside, under cover of admiring the pony and tsking
over the loose shoe, the pair had overwhelmed the boy before
he even was aware he was in danger, one of them clamping a
heavy hand over mouth and nose, stifling any chance of
drawing breath to cry out as the men roughly bore him down
into the straw and began fumbling at his breeches.
Unable to breathe, the boy's resistance quickly had spun
into darkness—from which he was shortly roused by the
pain, as his assailants took turns using him as a stallion
serviced a mare—the only blurred reference his stunned
awareness could summon for what they were doing to him.
He had fought them—oh, how he had fought!—flailing
with his heels, squirming, biting—anything to escape, to
hurt them, to try to make them stop. He had even, through
his fog of pain, somehow known that he must try to summon
his special powers to defend himself—but he was yet too
young, and too unskilled, and could not concentrate, for the
pain. And every time he thought he might be about to break

free, they had cut off his breathing again, or cuffed him
into senselessness.
How long it had lasted, Alyce had no firm sense. But
when the pain eventually stopped, there had been another
dressed all in black, who had pulled the other men away at
first, and turned the boy over in the straw—and recoiled at
the sight of his bruised and tear-stained face.
But his supposed benefactor had turned out to be no
benefactor at all, and hissed at the other two about "damned
Deryni brat!" and "What were you thinking?" just before a
powerful hand locked around his throat and squeezed him
into darkness once again.
One last time Krispin MacAthan had managed to fight his
way back to consciousness, only to find himself being lifted
onto the edge of a low wall made of stone—no, the opening of
a well, he realized with horror, as they stuffed his arms and
head into the opening. He had started to struggle again,
trying to cry out, but a heavy blow to the side of his head
had cut off the beginning of his cry for help.
The last thing he knew, he was flailing for his life as he
skidded down the well-shaft, desperately trying to slow his
descent with hands, with fingernails, with booted feet that
could find no purchase against the slimy stone. The shock of
hitting the cold water far below momentarily restored his
clear-headedness, but it was too late. His reflex gasp only
sucked water into his lungs; and trapped head-down by the
narrowness of the well-shaft, unable to twist upright, his
only chance of survival ebbed with his fading consciousness.
That final darkness had Alyce gasping, too, as she
surfaced from trance, coughing to clear the memory of the
cold death that had flooded into Krispin's lungs. As she
roused, Zoë threw her arms around her, holding her close,
and Kenneth leaned across the boy's body to grasp her wrist.
"Breathe, Alyce!" he ordered. "You're all right. Just
breathe."
She did, forcing herself to take a few deep, steadying
breaths, then shakily looked up at the two of them, father
and daughter.
'There were three of them," she managed to whisper,
forcing order and distance on what she had seen and felt.
'Two were men-at-arms, I think. They had him first. But it
seems to have been the third man's idea to throw him down
the well. And no, he wasn't yet dead, at that point. He
drowned."
"Could you identify the men?" Kenneth asked.
"If I had suspects to question, I could certainly tell
whether they were lying. There was something about the
third man. .. ."
Casting back for his image, she closed her eyes to bring it

into focus—and opened them with a start as she realized
that she knew him.
"Dear God, it was Septimus de Nore!"
"Lord Deldour's priest? Are you sure?" Kenneth asked.
She nodded. "Absolutely. He was one of the chaplains at
Arc-en-Ciel, when I first went there. I had several run-ins
with him. You remember him, Zoë."
Zoë nodded. "He was terrible. And he hated Deryni."
"And who was he with yesterday?" Alyce persisted. "Lord
Deldour, who also hates Deryni." New images came into
focus in her stunned mind. "That's what the badges were on
the other men's tunics. They were Deldour's men." She
swept her gaze numbly toward the stable. "Have they already
left?"
"I would be very surprised if they'd stayed around,"
Kenneth said, getting to his feet. "You're sure about this,
Alyce?" he asked, looking down at her. "Deldour is a
powerful man, and the priest's brother is a bishop."
"I know who and what they are," Alyce said coldly. "And
yes, I'm sure."

Chapter 27
"Blame not before thou hast examined the truth;
understand first, and then rebuke."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 11:7

K

ENNETH'S quick inquiries in the main stable yard confirmed
that, yes, Lord Deldour's party had left the night before, said
to be headed south out along the Carthane road. While a
cavalry troop made ready to ride, Kenneth told Duke Richard
what had been discovered. Delegating Kenneth to take the
news to the king, Richard himself mounted up and took out
the troop designated to apprehend and return Lord Deldour
and those in his company, especially the priest Septimus de
Nore.
Once they had gone, Kenneth pressed Alyce for a fuller
account of what she had learned, then passed that
information on to the king, sparing her that. Meanwhile,
women from the queen's household tenderly received the
body of the murdered Krispin MacAthan, helping his mother
wash away the dirt and blood and dressing him in fresh
page's livery before laying him out, at her request, in her
own bed, where the women would keep watch and say
prayers for his soul.
Later that night, numbed by her loss, Jessamy asked
Alyce to join her in her deathwatch, sitting rigid beside her
son's body, wordlessly stroking his hand as tears rolled
down her cheeks. Though she asked, as a mother must,
regarding what had been discovered in her son's deathreading, Alyce declined to add to Jessamy's grief by going
into overmuch detail, only assuring her that the perpetrators
would be brought to justice.
The king was not in evidence that night, being closeted
with his council regarding what should be done when the
miscreants were brought in. Whatever Donal's own feelings
in the matter, any public display of his grief was carefully
tempered to only that expected of one who has seen brutality
done to any child. Of his true kinship with the murdered
boy, he dared speak to no one, not even Jessamy, in her
present state.
Richard and his men did not return that night, but they
rode into the yard at Rhemuth Castle the following morning,
the eighth of January, with an irate Lord Deldour, Father
Septimus de Nore, and Deldour's six men-at-arms under
heavy guard. Richard had given Deldour no specifics of the
reason for the summons back to Rhemuth, mentioning only
that the king had recalled certain business that he wished to
discuss with the Carthane lord. Deldour was livid, but
Richard had refused to be moved. None of the Carthane

party looked happy as they drew rein in the yard and
dismounted.
They were even less happy when they found themselves
disarmed, Lord Deldour as well—not restrained, but escorted
forthwith to the king's withdrawing room behind the dais in
the great hall. Deldour complained all the way, protesting
his innocence of any wrong-doing, but he fell suddenly silent
as he was admitted to the royal presence.
Two chairs of state had been set before the fireplace for
the king and queen, who both were dressed in funereal
black, both wearing crowns. The two courtiers standing
behind them likewise wore black, as well as the young
woman standing beside the queen. Ranged along both side
walls of the room were archers—eight of them, black crepe
banding their upper arms and with arrows nocked to their
short recurve bows—each choosing a target as Richard
closed the door behind them and stood with his back against
it, one hand on the hilt of his sword.
"What on earth is the meaning of this?" Deldour asked,
most of his former belligerence evaporating as the gravity of
the situation became apparent.
"I, in turn, might ask the same question," the king
replied.
"A child was murdered here two nights past. Brutally.
Obscenely. By two of your men. And that man condoned and
finished the job." His finger stabbed at Septimus de Nore.
"I don't know what you're talking about!" Septimus
blustered.
"Do not further disgrace your cloth by a lie," Donal said
calmly. The only remaining question is, which of the six
behind you brutalized the boy?"
"This is preposterous!" Deldour blurted. "What on earth
would make you concoct such charges?"
"Ask him if the charges are false," Donal replied, pointing
randomly at one of the men-at-arms. "Did you participate in
the rape and murder of one of my pages?"
The man went white, looking wildly at the other men as
he fell to his knees, lifting his joined hands to the king in
trembling entreaty.
"Sire, I swear I know nothing of this!" he blurted. "I swear
to you, on my mother's life—"
"I do not want your mother's life!" the king snapped. "But
I will have the lives of the men who did this. How about
you?" He stabbed his finger at another white-faced man. "Did
you do it?"
The man melted to his knees, speechless with terror.
"Speak up, man. One word is sufficient: yes or no."
"N-no, Sire," the man whispered.

"And you?" The royal glare shifted to the man directly
behind the nay-sayer.
"I am innocent, Sire," the man said defiantly. "What kind
of man would murder a child?"
"Two of the men in this room," Donal replied, his eyes
narrowing. "But let us see how many of them we have
uncovered thus far. Lady Alyce?"
As he turned his head in her direction, Alyce moved softly
behind the chairs of state to stand at the king's right hand.
With her fair hair covered by a close-wrapped veil like the
queen's, the men in custody had paid her scant attention
until now. But she saw recognition lighting in their eyes as
she moved, remembering her from her Twelfth Night
betrothal, and naked fear and even loathing flickered among
them.
"The second man is lying, Sire," she said quietly. "And his
accomplice will be one of the three you have not yet put to
the question."
The guilty man gave a sob, cringing back on his hunkers
and covering his face with his hands. Consternation stirred
immediately among the others, stilled only when the
bowmen raised their weapons and half-drew in warning.
Lord Deldour was staring at the guilty man as if he suddenly
had sprouted horns, even shying back from the two men
who had been cleared, as they scuttled sideways on their
knees, distancing themselves from their wretched comrade.
Septimus de Nore had gone even paler in his black
cassock, though he had stood his ground thus far. As the
king swept his gaze over the remaining suspects, the three of
them sank raggedly to their knees, white faces averted,
cringing both from fear of the king's wrath and the even
more dangerous scrutiny of the woman whose blood they
now remembered.
"Ask him again, Sire," Alyce said softly, indicating the
guilty man with a jut of her chin.
"No, you ask him this time," the king replied, his voice
hard and cold. "Be very specific, and use whatever
persuasion you deem necessary."
She looked at him sharply, for she did not think it wise to
be blatant about her powers in front of hostile witnesses.
But even as she balked at the prospect, a way around it
occurred to her.
"Very well, Sire," she murmured, returning her gaze to the
guilty man.
He cringed anew, beginning to whimper, but she only
continued to look at him until he glanced up again—and
found himself snared in her eyes.
"What is your name?" she asked quietly.

"A-Alvin de Marco," he managed to whisper.
"Thank you." She inclined her head to him, aware that all
eyes were now upon her. "Alvin de Marco, you have nothing
to fear from me, for it is merely my gift to know when a man
tells the truth—and when he lies. It is the wrath of the king
you should fear, in answer for your crime—and God's
judgement, at that final reckoning, if you do not repent of
your sins and purge yourself of your guilt."
"Do not you presume to lecture him about anything to do
with God!" Septimus blurted, livid with anger. "What has a
Deryni to do with God? What worth is a Deryni's word? How
dare you?"
She glanced at him mildly, staying the king's intervention
with a slightly raised palm. "I am no longer your student,
that you may lecture me, Father. It is not I who am on trial
here."
"This is no trial!" Septimus retorted. "You have no proof
that any of us had a hand in whatever happened here!"
"You know full well what happened here," the king cut in,
"and I will decide what is sufficient proof. Proceed, my lady."
Inclining her head, Alyce returned her attention to the
cowering Alvin de Marco.
"Alvin, did you assault the boy?"
Sniveling now, trembling, the man gave a nod of his head.
"Say it, Alvin: yes or no.
"Y-yes," the wretched man managed to croak.
"And another man also did the same?"
Again, "Yes."
"Please point him out to us, Alvin."
Trembling, the accused turned on his knees to find his
accomplice, but the guilty man had already betrayed himself
by the pool of urine spreading outward from his cringing
form.
"You miserable worm!" the king said softly, ice in each
condemning word. "You have the bollocks to bugger a little
boy, but not to admit your guilt like a man. Well, we'll at
least see if we can't find a punishment to fit the crime.
Captain?"
The officer of the archers stepped forward smartly and
bowed.
"Sire?"
"Take those two to the guardhouse and fetch them a
priest—not that one, because he's disgraced his office, but I'll
not deny any man the chance to make peace with God before
he dies. It's more than they gave the boy. But when that's
done, I want them taken to the stable yard where the crime

was committed and strung up—and geld them first. As for
this miserable excuse for a man," he concluded, glaring at
Septimus, "I have an altogether more fitting disposition in
mind for him."

S

EISYLL Arilan had been one of the courtiers attending the
king that gray day in January, and was able to report the
fate of Septimus de Nore when he met with the Camberian
Council a few days later.
"I must give Donal Haldane credit," he said, when he had
outlined the basic events of the past week for those unable
to be present at a previous emergency meeting. "It was Old
Testament justice—there were some rumblings about some
aspects of the proceedings—but I think most would agree
that the end result did fit the circumstances."
The execution of Lord Deldour's two men had, indeed,
been met with general approval, as the word got out.
Assaults against children were never condoned or even
tolerated, whether the child was human or Deryni. Many
years before, disgruntlement about a child predator had lit
the first sparks that led to the Haldane Restoration of 917.
The fate of Father Septimus de Nore had sparked rather
different reactions, not because he was innocent of murder—
because he was not—but because he was a priest, and the
brother of a bishop. Grandly claiming benefit of clergy, and
making much of his family connection, he had demanded to
be bound over to ecclesiastical justice, preferably his
brother's, by which he might have anticipated being locked
away to a life of penitence and self-mortification—or even
gone free with a mild reprimand, since his victim had been
Deryni.
But the king had exercised his own notion of justice in
the matter of the killing of Krispin MacAthan, and had dealt
Septimus de Nore a sentence commensurate with what he
had done to his innocent victim. He might be innocent of
rapine, but his had been the hands that had tipped Krispin
down the well to drown.
First stripping him of his clerical attire—and of
undergarments and boots as well—they had flogged him
thirty lashes, in token of his betrayal of a child's trust of his
office. He then had been shoved head-first down that selfsame well into which he had dropped young Krispin—with a
rope bound round his ankles and extending back up the
well-shaft, to facilitate eventual retrieval of his body.
Because he was larger and stronger than Krispin had
been, he had managed to delay the inevitable for close to half
an hour, slipping incrementally closer to oblivion; but he

had not been able to stop it or reverse it. When, the
following morning, his body was pulled from the well, as had
been done with Krispin's, the flesh of hands, elbows, and
knees was lacerated nearly to the bone—but none had pitied
him.
"And good riddance!" Vivienne had said fiercely, when
Seisyll finished his account. She and Dominy both had wept
when they heard of Krispin's brutal slaying, and the fate of
his killers bothered them not at all.
"Aye, but it is having repercussions beyond what I think
Donal probably expected," Seisyll replied. "Septimus was the
brother of Bishop Oliver de Nore, who is pressing the
Archbishop of Rhemuth to excommunicate the king."
"He won't do that—will he?" Dominy said.
"Unknown," Michon answered. "Ultimately, Archbishop
William must take his direction from Valoret—and Michael of
Kheldour tends toward moderation. But neither archbishop
has made more than token gestures to curb de Nore's
excesses in Carthane. The death of one more Deryni boy,
weighed against the dozens who have burned in the Nyford
area, counts for very little in the grand scheme of things."
"On the other hand," Khoren observed, “these other
Deryni were not possible kin to the king—though Krispin's
death does render that question academic now."
"Do you still believe he was the king's son?" Oisín asked
Seisyll.
"Most probably," Seisyll replied. "Not that there was any
overt sign of it at the boy's funeral. I watched Donal closely,
for any indication that his affection for the boy might have
gone beyond that of any other page in his service, but he
was cool as ice."
"How is Jessamy holding up?" Dominy asked.
Seisyll shook his head, sighing. "She was devastated, as
one might expect—and definitely showing her age. She has
buried children before, of course—and a husband—and
Krispin was laid to rest near them, down in the crypts
beneath the cathedral. Very sadly, I think she shall bear no
more children, even should she marry again, so Krispin was
her last hope of a son. I pity her grief."
"This is all distressing news, to be sure," Barrett said
after a moment. "However, I am somewhat heartened by your
report of Alyce de Corwyn through all of this sad unfolding.
Her handling of the interrogation of the suspects was
masterful—avoiding as much as she could of any outward
show of her abilities."
Seisyll inclined his head. "True enough. She seemed to
sense the importance of caution in the presence of Lord
Deldour—for she will have known that, whatever passed in
that room, and whatever became of Father Septimus, word

would find its way back to Bishop Oliver."
"She has good sense," Khoren agreed. "Fortunately,
Truth-Reading is perhaps the least threatening of all our
talents, since it does not involve any direct interference with
the person being read."
Seisyll gave a nod of agreement. "Aye, it was exceedingly
well done. I would love to know what training has given her
such wisdom. But since she already knew of de Nore's part
in the affair, mere Truth-Reading was sufficient in the case
of the guilty pair—and by inducing the one to inform on the
other, our Alyce cleverly avoided having to compel answers
from any of them.
"And once the first man was discovered in his lie," Michon
agreed, "it was he who exposed his fellow—mostly out of fear
for what more she might do, if answers were not
forthcoming. That is both our strength and our vulnerability
among humans—that they don't know what we can actually
do."
A few of them chuckled at that, for it was perfectly true.
"What has been the reaction?" Barrett asked. "Nothing
has yet reached Nur Sayyid."
Seisyll shrugged. "Bishop Oliver is said to be livid over the
outcome, as one might expect, but that is largely a question
of the authority of the Church, aside from his personal pique
at having lost a brother; Septimus was a murderer, after all,
and had betrayed his office.
"Few question the fate of the two sodomites. Among the
common folk—those who know of it—I have talked to no one
who argues with the king's disposition of the case. Though
some might have stopped short of the gelding, all seem to
agree that the punishment did fit the crime-especially since
the two did acquiesce to the victim's death."
"Then, it appears we must wait to see what further
develops on that front," Oisín said. "I am very glad I do not
live down in Carthane." He slapped his palm against the
ivory table, shaking his head. "'Why did they do it?"
"Not for the obvious reasons," Barrett said evenly. "It will
not have been a matter of lust. Resentment might be a better
guess—even hatred. Young Krispin had been invested as a
page that day. Most at court no longer remark that his
mother is Deryni, but it is known; and some would resent
that he was being brought up with the royal children. He
was an intimate of the king’s sons—and their corruptor, by
the reckoning of some, simply by association, by the sheer
fact of being what he was."
"Was that sufficient motive to kill him?" Dominy asked.
"It all would have played a part," Michon agreed. "And
opportunity also would have been a factor, especially with
drink having been taken."

“Then, what about Alyce de Corwyn?" Khoren asked. "She
is far more prominent than Jessamy, especially since the
death of her brother."
"But she is marrying a human," Vivienne pointed out. "By
giving her to Kenneth Morgan, the king has chosen to dilute
the blood of the only Deryni ducal line in the land. That
would reassure some; it disturbs me. Especially with Corwyn
being the principal barrier between Gwynedd and Torenth."
'This is a cause for concern," Michon agreed. "But short of
killing off Kenneth Morgan and having one of our kind
abduct Alyce and marry her by force, the way her father did
with Stevana de Corwyn, there is no way to change what has
now been set in motion. Pray, rather, that Alyce de Corwyn
quickly bears male heirs—for Kenneth Morgan is a good and
honorable man, and will instill the same qualities in his
sons. And while you are praying, think how much worse it
could be if Alyce bears no heirs at all."
"Feh! A half-breed on the ducal throne in Corwyn!"
Vivienne muttered.
"Patience, Vivienne!" Barrett said with a gentle laugh.
"Alyce de Corwyn is not yet even wed!"

Chapter 28
"We shall direct his counsel and knowledge,
and in his secrets shall he meditate."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 39:7

D

ONAL Haldane had not heard the last regarding his
disposition of Krispin MacAthan's murderers. The execution
of Lord Deldour’s two guardsmen was largely accepted as
just, under the circumstances, and soon forgotten; however,
the killing of Septimus de Nore quickly became a cause
célèbre, especially among Gwynedd's clergy. Septimus had
been a priest and the brother of a bishop, and denying him
due benefit of clergy was an affront that Gwynedd's
hierarchy was not willing to overlook, even for a king.
"They've been waiting for several hours now, Sire," Sir
Tiarnán MacRae told the king, in the selfsame withdrawing
room where the infamous interrogation had taken place two
weeks earlier. Sir Kenneth Morgan and Seisyll Arilan had
been closeted with the king all morning, discussing the
latest letter of protest.
"I suppose I must see them," the king said with a sigh.
"Aye, Sire, I fear you must," Seisyll replied. "Bishop de
Nore is threatening an excommunication, if you do not
humble yourself before the Church and repent of your
action. For him, it is a personal affront, for you killed his
brother; but for the Church, it is a matter of having
overstepped your authority, trying a matter that, by canon
law, belonged before an ecclesiastical court."
The king had been listening with growing impatience as
Seisyll told him what he did not wish to hear—which was
only Seisyll's appointed function, after all—and rose
explosively to begin pacing.
"Seisyll, the man murdered one of my pages! A child! And
why? Apparently, to cover up the crimes of two more men.
And why did they do what they did? Who knows? A passion
of the moment? A drunken indulgence? Or was it a lashing
out at someone they knew to be Deryni, and therefore to be
hated?—and moreover, one too young to defend himself!"
"Whatever their motive, Sire, you uncovered their guilt by
employing the assistance of another hated Deryni," Seisyll
said calmly. "I think that will have stuck in de Nore's craw
almost as much as the fact that you executed his brother."
"No one complains when I use Morian's services, in the
field," the king muttered.
"No, but Morian is far away in Meara, and that is war,"
Seisyll replied. "Here in Rhemuth, two weeks ago, you also

flouted the authority of the Church. That is what will get
you excommunicated, if you tread not carefully."
"Do you expect me to apologize? Well, I won't. Nothing
can excuse what that foul priest did. Nothing! And I think
that even King Solomon would have been hard-pressed to
render a more fitting judgment."
"Nonetheless, the Church will uphold its right to deal
with its own," Seisyll replied. "Don't say that I did not warn
you, Sire."
"Yes, yes, I've been warned," the king grumbled as he
moved to a chair of state facing the doorway. "Come and
stand behind me—you and Kenneth, both. We might as well
see what this latest delegation has to say."
At his nod, Sir Tiarnán opened the door and gestured into
the corridor beyond, whence three clerics shortly appeared.
Tiarnán himself stepped outside and closed the door.
Though all three men wore the plain black cassocks of
working priests, two of the three sported the purple
skullcaps of bishops, with pectoral crosses on their breasts
and amethysts on their fingers. The senior of them was well
known to the king and his advisors: Desmond MacCartney,
auxiliary bishop to William Archbishop of Rhemuth—and
William's brother. The other bishop was more recently come
to the purple, though Donal had heard that young Patrick
Corrigan was slated for rapid rise in the hierarchy. The third
man seemed to be but a priest, though Donal had never seen
him before.
The king half-rose as the three men approached, but
made shrift to sit again before Bishop Desmond could extend
his ring to be kissed. The two bishops exchanged glances,
looking far from pleased.
"Thank you for seeing us, Sire," Bishop Desmond said,
lifting his head purposefully. "I believe you are acquainted
with Bishop Patrick Corrigan—and this is Father Rodder
Gillespie, from the Diocese of Nyford."
Corrigan and Gillespie gave the king sparse bows, which
Donal acknowledged with a nod.
"I understand that you have some business with me,
Fathers?" he said neutrally.
"Yes," Bishop Desmond said simply. "By now, I trust that
your Majesty will have read the missive that was delivered
earlier today."
"I have."
"And—have you anything to say about it?" Bishop
Desmond seemed somewhat taken aback by the brevity of
the king's reply.
"Yes," said the king, not backing down before the bishop's
gaze. "I do not repent me of my actions concerning the
murderous priest Septimus de Nore. His guilt was clear, and

his sentence fully justified."
"That is your final statement on the matter?" Desmond
said, more a declaration than a question.
"It is."
'Then, I am commanded to deliver this decree of
excommunication to your Majesty," Desmond went on,
holding out his hand for the document that Father Rodder
placed in it, "promulgated in due form by Bishop Oliver de
Nore, and to be executed by him with due ceremony—unless,
of course, your Majesty would care to reconsider," he added,
pausing in the process of offering the decree to the king.
The king’s smile was dangerous, the gray eyes cold.
“Bishop de Nore’s writ does not run in Rhemuth, my lord,
and I do not recognize his authority to impose
excommunication on me."
"Do you not?" Desmond replied softly. Tapping the
document gently against his chin, he glanced at the two men
standing behind the king, then handed it back to Gillespie.
"Fine. Then perhaps you will recognize the authority of
your own archbishop. Sire, I shall report your defiance to my
Lord William. And if his excommunication fails to move you
to repentance, perhaps the threat of interdict will make it
clear what his Grace expects of a loyal son of the Church.
Good day to you, Sire."
With that, he and his companions gave the king curt
bows, then turned and withdrew from the chamber, with
nary a backward glance. When Tiarnán had closed the door
behind them, Donal rose and drew his two companions back
to the fire.
"Interesting," he said. "Do you think they'll carry through
with their threat?"
"Very sadly, I do, Sire," Seisyll murmured. "Nothing can
reverse the death of Septimus de Nore, of course, but you
will be forced to make peace with the Church, for the sake of
all your kingdom. Your provocation was great, but the
bishops are correct, in that it was not your place to
discipline one of their own."
"But, would they have disciplined him?" Kenneth asked.
"Quite so," the king agreed. "And the answer is, no, they
would not. My way was best."
"Perhaps," Seisyll said. "But there will be a price to pay
for your way."
"Should I have bound him over to whatever 'justice' the
Church might have chosen to impose?" the king asked.
Seisyll smiled faintly. "I did not say that, Sire. But there
will be a price to pay."

T

HE price, in the short term, was indeed the
excommunication that Bishop Desmond had threatened—
and surprisingly, excommunication as well for Alyce, whose
Deryni powers had assisted in ferreting out the guilt of
Septimus and his two fellow-offenders.
"You've done nothing wrong," Kenneth assured her. "You
used your God-given gifts to uncover the truth—and truth
always comes of God. Septimus deserved to die. It was he
who turned his back on God—and reaped his just
recompense. This will pass."
"But it does not 'just pass,'" she murmured, clinging to
his embrace. "In the eyes of the Church, I am now set apart
from God, even more than my blood already had set me
apart. No priest may offer me the sacraments." She looked
up at him. "We may not even be married, until this ban is
lifted."
Anger stirred in his sea-gray eyes. "The Church is not
God, Alyce. And not all who serve the Church also serve
Him. What of your family chaplain, Father Paschal? Could
he not be summoned, and would he not perform the rite?"
"Aye, he would," she admitted, brightening, for she had
not yet considered that possibility. "Out of courtesy, he
would normally defer to the direction of any lawful bishop,
but he is not obliged to do so. They will like it not at all,
though, if he should act in defiance of their authority."
"And I shall like it not, if our marriage is too long delayed,
gentle Alyce." The touch of his lips on hers, at first a token
gesture to reassure, began to tease at promises of deeper
passions, stirred increasingly in the weeks since their
betrothal. And when he briefly let himself drink deeper of her
kiss, pressing her body close to his, she knew that she could
not long bear to keep him from her bed.
"I could send for Father Paschal," she whispered, as she
caught her breath. "He stayed in Cynfyn after Ahern's burial,
to assist in expanding the king's regency there, but I know
he would come, if I asked."
"Then do it," he urged, and turned her hand to press it to
his lips, feeling her delicious shudder as his tongue teased
briefly against her palm.

M

EANWHILE, the king refused to be moved on the matter of
his quarrel with the Church—and at the beginning of Lent,

his excommunication was widened to include interdict for
the entire archdiocese of Rhemuth. For more than a month
he held firm in his resolve, but finally he sent word to the
archbishop, requesting his presence at the castle.
"Sire, you cannot allow this to continue indefinitely,"
Archbishop William told him, on the day after what would
have been Palm Sunday, had the city not been still under
interdict. "You have forced me to close the doors of every
church in Rhemuth, and to cut off your people from the
solace of the sacraments—and this during Lent, when we
should be remembering the passion of our Lord, and
recalling His sacrifice for us. Can you not unbend to make
this far lesser sacrifice?"
"I cannot regret what I did," Donal said stubbornly.
"Septimus de Nore was a disgrace to his calling, a murderer.
He deserved to die for what he did."
"Perhaps he did," Archbishop William conceded. "That is
not the real issue. Canon law reserves the judgment of
delinquent priests to the justice of the Church. The king
cannot be seen to flout that law."
"I was unconvinced that justice would be done."
"So you took the law into your own hands," William
retorted. "And how is that different from any lynch mob that
might flout secular law?"
"His brother would have set aside the law!" Donal said
emphatically.
"Perhaps. But we shall never know now, shall we?"
Donal looked away, biting back an angry retort.
"Donal, we must end this impasse," the archbishop
murmured. "What would it hurt, to make some small
concession? You achieved your aim. Septimus paid with his
life. Conceding your error will not undo the justice you saw
fit to impose. But you must not require your people to suffer
further, because of your stubbornness."
After a long moment, the king turned his face slightly
toward the archbishop.
"What would you require of me, to make a reconciliation
with the Church?"
"Do you repent of your deeds?"
"Of the execution of Septimus de Nore—no. But I regret
that I was obliged to bypass the authority of the Church, in
my pursuit of justice."
A long silence fell between them as the archbishop
considered. Then:
"I am willing to accept that statement as an act of
contrition," he said. "However, I would require a more public
act of penance."

"How public, and what sort of penance?" the king
countered, warning in his eyes.
The archbishop again considered, not flinching from the
king's gaze.
"For penance—thirty lashes, as you ordered given to
Father de Nore," he finally said, holding up a hand to stay
the king's protest. "I would allow, the use of a simple leather
scourge of four unknotted thongs, rather than the weighted
strands customarily used in the flogging of a criminal. But
you shall accept this purging in the presence of the full
cathedral chapter, assembled within the privacy of the
chapter house at the cathedral."
"And you will lift the interdict, and the
excommunication?"
"I will," the archbishop replied. "I shall personally receive
you back into the bosom of Mother Church and grant you
absolution, at which time you will receive Holy Communion,
as a sign of your reconciliation. Do you agree?"
Donal closed his eyes for a long moment, then nodded.
"When can it be done?" he whispered.
"A preparation of three days' fasting should be sufficient,"
the archbishop allowed. "Bread and water only. I suggest you
spend it in seclusion. You may have two men to accompany
you for the purgation. I should warn you that I shall allow
Oliver de Nore to be present with my monks."
"Do not press me too hard, Archbishop!" Donal warned.
"The affront was against his brother," the archbishop
replied coolly. "He has a right to be present. But he shall not
lay hand on the whip. My monks shall see to that."
Donal let out an explosive breath, then gave a nod.
"Agreed.
"Then, three days hence," Archbishop William said. "And
have I your word that you shall abide by these conditions, I
shall lift the interdict immediately upon my return to the
cathedral."
"You have it," the king replied. "This should be Holy
Week. I would not subject my people to any further
deprivation."
"A commendable sentiment, Sire. Then, I shall expect
your presence on Thursday evening—after Mass and the
stripping of the altars, I think. Perhaps an hour after that,
when those keeping vigil have mostly gone. That should
ensure the privacy you require. We shall await you in the
chapter house."
“As you say, Archbishop."

T

HE king told no one of the accommodation he had reached
with the archbishop, though by morning, with the interdict
lifted, it could be surmised that some arrangement had been
agreed. He canceled all public appearances for the next three
days and kept to his private chambers, seeing no one.
Limited to bread and water by the terms of his fast, he found
his perceptions sharpening at first, and spent a great deal of
time considering, as fully as possible, the many interlocking
ramifications of the past several months since Twelfth Night.
Most wide-reaching, of course, was the rift he had created
between Church and state, by his defiance of canon law—
though that was about to be rectified. More personally
troubling was the act that had started the unfortunate chain
of events. With Krispin dead, not only had he lost a son, but
the intended protector for his firstborn.
It was a deplorable state of affairs, and had haunted him
increasingly as the weeks passed, for he was growing no
younger. The aftermath of Krispin's murder had underlined
how precarious was the safety of anyone possessing powers
unlike the rest of humankind; pretty Alyce de Corwyn was
still excommunicate, and Jessamy had become a pitied
recluse, still mourning the death of her son. With the right
preparation, young Brion would have powers not unlike
those of a Deryni—and might also fall victim to those who
hated such things, if he had not protection and guidance.
For that, the king decided he must provide another
protector. And as he contemplated this need, a possible plan
began to take shape in his mind.

I

T was Holy Thursday, the night the king was to present
himself at the cathedral, that the Lady Jessamy MacAthan
also made her way there, first to attend the Maundy Mass,
with its washing of the feet. But then, as the stripping of the
altars began, with the solemn processions of the Reserved
Sacrament to the altar of repose, she slipped down into the
crypt to pray beside her son's tomb.
She had found herself visiting the graves of her children
with increasing regularity in the past months, for she had
begun to sense that she would not be long in joining them.
She now believed a canker to be festering in her womb, and
guessed that the affliction very likely would be mortal. At
times, when she lay awake in the night with the dull pain
gnawing at her innards, she even wondered whether God
was punishing her for bearing this, the last of her children,

and the only boy among them. Even more, she worried
that the boy's father had not been her husband.
"Dear, dear Krispin," she murmured, lifting her head to
run a caressing hand across the top of the marble lid, now
carved with his name and the years of his brief life. She had
brought spring wildflowers to adorn the tomb for Easter, as
she had done for her other children buried here, and she
shook her head in sad resignation as she inhaled deeply of
the flowers' clean fragrance.
"I thought I might find you here," came a low voice from
the doorway behind her.
She had not heard his distant footsteps, over the murmur
of chanting voices in the cathedral above, but she knew his
presence, and only half turned her head toward him,
resenting his intrusion.
"Good evening, Sire. I am surprised that you would come
here at this hour."
"You did."
He came and knelt beside her, bowing his head briefly in
prayer and then crossing himself before turning to sit on the
kneeler beside her, facing the only exit from the chamber.
"I miss him, too, Jessamy," he said after a moment.
She sank down to also sit, hunkering down in the lining
of her cloak, for it was chill in the royal crypt.
"All the same, was it wise for you to come here, being
excommunicate?" she asked.
"I, too, have children buried here," he replied. "And
shortly, I go to make my peace with the Church. Besides, I
left two good men standing guard upstairs. No one may enter
save by going past them. And your maid is keeping vigil
before the altar of repose—and will do so until I rouse her, or
you do."
"Then, you came here specifically to see me," she
ventured.
"In part. And to avail myself of the witness of only the
dead."
"Then, you chose well, for I shall soon be among them,"
she said.
"What?" He kept his voice low, but his surprise was
unmistakable.
"I have a canker in my womb. I doubt I shall see the
autumn."
His silence was like a wall between them.
"I am very sorry to hear that," he finally said softy.
She shrugged. "I am sorry to have to say it. I had hoped
for many more years. Sadly, I am not to be granted that."

She shrugged again and sighed.
"But that is not why you came down here to seek me out.
Nor, I think, was it to visit my son—our son."
"No." He turned his face slightly away from her, scuffing
at the grit under his boot. "I go later to meet with the
archbishop and his monks, to purge myself of my guilt in
executing our son's killer—not the man's death, but the
going outside canon law to do it. I have been fasting for three
days. It is true that fasting sharpens the mind."
"I have long told you that," she murmured, smiling faintly
as she leaned her head against the side of her son's tomb.
He inclined his head in agreement, but went on with his
previous train of thought.
"I have been thinking about the loss of our son, and how
Brion now shall have no protector. One of the men with me
tonight is Sir Kenneth Morgan, who is to marry Alyce de
Corwyn—who is Deryni. It occurs to me that a de Corwyn
son might make an acceptable replacement for . . . the one
who was lost."
"How casually you set him aside," she said bitterly. "But
then, you did not hold his lifeless body in your arms. You
did not see the injuries done it. You did not clutch at the
wrenching in your heart when they laid him in this tomb, or
feel a part of your soul die as the lid slid into place."
She had felt him tense beside her as she spoke, each new
observation like a physical blow, but he only said, "No. I did
not.
"But never believe that I did not love him, in my way," he
went on, after a few seconds. "What I could do, I did—and
my purgation later tonight will be the cost of it. But there is
nothing that you or I can do to change what was and is. He
is gone. I have other sons who must be protected. As a king,
I must put that above all other considerations."
"Yes, I am well aware of what you have been willing to do,
to protect those sons," she said dully.
"Then, you will understand why I am minded to place
that protection into the hands of the next Duke of Corwyn,
who will be half Deryni."
She gave a mirthless chuckle and lightly shook her head.
"Better half Deryni than no Deryni at all," she said. "But
even if Alyce were to wed your precious Kenneth tomorrow, I
doubt that I shall ever see any child of that union." She
paused a beat. "Or—is it that you do not mean it to be Sir
Kenneth's child?"
When he said nothing, she shifted position to stare at him
more directly. "Donal?"
"It is the obvious solution to my present dilemma."
"That assumes that she would agree to such an

arrangement," Jessamy said incredulously.
"You did."
She snorted. "I was a respectable matron with many
children already, and a husband I merely tolerated."
"She shall have a husband," Donal said mildly.
"And then you would ask her to bear your child? I think
not."
"You do not think that I would ask her?" the king
countered.
"I do not think she would agree to it," Jessamy said. "And
if you took her against her will, all would know of the child's
bastardy. Besides, her first son must be the next Duke of
Corwyn—and you may not have time to breed a second."
"Her first son shall be duke regardless of his father—and
I had not thought to take her against her will," Donal said
carefully. "I had not thought to let her be aware of it at all.
You could help me do that."
“I--?”
He gave a careful nod. "Did you not tell me, years ago,
that her father Keryell had set certain controls upon her and
her sister before sending them to court, and had given those
controls into your keeping?"
She turned her face away, troubled by what she was
hearing.
"Those controls were set so that I might assist in their
training, and to ensure that they exercised due caution
regarding what they are. By rights, I should have released
her by now."
"But you have not released her, have you?"
"No."
"Then, it appears that you can, indeed, help me in what I
desire."
A heavy silence fell between them, stirred only by the
sound of their breathing for a long moment, as Jessamy
weighed her answer. In the cathedral above, the sounds of
public devotion were gradually fading away, the last
worshippers departing for the night.
"You are asking me to deceive her," she finally said, "to
use the trust her father placed in me as a tool for your
purposes."
"I am asking you to serve the future of my line," he
replied. "Of a time, you believed that to be a worthy cause.
Worthy enough to bear me a son in secret, to be the
protector and boon companion of Gwynedd's next king."
"A son who now is dead," she said bleakly. "And you
would attempt this experiment again?"

"Yes."
She rose, turning to rest both hands on the lid of
Krispin's sarcophagus.
"I will not have her reputation sullied. She must be safely
married first."
"Of course."
"And she must never know what you do to her. She must
believe that any child is her husband's."
"I would treasure such a child as well, for Sir Kenneth
Morgan is a good and faithful servant of the Crown, as well
as a friend. And there is time for many children of his loins.
My time is limited."
"Not so limited as mine," she retorted. "Still, I will do as
you ask. But you are not to have her maidenhead. At least
grant her husband that grace!"
With obvious reluctance, he inclined his head.
"There is still the matter of her excommunication," he
said. "Once my own is lifted, I shall be free to see to hers.
Meanwhile, I believe that she has summoned her family
chaplain from Cynfyn, who will perform the marriage
regardless. I would hope for a wedding in May or June. And
after that..."
Jessamy slowly nodded. "I will need to make certain
preparations," she said. "I have made little use of the triggers
set by her father; those must be assessed, to be certain they
shall serve our needs."
"Could not the same purpose be served by a flask of good
wine, suitably embellished?" Donal said lightly.
"Once, perhaps. But the getting of a child may take
several attempts—though I shall enlist one of the
laundresses to begin making note of her monthly courses.
From that, I shall be able to ascertain the spans when she is
likely to be fertile. And once she is married, you, in turn,
must be certain to keep her husband from her during those
days, until the time is propitious for your own endeavors."
He gave a nod, closing his eyes briefly against the sight of
her, remembering the getting of that son who was lost, and
praying that the getting of another would be as expeditious.
"Thank you," he whispered. Silence had settled in the
cathedral above as he reached up to take her hand, pressed
it to his lips.
"I must go now," he murmured, reluctantly getting to his
feet. "I fear that I have an appointment with an archbishop.
Be sure that, for the sake of our sweet Krispin, I shall offer
up my penance gladly."

M

UCH later that night, when the king was safely returned to
his bed, his stripes dressed, and Kenneth left to keep watch
outside his door, Seisyll Arilan reported to the Camberian
Council on what had transpired.
"He had not truly prepared us for what was to happen,"
Seisyll said, "though we knew that the meeting had
something to do with the reconciliation in progress between
king and Church. He had gone down into the royal crypts
beforehand—to pray, he said, though we had earlier seen
Lady Jessamy enter there as well. One may surmise that
perhaps he told her of the price he was about to pay for
having avenged her son.
"He looked shaken when he came out—though perhaps
that was the effect of three days' fasting. We went next to the
chapter house, where the monks had been gathering for the
past half hour. The archbishop was there, waiting before the
sedilla, and so was Bishop de Nore, the brother of the priest
who was executed.
"Before entering the room; the king removed his cloak, his
sword, his boots, his over-robe, and gave them into our care,
then lay himself prostrate before the two bishops, with the
monks ranged around the edges of the room. I could not
hear what was said between them, but after a little while,
the king came onto his knees and put off his shirt before
lying down again, this time with his arms outstretched in a
cross."
Seisyll shook his head and let out a sigh, still much
affected by what he had seen.
"They flogged him then: thirty strokes, as he had meted
out to Septimus de Nore, five strokes each from six different
monks. Thank God it was not the flagellum, as was used on
de Nore. The weals glistened with royal blood—and it is red,
not blue or purple, as some would have it—but he uttered
not a sound.
"When it was done, he took back his shirt, kissed the
hand of each of the six monks who had flogged him, then
knelt before Archbishop William to receive absolution and
Holy Communion. He spoke not at all as we rode with him
back to the castle. Lady Alyce came to bathe his stripes and
anoint them with soothing salves. I do not think he spoke
with her, either, though it was clear how he had incurred
them.
"I left him sleeping peacefully—on his stomach, to be
sure. I think there will be no scarring, but he will not soon
forget this night, or the cost of his momentary defiance. At
least he is restored to grace."
The others were shaking their heads by the time he

finished.
"This is bad business, with the bishops," Barrett said. "I
like it not, that the king yielded to their pressure."
"He had little choice," Khoren retorted. "Your bishops in
Gwynedd are not like ours in Andelon. Headstrong they are,
and blind in the matter of anything Deryni. There will be
more trouble, mark my words."

Chapter 29
"Marry thy daughter, and so shalt thou have performed
a weighty matter; but give her to a man of understanding."
-ECCLESIASTICUS 7:25

H

EADSTRONG the bishops of Gwynedd might be, but there
was at least one man prepared to beard them in their den—
though in the subtle way only possible for a Deryni. Despite
a flurry of letters from Alyce de Corwyn, none finally reached
Father Paschal Didier until mid-April. It was early May
before he was able to present himself in Rhemuth.
"This should never have happened," he told her, when
she had given her rendition of the events of the Twelfth Night
previous. "You have done nothing wrong. It cannot be
considered a sin to discern the truth—and the truth, in this
instance, enabled true evil-doers to be brought to light."
"Nonetheless, I am excommunicate," she replied. "Nor
have I been able to ascertain what would satisfy the
archbishop. And until the ban is lifted, I am barred from
reception of the sacraments. Including marriage."
"Quite so," Paschal said. "And I am of the distinct
impression that you favor the prospect of marriage with Sir
Kenneth Morgan, and may even be eager for it." He smiled
and shrugged at her look of surprise. "A good confessor can
sense a change of heart, dear child. I have known since your
childhood that the dynastic expectations of your eventual
marriage were a cause of concern to you. But Sir Kenneth is
not what you feared, is he?"
She shook her head. "Not at all. He is a good man,
Father," she said shyly, "tender and kind. To have come to
care for him is nothing that I ever could have anticipated,
but it... happened. And to know that marriage with him
would also serve the king's needs is both happy coincidence
and an answer to my prayers. With the king's blessing, I
would marry him even without the Church's blessing—but I
should rather have both. It was Sir Kenneth who suggested
that I approach you about blessing our union, since he
knows of the affection that has bound you to my house for
many years. But I cannot ask you to intervene if it would
leave you in the ill graces of the archbishop."
"I have been obliged to tread a narrow line with your
Gwynedd clergy," he admitted, "but in this, it may be
possible to ... adjust the archbishop's attitude."
She looked at him sharply. “You don't mean to tamper
with his mind? His absolution must be honest, else it is
nothing worth."

"Since the 'sin' to be absolved was no sin at all, it little
matters whether the absolution is honest," Paschal replied.
"But you need not fear. I shall appeal to a reasoning he
cannot resist. Perhaps you would be so good as to ask Sir
Kenneth to accompany us to the cathedral tomorrow
morning. I feel certain that he will wish to be at the side of
his betrothed when she humbles herself before the
archbishop and offers her contrition, so that she may be
married before God."
"Father, I am not contrite over what I did!" she reminded
him.
"No, but as a good daughter of the Church, you will tell
the archbishop that you wish to purge yourself of any guilt
over having done what the king required of you, in
confirming the truth of statements made by those involved
with the murder of an innocent child.
"The archbishop, in turn, will assign you a period of
penitential contemplation at—say—the convent of Notre
Dame d'Arc-en-Ciel, which shall also serve as a retreat in
preparation for your marriage from that house. This will also
remove your marriage from the glare of possibly negative
reaction if it were to occur here at court. Does that—satisfy
the scruples of your conscience?"
She was grinning by the time he finished, and threw her
arms around him in an exuberant hug.
"Father, I do love you! But, will the archbishop truly
agree?"
"He will," he assured her. "Your offense was not great—
and would have occasioned little comment, had it not been
Bishop de Nore's brother involved; Sir Morian does what you
did on a regular basis, though that is in Meara. And it would
not surprise me if the Lady Jessamy has done it for the king,
on more than one occasion.
"Nonetheless, because a bishop's brother was involved,
and because the bishops must save face, you must be seen
to show contrition and make amends for your part in it,
victim though you were of the king's expediency—for which
he has already been forgiven. My part in the affair must be
subtle—to ... persuade the archbishop that this is a just
resolution—but on a one-time basis, it will be safe enough.
Just mind that you do not affront him again, if at all
possible."
"It was never my intention to affront him at all," she
replied.
"Then, we are agreed," he said, smiling.

T

HE meeting with the archbishop took place not the next
day, but the day following, due to his previous engagements.
But other than that, all went according to plan. Gowned and
veiled in penitential black, Alyce de Corwyn presented
herself before Archbishop William in the company of her
childhood confessor and her betrothed, kneeling to beg his
forgiveness and praying to be received back into the ranks of
the faithful, that she might be free to marry according to the
wishes of the king.
The archbishop listened dutifully enough—somewhat stiff
at first, in the presence of a priest unknown to him and not
under his jurisdiction—but he was won over when Paschal
casually drew him aside to clarify a point of Alyce's
statement . . . and found himself unaccountably moved to
pity.
"It does seem that the king placed you in a somewhat
untenable position, obliged to use your powers in his
service," the archbishop allowed, when he and Paschal
returned to where Alyce and Kenneth still knelt, and Paschal
again knelt beside her. "And Father Paschal assures me that
your betrothed is an honorable and God-fearing man, who
will do his utmost to see that you stray not again into the
dangerous proclivities to which your race is prone. Sir
Kenneth, do you pledge to do so, that your wife-to-be come
not before me again in mortal peril of her soul?"
Alyce could sense the resentment coursing through
Kenneth's body as he knelt beside her, but he humbly bowed
his head.
"I do pledge it, Excellency."
"Then, I absolve you of your sins, Alyce de Corwyn," the
archbishop made the sign of the cross above her bowed
head, "and I lift the excommunication imposed in another
place, receiving you back into the company of the faithful.
For penance, I direct you to present yourself forthwith at the
convent of Notre Dame d'Arc-en-Ciel, where I believe you
were once a student, and there to make a month's retreat
preparatory to your marriage from that place. Father
Paschal, I give you license to perform the blessing of such
marriage—and hope never again to see any of the three of
you before me in any matter of disobedience to Holy Mother
Church. Do I make myself clear?"
"You do, your Excellency—and thank you," Paschal
replied, bending to kiss the archbishop's ring—and slightly
blurring all that had just transpired.
"Thank you, Excellency," Alyce and Kenneth murmured
together, also bowing low.

T

HE resolution greatly relieved the king, when he heard of it,
though he was less than pleased to learn that Alyce was to
go immediately to Arc-en-Ciel, there to prepare for her
wedding.
"I have promised that I shall not touch her before her
husband has her," he told Jessamy peevishly, that night
before Alyce was to leave, "but I cannot afford to delay
overlong. Nor can you."
"My preparations are under way," she replied, "but my
strength is not what it once was. I have taken opportunity to
examine her old training triggers, and they are intact. I shall
give you access closer to your need for them. For now,
however, she will be safe enough at Arc-en-Ciel—from
Kenneth and from you. When she returns, a married woman,
we shall need a few more months to refine the timing of the
deed. And you might begin amassing a set of errands for her
husband, to keep him from her during the times she is most
likely to conceive."
Donal shook his head in both disbelief and resignation.
"How casually I make plans to cuckold my friend," he
murmured. "But it must be done." He looked away briefly.
"You will attend the wedding? The queen and I shall be
present—and it will be I who give away the bride."
"You will not truly have given her until all of this is over,
Sire," she said, "but at least your participation sets a seal on
their marriage, in the eyes of the court. Think carefully
whether you really intend to do this thing—for once it is set
in motion, you know the deception you will have to maintain
thereafter."
"It is, indeed, my intention," he murmured. "For the sake
of my son, and out of loving memory of the one who was lost,
I must do it."
"Then, God help us both."

A

LYCE'S return to Arc-en-Ciel was more an occasion of joy
than of penitential gloom. Zoë went with her, to help her
prepare for her upcoming nuptials, and Paschal took up
residence with the other chaplains for the duration, to be
available for the pastoral counseling that accompanied the
ostensible reason for Alyce's presence there again. Her only
sadness was that she would be missing Vera's wedding,
which was to occur while she was on retreat.
Mother Judiana received both girls with open arms,
installing them in the room they had shared before, and the
other sisters and the students eagerly fell to work on the
stitchery for a bridal trousseau. Though Alyce did spend

time with Father Paschal every day, in obedience to the
archbishop's instruction that this was to be a time of
penitence regarding her Deryni nature, the priest geared
these sessions more toward the meditations proper to a more
traditional pre-nuptial retreat, though without the presence
of the groom.
In light of what she had been obliged to do in the wake of
Krispin's murder, Paschal also gave her regular sessions of
advanced training in the more subtle use of her powers.
After one such session, when she had emerged from trance,
he looked at her oddly, as if considering whether to share
some facet of what had just occurred.
"Are you aware that the old triggers your father set are
still in place?" he asked.
"Of course," she replied. "Don't you use them regularly, in
our sessions?"
"I do." He paused, again considering. "Lady Jessamy was
given access to those triggers as well," he said then. "Has she
used them much?"
She shook her head. "Very rarely. I suppose Father's
original intention was that she might be able to augment our
training. That would have been before he decided to have
you come to us regularly."
"That's very interesting," he murmured. "When would you
say was the last time she used the triggers?"
"Oh, ages ago. Probably after Father was killed—or it
might have been when I brought Ahern's body back through
Rhemuth, on my way to take him home to Cynfyn. I was
exhausted, and she made me sleep."
"Nothing more recently?"
"No. Why are you asking?"
"Because she appears to have been poking around in the
last week or so before you came here," Paschal said baldly.
"Have you any idea why she might have done that?"
"None at all... no."
"I did not think you did," Paschal replied. "And that is
very curious—and disturbing."
"But—why would she do such a thing?"
"I don't know. And it is possible there may be some
benign explanation—though, by rights, she should have
released the triggers years ago, when I resumed
responsibility for your training. Were it not for the hidden
trace of her most recent contact, I would have attributed the
omission to oversight. . . ."
"Paschal, you're frightening me . . . ," she began, eyes
wide.
"No need, child," he assured her, patting her hand. "I've

taken care of it. I've left the triggers partially engaged, so
that you'll give the external responses she expects, if she
should try this again; but I've also given you discretion, to
override any commands she might try to set. Unless you
choose to let her know, she shouldn't realize that anything
has changed. I don't know what game she may be playing—
but I do know that I want you to be the winner, if she insists
upon including you in that game, without your knowledge
and very possibly against your will."
Alyce gave a shiver, shaking her head.
"It makes no sense. What possible motive could she
have?"
"I wish I knew," Paschal replied. "But, put it from your
mind for now. You will soon be a bride, and much in your
life will change. For one thing, you shall be in your
husband's keeping—not Jessamy's, not mine, or even the
king's or queen's. You are coming well into your inheritance,
dear Alyce, and I am very proud of you."
She came back to his embrace again, basking in the
warmth of his affection and praise, and did resolve to put it
from her mind.

T

HE wedding day of Alyce de Corwyn and Sir Kenneth
Morgan dawned clear and sunny. Alyce stirred and stretched
in the bed she had shared so long with Zoë, opening her eyes
to see Zoë gazing at her from the other pillow and smiling.
"What?" Alyce murmured.
Zoë giggled and also stretched. "Just think. In a few
hours, you're going to be my mother."
Alyce shook her head, also giggling. "Mother to your
sisters, maybe—in time. To me, you shall always be my
sister."
"Oh, Alyce, you are like a sister to me—far more than my
sisters of blood. Promise that you won't forget me, when
you're a proper married lady."
"Did you forget me, when you became a proper married
lady?" Alyce said lightly.
"Well, I never was really a proper married lady," Zoë said
with a touch of wistfulness. "Sometimes I dream about
Ahern, and what it might have been like—you know."
"No, I don't know!" Alyce replied. "At least not yet." She
sat up in bed to take Zoë's hand. "Oh, Zoë, just think. A day
from now, I shall no longer be a maid—and I shan't even be
able to tell you what it was like, because he's your father, for
goodness' sake!"

"Well, it wouldn't be right, would it?" Zoë said matter-offactly. "On the other hand . . ." She looked at Alyce slyly. “I’ll
bet he's a very good lover. He's ever so kind and gentle.
Though not so gentle, I'm sure, that he will not give you
pleasure! I mean—oh, dear. This is going to be complicated,
isn't it?"
Alyce laughed aloud at that and tumbled out of bed,
rummaging for a robe.
“Get up, you! You must help me make myself beautiful
for your father. This is my wedding day!"

T

HE nuptial Mass was to begin at noon, following on the last
stroke of the Angelus. By eleven, the convent chapel was
prepared, bedecked with flowers and flooded with summer
sunlight. The few invited guests had begun to arrive.
The king and queen had come the night before, taking
over part of the guest quarters with the three young princes
and Princess Xenia, who was bouncing with the excitement
of being allowed to serve as Alyce's flower girl. Also in the
royal party were Lady Jessamy and her two daughters still at
home, Jesiana and Seffira, along with the king's two
principal aides besides Kenneth: Sir Tiarnán MacRae and Sir
Jiri Redfearn. Duke Richard was on assignment in the field,
and sent his regrets, but Sir Seisyll Arilan had deputed in
his place.
From farther afield came the seneschals of both Corwyn
and Lendour, along with several knights each, come to
witness the nuptials of this daughter of both houses and to
express their glad support for the man who now would
become a principal regent for both honors. They had met
him often in the past, and knew that Ahern had liked and
respected him. Sir Jovett Chandos was among them—and
Sir Sé Trelawney, once again come from wherever his
personal quest now had taken him. The newly wed Earl of
Kierney and his bride arrived, and Vera left his side for a
time to spend a few moments with her secret sister.
The sisters and students of Arc-en-Ciel had all lent their
efforts to the creation of the gown Alyce donned that
morning: a sweep of nubby green silk embroidered with
golden gryphons the size of a man's hand, with Kenneth
Morgan's gold double-tressure bordure set along the hem.
She wore the Furstána emeralds at her throat—and on one
wrist, the gold bangle of opals and sapphires that had been
her mother's. A bridal wreath of roses in a myriad of hues
adorned the tumble of golden hair cascading to her waist,
like the one that Cerys Devane had worn to her novice
profession; and the now fully professed Sister Iris Cerys was

one of the those who held the poles of the rainbow canopy
under which the bride would walk down the aisle; Iris
Jessilde was the other.
The chapel and players were prepared. The guests, such
as there were, had been seated at the westerly ends of the
choir stalls, the royal party on the Gospel side—king and
queen and royal children, along with members of the king's
staff—and Kenneth's sisters and younger daughters with the
Corwyn and Lendour men on the Epistle side. The scent of
summer flowers floated on the still air, dust motes sparkling
in the sunlight that streamed through the great rose
windows, east and west.
As the last stroke of the Angelus faded, Father Paschal
led Sir Kenneth and Sir Jiri Redfearn from the sacristy to the
front of the chapel. The convent's three chaplains were also
vested and ready, ranged behind them. When all were in
place, Mother Iris Judiana bowed to the four priests, then
made her way down the aisle to greet the bride, who was
waiting under the rainbow canopy.
At Judiana's approach, Alyce sank to her knees to receive
a blessing. Then, as the king helped her to her feet, coming
beneath the canopy with her, the sisters and students of the
convent choir began the Ave Vierge Dorée—and truly, as the
pair of them began their walk down the aisle to where Sir
Kenneth Morgan waited, she was the "golden virgin" of the
anthem.
Later, the details of that next hour blurred together in a
series of somewhat disjointed images of ceremony. Preceded
by the Princess Xenia, who paused every three steps to
gravely fling a handful of rose petals into the air, and by
Prince Brion in his pages' livery, bearing a cushion on which
lay the coronets both of Corwyn and Lendour, Alyce made
her way down the aisle on the king's arm, the canopy
accompanying them, pausing at the steps into the choir to
reverence the altar. Zoë followed behind, as witness and
attendant.
Up into the choir then, where the king and Mother
Judiana led her out from under the canopy, now no longer
sheltered under the Lady's rainbow mantle but given into the
keeping of the man in whose hand the king now set hers,
kissing her cheek and then stepping back to take his place
beside his queen.
Readings, then, speaking of the duty of husbands and
wives to one another and to God—and the joy recounted in
the Song of Songs:
"Surge, propera, arnica mea, Columba mea, formosa mea,
et veni...."
My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my love,
my fair one, and come away, for lo, the winter is past, the
rain is over and gone... .

Next, the vows, kneeling before Father Paschal as he bade
them exchange promises, a ring, a kiss. And then the
coronets, brought on their velvet cushion by Prince Brion,
which cushion she took and extended to her new husband,
that he might lay hands upon the two in token of the
responsibilities he now assumed as a regent of Corwyn and
Lendour.
The remainder of the Mass then—heavenly bread upon
the tongue and the sacred cup shared each to each. And
after that, the laying of her floral crown at the feet of the
statue of the Virgin, bows to king and queen, and the
recessional, following the double line of blue-robed students
back up the aisle and into the chapel forecourt, where the
girls showered them with flower petals as they emerged into
the sunlight.
After, there was a festive wedding supper, and good
wishes from the wedding guests: Zoë's enthusiastic embrace
for both of them, the shy kisses of Kenneth's other two
daughters, the awkward embraces of his sisters; the more
heartfelt kisses of the three young princes and little Princess
Xenia, who kept gathering up the rose petals from the chapel
floor so she could shower the couple again; a promise of the
king's ongoing protection and favor; Sé's promise that he
would always be there, if needed. Vera's grin as she
whispered a word or two about what awaited Alyce in the
marriage bed.
After supper, the bridal couple were conducted to the
principal guest apartment, occupied the night before by the
king and queen but now vacated, with their imminent
departure to return to the city. When the queen and
Jessamy had dressed Alyce for bed, and Father Paschal had
blessed the bed and her in it, everyone withdrew save for
Kenneth, left standing against the door, simply gazing at her.
In the garden beneath the window, the sweet voices of the
students sang a gentle bridal blessing from distant
Bremagne, that soon faded into stillness with the sound of
departing feet on gravel.
He came to her then, in the twilit summer night,
shedding his outer robe to slip into the bed beside her. He
lay there on his side for a long moment, simply gazing at her,
head propped on one elbow, before lifting a reverent hand to
brush along her cheek, across her lips, down the curve of
her neck to the ribbons at the throat of her night shirt,
briefly caressing the sweet swell of her breast.
"Dear God, you are beautiful, in body and in soul!" he
whispered, his eyes never leaving hers. "I asked you once
before whether you were an angel, for surely I stand before
the gates of Paradise."
As she shivered slightly at his touch, he gently tugged at
one of the ribbons until its bow parted, rolling closer then to
nuzzle kisses on the creamy skin thus exposed.

"Actually, I've just lied to you," he admitted, raising an
eyebrow at her astonished O of indignation. "I am not
standing anywhere; I am lying here beside a beautiful
woman who is my wife at last—though a part of me is
upstanding."
The playful downward flick of his glance to the region of
his groin elicited a giggle and a maidenly blush on the part
of his bride, after which he resumed his reverent exploration
of her neck, loosing another tie, slipping a gentle hand into
the open neck of her gown as his mouth sought hers and
began to draw her with him into Paradise.

S

EVERAL times they had their pleasure of one another that
night, and again shortly after dawn, before slipping back into
languid dozing for another several hours. Around noon,
shortly after the Angelus, they surfaced for a meal, brought
to their room by a smiling Sister Iris Cerys, who bobbed in
blushing curtsy over the tray she presented as Kenneth
opened the door.
Later in the afternoon, the newlyweds emerged to stroll
hand-in-hand in the convent garden, beginning talk of plans
and dreams. Toward suppertime, others began to appear in
the garden. Though most of the wedding guests had left,
either the night before or first thing that morning, Zoë and
Jiri Redfearn remained, along with Jovett Chandos. The five
of them supped together that evening with Father Paschal
and Mother Judiana, and spoke guardedly of the state of
affairs concerning the bishops.
Alyce, who knew better than any of them just how far the
bishop's wrath could extend— and with how little cause—
kept largely silent, and lay shivering in Kenneth's arms later
that night, until he kissed away her tears and turned her
thoughts to more pleasant contemplations.

B

UT their idyll of married bliss was not to last. The very next
morning, not long after first light, Sir Jiri came knocking on
their door with missives from the king recalling them all to
Rhemuth.
"The king says there's been trouble up near Sostra. The
county of that name belongs to Torenth, of course," Kenneth
said, still skimming the king's letter, "but the town of Sostra
is Corwyn's, as you know."

Both were aware that Duke Richard had been patrolling
along the Torenthi border since mid-May, hoping his
presence would discourage a repeat of the incursions into
Corwyn two years before.
"It appears I'm to take up some of my regenting duties
somewhat sooner than we expected," he went on. “Deinol
Hartmann has asked for Jovett as well. We should leave as
soon as possible."
They were gone within the hour, Jiri and Jovett in
addition to Alyce, Kenneth, and Zoë, clattering into the yard
at Rhemuth just past noon.
"Dreadfully sorry to drag you away from your bride,
Kenneth," the king said, before briefing the three who would
leave shortly for Sostra.
As he drew them toward the maps spread on the table in
the summer council chamber, already starting to review
details of the reports he had received from Richard, Seisyll
Arilan watched silently from the other side of the room, and
wondered why the king had lied.

W

HATEVER the reason, Kenneth was away off-and-on for
most of the summer and into the autumn, with periodic
visits home to deliver dispatches and be reunited with his
bride, but never for more than a few days, and never long
enough to get her with child.
Jessamy, meanwhile, continued her observations
regarding Alyce, recalling her own preparations for the
conception of Krispin, and gradually narrowed down a series
of optimal target dates.
But Jessamy's health was fast failing. Alyce and the royal
physicians nursed her, but there was little they could do
besides ease her pain. By October, she was all but
bedridden, and early in November asked for Seisyll Arilan.
"I'm told you wished to see me," he said quietly, pulling a
stool closer to her bed, at her gesture. Her maid had
withdrawn, and they were quite alone.
"I am dying, Seisyll," she murmured. "It may not be today,
or even next week, but it will be sooner rather than later."
"I had heard that," he replied. "I am very sorry."
"So am I." She turned her face to gaze at the canopy
above the bed.
"Seisyll, we have not always agreed—you and I. I
understand, though I do not accept, the reasons that others
felt obliged to dictate the course of my life. I have never

understood why there was so much antipathy toward my
father, but I accept that perhaps there are things I was not
meant to understand."
When he said nothing, only lowering his eyes, she went
on.
"But you must believe me when I tell you that I have tried
to act only in ways that would honor my blood and the love I
have come to bear for the House of Haldane."
She paused to cough, and Seisyll watched her in
compassion.
"I wish to speak to you of Krispin," she whispered, when
she had caught her breath. "He is gone now, so the telling of
his tale cannot hurt him, but because of ... other things that
are in progress, you have a need to know. Take my hand,
Seisyll."
As he did so, she closed her eyes and pulled back her
shields, inviting rapport. . . and gave him the full reckoning
of Krispin's begetting, the death of Sief, the deceptions
thereafter . . . and now, the plans in train for Alyce de
Corwyn, to repeat the king's mission, that another Deryni
heir of his body should be conceived to become the protector
of Gwynedd's future kings....

S

UDDENLY, so much makes sense," Seisyll told the
Camberian Council a few nights later, after leaving Jessamy
in a coma from which she was not likely to emerge. "Much
we had surmised, but we had imputed malice where there
was none. Krispin MacAthan was, in fact, Krispin Haldane—
and Sief’s death was unfortunate, but Donal did not set out
to kill him. Had Sief not guessed the truth of the boy's
paternity—we all know how jealous he was—all might have
proceeded according to plan."
"That still does not answer the question of how the king
happened to come by his rather extraordinary ability,"
Michon said. "Nor does it explain why Donal seems never to
have exercised that power since killing Sief."
"No, and Jessamy declined to enlighten me on either
point," Seisyll replied. "I was grateful enough that she chose
to share what she did—and on her deathbed, in all
likelihood."
"Could you not have slipped past her shields, in her
weakened condition?" Vivienne muttered.
"Dear Vivienne, there are some scruples that even I will
not set aside," Seisyll replied. "The source of the king's power
is not nearly so important as the fact that he has it—and
that he desires to get another child who will share those

powers."
"What?" Barrett gasped, as the others merely gaped at
Seisyll in astonishment.
"Whether we like it or not," Seisyll went on, "the notion of
a Deryni protector for the Haldane princes was a good one.
The matter of Haldane paternity for such a protector is a
separate issue, and disturbs us mostly because we did not
think of it, I suspect—and because that Haldane bloodline is
an unknown quantity, proven dangerous because of what
Donal Haldane was able to do to one of us. Sief would not
have been an easy conquest."
"Definitely true," Oisín said with a grimace.
"That said, you should know that the king intends to
repeat the experiment."
"Well, certainly not with Jessamy," Barrett said mildly.
"Sadly, no," Seisyll agreed. "But the stage is already set
for a replanting of Haldane seed."
"In what field?" Oisín muttered.
"Alyce de Corwyn!" Michon declared.
"She is the only appropriate Deryni to whom he has
access," Seisyll replied. "None of Jessamy's daughters would
do, for various reasons."
"That would certainly explain why her husband has been
kept so often abroad since their wedding," Oisín said. "Will
the king have had her yet?"
"Not yet, so far as I can tell," Seisyll replied. "I have the
impression that he is proceeding with great caution, since
the deed must be carried out without the lady's knowledge or
consent: an additional factor that will be different from his
coupling with Jessamy.
"That makes it likely that he may dare to try it only once,
lest her suspicions be aroused—or Sir Kenneth's. Hence, the
timing will be critical. And regarding Kenneth—if anything,
the king is closer to him than he was to Sief. It will be a
betrayal—but one that the king is willing to accept, in the
service of a greater cause. And hopefully, Kenneth will never
know."
"Sief also was meant not to know," Dominy pointed out.
"But Kenneth is human, and can be controlled," Michon
said. "Deceiving Alyce will be far more difficult a matter, even
with the triggers Jessamy has given over to the king."
Khoren Vastouni slowly shook his head. "One must
admire the audacity of the Haldanes," he said. "Can aught be
done to facilitate this mating? For I would be interested,
indeed, to see a child of Alyce de Corwyn and Donal
Haldane."
"Once more, I fear we must sit back and merely observe,"

Seisyll replied. "With luck, we shall know soon enough."

B

UT it would not come as soon as any of them had hoped,
for Jessamy never emerged from her coma, and died shortly
before Christmas. Knowledge that she was dying had put a
damper on the king's plans in November, and the funeral
aftermath and preparations for Twelfth Night and its
attendant courts made a December liaison infeasible. It was
not until late January that Donal Haldane felt ready to make
his move—if ever he was to do it.
The night he finally chose, based on Jessamy's
calculations and observations of the laundress she had
employed, was one long in careful planning. It was a stormy
night toward the end of January, with wind howling among
the chimneys and snow piling high in the castle yard.
Kenneth had returned two days earlier from a mission down
to Desse, exhausted from his ride, and Donal had made
certain that Alyce was kept late in the royal nursery that
night, tending a feverish child—courtesy of a posset
concocted to produce precisely that condition.
The king kept Kenneth very late the next night as well,
plying him with drink and a carefully planted suggestion to
ensure that he passed out immediately upon reaching his
bed, with no inclination to even touch his wife.
On the third night, his hour come at last, the king had
also made his preparations, this time with a sedative in the
wine he, had had served at a supper shared by the pair at
his own table, along with the queen. The ensuing drowsiness
of both queen and aide had ensured an early night. Both
now slept in their respective beds. Alyce had set her cup
aside after only a sip or two, but now slept as well, curled in
the curve of her husband's body.
Donal watched the pair for nearly an hour through a spyhole in the paneling of their apartment—the one he had
chosen especially, after their marriage—stretching forth his
powers to confirm the depth of their sleep, until finally he
summoned sufficient resolve to proceed.
He had prepared carefully, clothing himself, over his
nightshirt, in a long dressing gown of goodly wool, lined with
fur, for he had not known how long he might need to lurk in
the passageway behind the paneling. Soft boots were on his
feet, and a fur-lined cap on his head.
Senses finely attuned, he touched the stud that would let
the hidden panel slide back soundlessly, slipping inside and
closing it behind him. Softly he walked to Kenneth's side of
the bed and lightly touched his temple, profoundly
deepening his sleep. Jessamy had taught him how to do

that, too. He then moved around to the other side,
undoing the front of his robe as he went. Pulse racing, he
was already aroused, from the simple daring of the deed he
contemplated, but he knew he must first make certain she
would not stir while he had his way with her.
Pulling back her side of the coverlet with one hand, he
reached his hand to touch her as he had touched her
husband, reaching for the controls set by her father so many
years before and adjusted by Jessamy for the specific
purpose of this night's work. Alyce gave a low moan, but did
not stir as he gently shifted her onto her back. But when he
started to turn back her nightdress, her eyes opened to gaze
at him in shock.
"Sire?" she breathed.
Panic overtook him, and he seized her wrist and reached
for the controls again, at the same time trying to pull his
robe around him, a part of him unable to comprehend why
Jessamy's trigger had not worked. His mind surged across
the physical link thus formed, but very solid shields flared
between them, and he could not get past.
Anger made his own powers stir more potently, coiling in
that secret place behind his eyes, but she only scrambled to
a sitting position, her wrist still clasped in his hand, her own
powers like an impenetrable wall between them as she laid
her other hand on the wrist of her sleeping husband—tried
and failed to rouse him.
"How have you done this to him, and what did you intend
to do to me?" she demanded.
Once again he tried to take her mind, again clashing
against those adamantine shields, feeling the killing power
start to stir, as it had with Sief, all those years ago—but
abruptly he backed down, releasing her wrist as if it were a
bar of red-hot iron. Killing her was the last thing he wished
to do, even if it meant that there would now be no magical
protector for his sons.
"God, forgive me, Alyce!" he breathed.
Burying his face in his hands, he slid to the floor beside
the bed, elbows braced against its edge, and wept—for the
dead Krispin, for Jessamy, also in her grave, and for the
child who now would never be. She watched him in silence
for several long moments, again checking the sleeping
Kenneth, then shifted to lift his head into her lap, rocking
him against her breast as he sobbed on and on—and
gradually confessed all.
By the time he had mostly spent his tears, she had wept
as well, and scrubbed her sleeve across her eyes as he lifted
his head, reluctant to meet her gaze. She said nothing as he
hauled himself back up off his knees and gingerly sat on the
edge of the bed.
"You must think me a terrible man," he said uncertainly.

"And if you did, I would not blame you."
Slowly she shook her head, pitying him.
"No, not terrible," she replied. "But I think I now
understand more of what a heavy weight it is to wear a
crown. What pain you must have borne, when Krispin died—
and to be forced to bear it in secret, unable to express your
true loss…."
He nodded bleakly, his anguish etched on his weathered
face.
"Jessamy was obliged to bear it all—and all her sacrifice
was for naught, in the end." He hung his head. "I don't know
why I thought I might repeat the same exercise. I suppose I
wanted to re-create Krispin. But of course, that would never
have happened, even had I succeeded in what I set out to do
tonight. I did consider simply asking you openly—but there
was Kenneth, who is my friend—or, who was my friend, I
suppose, once he learns what has happened here tonight."
"But nothing happened here, Sire," she said softly.
"It would have happened, if I'd had my way—much to my
shame."
"But it did not." She glanced across at Kenneth, still
oblivious. "And it could not," she added in a whisper.
He looked at her in question. "I don't understand."
"You should wake Kenneth now, Sire," she said, ignoring
his comment. "Or—no, give his controls to me, and I shall
wake him. And before I do, I shall give him the gist of what
has happened—and of your need."
He started to get up, but she stayed him with a hand on
his wrist, only nodding toward Kenneth. Bracing himself, the
king rose enough to wrap his robe more closely around
himself, then settled back again on her side of the bed,
stretching then to set his hand on Kenneth's forehead, as
Alyce did the same.
The touch of her mind was gentle now, taking the
controls he gave, and he bowed his head as he withdrew, in
awe of her grace, leaving it to her to do what she felt needful.
After a moment, Alyce, too, withdrew her hand, and
Donal dared to look back at both of them. He saw the
tenderness as she bent to press a gentle kiss to her
husband's brow, tensed as the other man's eyelids flickered
and then the sea-gray eyes opened.
Their gaze was cool at first, appraising, measuring. But
then he sat up wordlessly to take his wife in his arms and
hold her to his breast, the while not taking his eyes from the
king's.
After a moment, as Alyce straightened and turned within
the circle of his arm, to lean against his chest and also meet
the king's eyes, Kenneth gave a cautious sigh.

"I grieve with you, Sire, for your loss," he said quietly.
"You have had to live with your grief in silence, since that
awful morning when we found the boy in the well. And I
understand what you meant to do, and why."
"Can you forgive me?" Donal managed to ask.
"Yes," Kenneth said. "And I can do more than that—
because you are my king, and I and mine are in your service,
and in your homage—and in your love, I hope."
"I don't understand," Donal whispered.
Kenneth gave a quiet smile and pulled Alyce momentarily
closer to him, gently kissing the lips she turned to his.
"Alyce is already with child, Sire," he murmured. "At least
she tells me she is. Apparently, Deryni can sense these
things long before another might guess."
"But--how ... ?"
"Quite frankly, it was probably akin to the way your
Krispin was conceived," Kenneth allowed, raising a droll
eyebrow. "You gave me little opportunity for more leisurely
coupling with my wife, in these past few months. It will have
happened last month, when I was carrying dispatches back
and forth between here and Coroth. I think I was home for
all of an hour that week—and well aware that new
dispatches were being readied for my immediate return to
the road.
"But one makes do when one must," he said, bending to
kiss her again. "And the timing, apparently, was fortuitous.
"This child is truly meant to be, Sire," Alyce murmured.
"And I believe it will be a son. If you wish it, he can be your
son, in every way save of your blood, raised to be a loyal
companion and protector to Prince Brion, with the powers of
a Deryni to aid him."
"What are you saying?" Donal whispered.
"She's saying that we shall give him to you, Sire,"
Kenneth said. "Not physically, but in the sense of loyalty and
power and utter devotion to your House. If you will have
him."

Epilogue
"Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee,
and before thou earnest forth out of the womb I sanctified
thee. . . ."
-JEREMIAH 1:5

I

N due course, Alyce's pregnancy became obvious to all with
eyes to see. The queen, too, was found to be again with
child; and the relationship of the two women shifted subtly
as Alyce joined her in the role of wife and mother-to-be. Both
prospective fathers doted on their pregnant wives, and each
paid due deference to the other's spouse. It was a time of
tranquility and expectation.
"He actually did it!" said Oisín Adair, in a reaction mixed
of amazement and admiration, when Seisyll had reported the
dual pregnancies to the Camberian Council. "And not just
Alyce, but the queen as well!"
"Well, hopefully not both at once," Vivienne said primly,
though she was doing her best not to smirk. "Still, it has
been a remarkable achievement. Who would have thought
the old man had it in him anymore?"
Seisyll shook his head, smiling. "Never underestimate
Donal Haldane," he said. "In his long and colorful life, he has
accomplished a great deal that no one would have expected."
"When will she give birth?" Khoren asked.
"Early in the autumn, by all the signs," Seisyll replied.
"And the queen at about the same time."
"Just bear in mind that Alyce's child could be a girl,"
Dominy reminded them.
"That would only matter for the Corwyn succession,"
Seisyll replied. "If Donal's purpose was to beget a future
protector for his sons—a Deryni protector—a woman could
serve as well as a man, provided she had the proper training.
We could ensure that she had that training. I could ensure
it; or another could be recruited."
"True enough," Michon agreed.
"Then, it appears we have only to wait until the autumn,
to see what fruit is borne from the king's new experiment,"
Barrett said.

T

HAT summer was a welcome season of peace, allowing

Kenneth the leisure to finally settle into contented
domesticity with his new wife. Aside from the three present
that January night in their apartments, none knew of the
incident. Zoë Morgan spent nearly every waking hour in the
company of Alyce and the queen, marveling at these new
pregnancies and delighting in the prospect of a new halfsibling.
Toward midsummer, Alyce was able to confirm that her
child would be a boy. The king, too, was told, and was
present outside the birthing room late in September, when
Alyce de Corwyn, wife of Sir Kenneth Morgan, was brought
to bed of a hale and healthy son, with wisps of white-blond
hair and light eyes already full of infant wisdom. Zoë had
attended the birth, assisting the royal midwife and lending
the mother her strength, and helped clean up babe and
mother before admitting her father to behold his son.
Kenneth entered very tentatively, craning his neck for a
glimpse of the babe as he approached his wife's bed. Alyce's
face, as she looked up at him over the downy head cupped at
her breast, proclaimed joy and contentment along with the
weariness of the birthing—and love for the man who sat
tentatively on the edge of the bed and bent to kiss her
forehead.
"Are you well, dearest heart?" he whispered.
She smiled and lifted her lips to his. "I am well," she
replied. "And we have a son, indeed."
As she glanced down adoringly at the child in her arms,
briefly pulling aside his blankets to display his perfect form,
Kenneth let his eyes drink in the wonder of the babe, bent to
kiss the golden fluff at the top of his head.
"May I hold him?" he murmured.
"Of course."
He was cradling his son, murmuring sweet nothings as
he sat close beside the mother, when Zoë admitted the king
to the chamber and quietly withdrew. Both parents looked
up as the king approached, and Kenneth gathered his son in
his arms as he stood, beckoning the king closer with his
eyes. Donal Haldane's gaze did not leave Kenneth's as he
came to stand toe-to-toe with the man who held what had
been so earnestly desired.
"Sire," Kenneth said steadily, "eight months ago, in this
room, we made you a solemn pledge. You need not fear that
we will fail to honor it. We give you a future protector for
your sons."
And with those simple words, he laid the child in the
king's arms.
"Your Majesty, I am honored to present my son, Alaric
Anthony Morgan."

S

IX weeks later, in the chapel royal at Rhemuth Castle, the
child was officially christened with that name—the Anthony
for Kenneth's grandfather, Kai Anthony, who had fought at
the side of Malcolm Haldane at Killingford. Also christened
on that day was the newest Haldane prince, born a week
after young Alaric and given a string of royal names to live
up to: Jathan Joachim Richard Urien.
But both boys received illustrious godparents on that
day. Duke Richard and Sir Tiarnán MacRae were among
those standing for young Prince Jathan; young Alaric had
his half-sister Zoë, the visibly pregnant Lady Vera Howard
McLain, now Countess of Kierney, Sir Jovett Chandos, in
from Cynfyn, and Sir Sé Trelawney. It was not until later
that afternoon, while taking refreshments in the great hall,
that Lord Seisyll Arilan finally got an opportunity to hold the
newly baptized Alaric in his arms—and made a discovery
that was to cause great consternation, when he reported
back to his colleagues of the Camberian Council.
For, whatever else he was, Alaric Anthony Morgan was
not the son of Donal Haldane. What he might become, only
time would tell.

APPENDIX I

Index of Characters
AHERN JERNIAN DE CORWYN, LORD—son and heir of Keryell Earl of Lendour
and Stevana de Corwyn; twin to Marie de Corwyn.
ALARIC ANTHONY MORGAN —infant son of Alyce de Corwyn Morgan and Sir
Kenneth Kai Morgan.
ALAZAIS MORGAN—youngest daughter of Sir Kenneth Morgan.
*ALBADORE, SAINT—a patron saint of lost things.
ALEXANDER DARBY, FATHER—violently anti-Deryni priest and former physician
in Carthane.
ALINOR CARDIEL, LADY—second wife of Mikhail Prince of Andelon, sister of
Thomas.
ALVIN DE MARCO—a guard in the retinue of Lord Deldour.
ALYCE JAVANA DE CORWYN, LADY—elder daughter of Keryell Earl of Lendour
and Stevana de Corwyn.
ANDREW MCLAIN, DUKE—Duke of Cassan, father of Jared. ANGELUS,
FATHER—a chaplain to Queen Richeldis. ANJELICA—maid to Lady Jessamy.
ANNALIND, PRINCESS—a princess of Meara, younger twin of Roisian.

ARDRY MACARDRY—infant son of Caulay Earl of Transha.
*ATUN, PRINCE—late Prince of Andelon, father of Mikhail and Khoren.
AURÉLIEN DE COURCY—son of Michon and husband of Sieffany
MacAthan.
BARRETT DE LANEY—blind member of the Camberian Council; brother
of Dominy de Laney.
BASIL OF CASTLEROO—a Mearan rebel. BENJAMIN—servant in the
employ of Seisyll Arilan.
BENROY, FATHER—weak-sighted scrivener and chaplain at Arc-en-Ciel.
BLAINE

EMANUEL

RICHARD

CINHIL

HALDANE,

PRINCE —second son of Donal King of Gwynedd. BLAISE OF TRURILL—a
Mearan rebel. BRENDAN, BROTHER—a dark at Rhemuth
BRIGETTA DELACORTE, LADY—a junior lady-in-waiting to Queen Richeldis.
BRION DONAL CINHIL URIEN HALDANE, PRINCE—firstborn son and heir of
King Donal.
BRONNA, LADY—a nurse to the royal children.
CAITRIN OF MEARAN, PRINCESS—daughter of Judhael of Meara, sister of
Princess Onora.
*CASSIANUS DE LANEY—deceased older brother of Dominy and Barrett.
CERYS DEVANE—a student at Arc-en-Ciel, Alyce's original roommate, who later
takes the veil as Sister Ins Cerys.
*CHARLAN MORGAN, SIR—former squire to Javan Haldane, treacherously killed
with him; distant cousin of Sir Kenneth Morgan.
CLARICE, LADY—a lady-in-waiting to Queen Richeldis.
*COLMAN, KING—deceased King of Howicce and Llannedd, father of Queen
Richeldis.
*CORBAN HOWELL, SIR—deceased Earl of Eastmarch. CRAWFORD, MASTER—a
guard at Rhemuth Castle.
*CYNFYN OF LENDOUR—deceased son of Keryell Earl of Lendour by his first
marriage.
*DAMIAN CATHCART—a general/tactician of the past. DEINOL HARTMANN,
SIR—seneschal at Castle Cynfyn.
DELDOUR, LORD—a lord of Carthane, and one of the ringleaders of an antiDeryni lay group centered on the ministry of Bishop Oliver de Nore; Father
Septimus becomes his chaplain.
DENIT, FATHER—queen's chaplain in 1088.
DESMOND MACCARTNEY, BISHOP—Auxiliary Bishop of Rhemuth, brother of
William.
DOMINY DE LANEY—sister of Barrett, member of the Camberian Council.
DONAL BLAINE AIDAN CINHIL HALDANE, KING—King
of Gwynedd, Prince of Meara, and Lord of the Purple
March.
DONNARD, MASTER—Duke Richard's battle-surgeon in 1086.
*DULCHESSE, QUEEN—childless first queen of Donal Haldane.
EDWARD —a carpenter at Rhemuth Castle.
EDWINA—Zoë's original roommate at Arc-en-Ciel, from Llannedd.
ELAINE MACINNIS, LADY—daughter of Manfred MacInnis and Signe Calder of
Sheele; first wife of Jared Earl of Kierney, and mother of Kevin McLain.
EVAN SULLIVAN, SIR—human buyer of horses at manor of Arkella, north of
Ratharkin. (Kindaloo is farther along.)
FARIAN, FATHER—a young dark at Rhemuth.

*FERROL HOWARD, SIR—slain 1025 at Killingford with King Urien and buried in
crypt beneath Rhemuth Cathedral.
FRANCIS DELANEY—a Mearan rebel.
GEILL MORGAN—middle daughter of Sir Kenneth Morgan.
GERALD —a squire in the service of King Donal.
*GRANIA DE CORWYN, LADY—mother of Stevana and grandmother of Alyce,
Marie, Ahern, and Vera.
GWENAËL, QUEEN—Queen of Llannedd and mother of Queen Richeldis.
HAMBERT HAMILTON, SIR—seneschal of Coroth. IERY —Marie's roommate at
Arc-en-Ciel.
ILLANN, KING—King of Howicce and, after the death of Queen Gwenaël, King of
Llannedd; brother of Queen Richeldis.
IOLO MELANDRY, SIR—royal governor of Ratharkin, hanged by rebels.
IRIS ALTHEA, SISTER—mistress of scriptorium at Arc-en-Ciel.
IRIS ANTHONY, SISTER—professed nun at Arc-en-Ciel.
IRIS JESSILDE, SISTER—second daughter of Jessamy MacAthan, a novice at
Arc-en-Ciel.
IRIS JUDIANA, MOTHER—Superior at Arc-en-Ciel; daughter of a Bremagni duke,
educated at Rhaname.

IRIS MART, SISTER—a professed nun at Arc-en-Ciel. IRIS ROSE,
SISTER—a novice at Arc-en-Ciel.
ISAN FITZMARTIN—a page in the household of King Donal, son of Lady
Megory Fitzmartin.
IVONE—a squire to King Donal in 1086.
JARED MCLAIN, EARL OF KIERNEY—only son of Andrew Duke of
Cassan.
*JEPPE LASCELLES—one of the Gwynedd generals at Killingford.
JESIANA MACATHAN—a daughter of Jessamy and Sief MacAthan.
JESSAMY FERCH LEWYS MACATHAN—daughter of Lewys ap Norfal and
Lady Ilde; wife of Sief MacAthan. Mother of four living daughters and
Krispin MacAthan.
JESSILDE MACATHAN —see Iris Jessilde, sister. JIRI REDFEARN, SIR—
an aide to King Donal. JODOTHA—a legendary Deryni of the seventh
century.
*JOLYON OF MEARA, PRINCE—last sovereign Prince of Meara, husband
of Urracca, father of Roisian and Annalind.
JOSQUIN GRAMERCY—a scout in the service of King Donal.
JOVETT CHANDOS, SIR—former squire in the service of Keryell Earl of
Lendour, childhood friend of Alyce and Marie de Corwyn, secretly Deryni;
knighted with Sé Trelawney at Twelfth Night court, 1082.
JUDHAEL, PRINCE—soi-distant Prince of Meara, first cousin to King
Donal, son of Annalind, Princess of Meara.
KENNETH KAI MORGAN, SIR—an aide to King Donal; father of Zoë and
two more daughters.
KEVIN DOUGLAS MCLAIN—infant son of Jared Earl of Kierney and Elaine
MacInnis.
KHOREN VASTOUNI, PRINCE—member of the Camberian Council.
KRISPIN SIEF MACATHAN— son of Jessamy by King Donal, secretly sired to be a
Deryni protector for the royal princes.
LAURELA HOWARD—"mother" of Vera (de Corwyn) Howard.
LEWYS AP NORFAL—infamous Deryni who defied the Camberian Council; father
of Jessamy and Morian.
LUCIEN TALBOT, BARON—a baron of the Purple March, permanent royal
governor of Ratharkin replacing the murdered Iolo Melandry.
MALGAR DE FIRENZA, FATHER—new chaplain and music master at Arc-en-Ciel
after Septimus de Nore.
MARIE STEPHANIA DE CORWYN—younger daughter of Keryell Earl of Lendour
and Stevana de Corwyn; twin to Ahern de Corwyn.
MEGORY FITZMARTIN—a principal lady-in-waiting to Queen Richeldis.
MICHAEL OF KHELDOUR, ARCHBISHOP—Archbishop of Valoret and Primate of
All Gwynedd.
MICHAEL MACDONALD, SIR—husband of Princess Onora of Meara.
MICHENDRA VASTOUNI, PRINCESS—younger daughter of Prince Mikhail of
Andelon.
MICHON DE COURCY, LORD— member of the Camberian Council.
MIKHAIL VASTOUNI, PRINCE—sovereign Prince of Andelon and nephew of Prince
Khoren.

MIRANDA, LADY—a lady-in-waiting to Queen Richeldis.
MORIAN DU JOUX (AP LEWYS), SIR—brother of Jessamy, and Deryni.
MUNGO, FATHER—a chaplain in the royal household.

MURIELLA, LADY—a lady-in-waiting to Queen Richeldis. NED —a
gardener at Rhemuth Castle.
NIDIAN AP PEDR—a citizen of Ratharkin.
NIGEL CLUIM GWYDION RHYS HALDANE, PRINCE—son of King Donal
and Queen Richeldis.
NIMUR FURSTÁN—King of Torenth.
*NORFAL—a Deryni master.
OÍSIN ADAIR—a horse breeder, member of the Camberian Council.
OLIVER DE NORE, BISHOP—itinerant bishop in Carthane, elder brother
of Septimus.
ONORA, PRINCESS—daughter of Judhael of Meara, granddaughter of
Annalind of Meara.
ORBAN HOWARD, SIR—"father" of Vera (de Corwyn) Howard.
ORIN—great Deryni adept and mystic of the seventh century.
PASCHAL DIDIER, FATHER—Deryni priest from Bremagne, chaplain to
Keryell Earl of Lendour and tutor to Alyce and Ahern (and Vera Howard).
Trained at Nur Sayyid and the R'Kassan seminary at Rhaname.
PATRICK CORRIGAN, BISHOP—newly consecrated itinerant bishop.
RANNULF, SIR—along on the hunt at Martinmas.
RICHARD BEARAND RHUPERT CINHIL HALDANE, PRINCE—unmarried halfbrother of King Donal, Duke of Carthmoor.
RICHELDIS, QUEEN—second wife of King Donal and mother of his children, a
princess of Howicce and Llannedd.
ROBARD KINCAID, SIR—a Mearan rebel.
RODDER GILLESPIE, FATHER—a priest of the Diocese of Nyford.
*ROISIAN, QUEEN—heiress of Meara, eldest daughter of Jolyon of Meara and
Urracca; twin of Annalind; wife of Malcolm Haldane and Queen of Gwynedd.
RORIK HOWELL, SIR—new Earl of Eastmarch, son of the late Corban Howell.
ROSMERTA, LADY—third wife of Keryell Earl of Lendour.
RUSLAN, BROTHER—a monk serving at the chapel royal of Rhemuth Castle.
SEFFIRA MACATHAN, LADY—a daughter of Jessamy and Sief MacAthan.
SEISYLL ARILAN, LORD—member of King Donal's council of state and also the
Camberian Council.
SEPTIMUS DE NORE, FATHER—brother of Bishop Oliver de Nore, briefly a
chaplain at Arc-en-Ciel.
SÉ TRELAWNEY, SIR—former squire in the service of Keryell Earl of Lendour,
childhood friend of Alyce, Marie, and Ahern, secretly Deryni; knighted at Twelfth
Night Court 1082.
SIEF MACATHAN, JUNIOR—firstborn son of Jessamy and Sief, dead at one week
of age.
SIEF MACATHAN, LORD—member of King Donal's council of state and also the
Camberian Council.
SiEFFANY MACATHAN DE COURCY—eldest daughter of Jessamy and Sief MacAthan,
wife of Aurelien de Courcy.
SILE, QUEEN—second wife to King Malcolm Haldane, mother of Richard.
SlLKE ANNE ELIZABETH ROISIAN HALDANE, PRINCESS —

second daughter of Donal King of Gwynedd and Queen Richeldis.
SOBBON VON HORTHY, PRINCE—sovereign Prince of Thalia and Hort of Orsal.
SOFIANA VASTOUNI, PRINCESS—elder daughter of Prince Mikhail of Andelon
and Princess Ysabeau.
STASHA, PRINCESS—wife of Prince Khoren Vastouni of Andelon.
*STEVANA DE CORWYN, LADY—deceased heiress of Corwyn, granddaughter of
Stiofan Duke of Corwyn; second wife of Keryell Earl of Lendour, mother of Alyce,
Vera, Ahern, and Marie.
*STIOFAN DE CORWYN, DUKE—great grandfather of Alyce de Corwyn.
*TAYCE FURSTANA, LADY—first cousin of Festil I King of Gwynedd, wife of Lord
Richard du Joux; their son was Dominic du Joux, first Duke of Corwyn.
THOMAS CARDIEL—younger brother of Alinor. TIARNÁN MACRAE, SIR—an aide
to King Donal. TlPHANE, LADY—a lady-in-waiting to Queen Richeldis.
TREVOR UDAUT—a squire in 1090, just raised from page at that Twelfth Night.
URIEN, KING —Haldane monarch who died at Killingford. *URRACCA,
PRINCESS —consort of the last sovereign Prince of Meara, mother of twin sisters
Roisian and Annalind and also of Magrette.
URSIC, DUKE —Duke of Claibourne.
VERA LAURELA (DE CORWYN) HOWARD—younger twin sister of Alyce, but
raised by and believed to be the daughter of Lord Orban Howard and Lady
Laurela.
VIVIENNE DE JORDANET, LADY— member of the Camberian Council.
WILCE MELANDRY, SIR—nephew of Iolo, sheriff of Ratharkin.
WILLIAM MACCARTNEY, ARCHBISHOP—Archbishop of Rhemuth.
XENIA NUALA JARONI SWYNBETH, PRINCESS—first daughter and third child of

Donal King of Gwynedd and Richeldis.
*YSABEAU, PRINCESS —late wife of Prince Mikhail of Andelon, mother of
Sofiana and Michendra.
ZOË BRONWYN MORGAN—a student at Arc-en-Ciel, eldest daughter of Sir
Kenneth Morgan.

* denotes a character is already deceased when first mentioned.

APPENDIX II

Index of Places

ARC-EN-CIEL, CONVENT OF NOTRE DAME D'—royal convent and school just
outside Rhemuth.
ARDEVALA—a holding of Michon de Courcy.
ARKELLA—manor of Sir Evan Sullivan, north of Ratharkin; location of a Portal.
ARX FIDEI SEMINARY—one of the principal seminaries in Gwynedd, north of
Rhemuth.
BELDOUR—capital city of Torenth.
BREMAGNE—kingdom across the Southern Sea from Gwynedd.
CAERIESSE —legendary land that sank beneath the sea.
CARTHANELLE —royal manor north of Nyford, summer seat of the Dukes of
Carthmoor.
CARTHMOOR—holding of Prince Richard Duke of Carthmoor.
CASSAN —duchy in northwest Gwynedd. CASTEL DEARG—Jared McLain's seat
in Kierney.
CASTLE CYNFYN—seat of the Earl of Lendour, in the town of Cynfyn.

CASTLE RUNDEL—an hour's ride from Culdi.
COAMER MOUNTAINS—mountain range marking part of the border
between Gwynedd and Torenth.
CONCARADINE —free port on the River Eirian. Co ROTH —capital of
Corwyn.
CORWYN—ancient duchy in southeast Gwynedd, seat of the Deryni
dukes of Corwyn.
CUILTEINE—marcher town in the southwest of Gwynedd. CYNFYN —
capital of Lendour, and Keryell's seat.
DESSE—northernmost navigable point on the River Eirian, several
hours' ride south of Rhemuth.
DHASSA—free holy city in the Lendour Mountains. DJELLARDA—capital
of the princely state of Andelon. EASTMARCH—county in northeast
Gwynedd.
FESSY—village in Bremagne, site of an apparition seen near an ancient
holy well, where the Ordre de Notre Dame d'Arc-en-Ciel began.
GWYNEDD—principal kingdom of the Eleven Kingdoms, seat of the
Haldane kings.
HOWICCE —kingdom linked with the Kingdom of Llannedd, southwest of
Gwynedd.
JACA—sovereign principality, one of the Forcinn States.
JENADUR—Sé Trelawney's family seat.
KHELDISH RIDING—portion of the old Principality of Kheldour.
KHELDOUR—ancient principality in northern Gwynedd.
KlERNEY—earldom in northwest of Gwynedd, a secondary holding of the Dukes of Cassan.
KILLINGFORD—site of a decisive battle in the great Gwynedd-Torenth War of 1025.
KILTUIN—small river-port town in Corwyn, north of Coroth.
KlNDALOO—a village north of Ratharkin and Arkella, in Meara.
LEND OUR—earldom north of Corwyn.
LLANNEDD—Kingdom linked with the Kingdom of Howicce, southwest of Gwynedd.
MARLEY —earldom in northeast Gwynedd.
MEARA—formerly independent principality west of Gwynedd, now a province of
Gwynedd.
MORGANHALL—Sir Kenneth Morgan's estate.
NUR HALLAJ —sovereign principality adjacent to the Forcinn States.
NUR SAYYID—great university in R'Kassi.
NYFORD—capital of Carthmoor; ancient market town and port.
ORSALIA—ancient name of part of Trailia, whence derives the title "Hort of Orsal."
PURPLE MARCH, THE—area north and west of Rhemuth, adjoining Kierney.
PWYLLHELI —capital of Llannedd. RATHARKIN —provincial capital of Meara. REMIGNY —
capital of Bremagne.

RHANAME —great seminary in R'Kassi. RHEMUTH—capital of Gwynedd.
RHENDALL—county in northeast Gwynedd.
RHONDEVALA—where Michon's son Aurelien and Jessamy's eldest
daughter live.
R'KASSI—kingdom to the south of the Forcinn States, famous for its
horses.
ST. BRIDGET'S ABBEY—convent near Cùilteine.
ST. HILARY'S WITHIN-THE-WALLS—royal basilica adjoining the royal
palace in Rhemuth.
SOSTRA—a Corwyn town adjacent to the Torenthi county of the same

name.
TORENTH —principal kingdom east of Gwynedd.
TRALIA—more recent name of the sovereign principality ruled by the
Hort of Orsal.
TRANSHA—small border county in northwest Gwynedd. TRE-ARILAN—
ancestral home of the Arilan family.
TRURILL—barony between Gwynedd and Meara.
VALORET—former capital of Gwynedd; seat of the Archbishop of Valoret,
Primate of All Gwynedd.

A
ACE
$7.99 U.S.
$10.99 CAN

Praise for

In the King's Service
"Kurtz is one of the best of those fantasy writers who use medieval-like
settings for their novels, and this is one of her better
—Chronicle
books."
"Kurtz's fidelity to the customs and mores of medieval Europe gives a
richness of detail to her alternate medieval world."
—Library Journal
"Exquisitely detailed ... the scenes of daily life at court, plus the usual
church versus magic conflict, will keep fans turning the
—Publishers Weekly
pages."
"The novel sparkles with Kurtz's attention to detail... can be enjoyed by
fans and newcomers alike."
—RT Bookclub (Top Pick)
Praise for

King Kelson's Bride
"Katherine Kurtz's triumphant return to the magical medieval realm of
Gwynedd ... Exciting and intriguing."
—SFSite

"Kurtz's strengths lie in her patient accumulation of telling detail, wellarticulated plots, and believable magics. Should bring the fans flocking,
and attract newcomers, too."
—Kirkus Reviews
The author remains just as polished and expert as ever... Kurtz, one of the founders of
modem historical fantasy, after nearly thirty years continues to be one of its most
accomplished practitioners."
—Publishers Weekly
"Ms. Kurtz creates compelling characters, a byzantine plot, and magical wonder for a
beguiling reading experience."
—Romantic Times
"A good choice for most fantasy collections."
-—Library Journal
'This Deryni yam should satisfy all the fans the series has accumulated during its thirtyyear run."
—Booklist
"One of the happiest... books in this series."
—Locus

Praise for Katherine Kurtz's

Deryni novels

"An incredible historical tapestry of a world that never was and of
immensely vital people who ought to be."
—Anne McCaffrey
"A rich feast of medieval chivalry, romance, and magic— the book that all
Katherine Kurtz's fans have been awaiting."
—Marion Zimmer Bradley
"At her best Kurtz's love of history lets her do things with her characters
and their world that no nonhistorian could hope to
—Chicago Sun-Times
do."
"Kurtz has created a fascinating idealization of the Middle Ages and
infused it with a kind of magic one can truly believe
—Fantasy Review
in."
ACE BOOKS. NEW YORK

THE BERKLEY PUBLISHING GROUP
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada). 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto. Ontario M4V 3B2, Canada
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand. London WC2R ORL, England
Penguin Group Ireland, 25 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd.)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty. Ltd.)
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi—110 017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), Cnr. Airborne and Rosedale Roads, Albany, Auckland 1310, New Zealand
{a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty.) Ltd., 24 Sturdee Avenue. Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South
Africa
Penguin Books Ltd.. Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL. England
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously, and
any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, business establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
IN THE KING'S SERVICE
An Ace Book / published by arrangement with the author
PRINTING HISTORY
Ace hardcover edition / November 2003 Ace mass market edition / January 2005
Copyright © 2003 by Katherine Kurtz.
The Eleven Kingdoms map copyright © 2004 by Grey Ghost Press, Inc., www.derynireauiis.com
Graphic design by Daniel M. Davis, Ann Dupuis, James A. Fox-Davis, and Martine Lynch.
Cover art by Matt Stawicki.
Cover design by Pyrographx.
Interior text design by Kristin del Rosario.
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced, scanned, or distributed in any printed or electronic form without permission. Please do not participate in
or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials in violation of the author's rights. Purchase only authorized editions. For information
address: The Berkley Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014.
ISBN: 0-441-01209-4
ACE
Ace Books are published by The Berkley Publishing Group,
a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.,
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014.
ACE and the "A" design
are trademarks belonging to Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 I
If you purchased this book without a cover, you should be aware that this book is stolen property. It was reported as "unsold and destroyed" to
the publisher, and neither the author nor the publisher has received any payment for this "stripped book."

