To Mary Thomson and Cherie Buchheim
Longtime friends, fans, research experts, geeks,
and genuine enthusiasts

Contents

Chapter 1
Gotham City

3

Chapter 2
Gotham City Wayne Manor

14

Chapter 3
Metropolis the Daily Planet

22

Chapter 4
The Star City Queen

27

Chapter 5
Siberia Ariguska Gulag

33

Chapter 6
The Daily Planet

39

Chapter 7
Siberia Ariguska Gulag

50

Chapter 8
Gotham City

55

Chapter 9
The Daily Planet

66

Chapter 10
Metropolis

70

Chapter 11
Wayne Manor

74

Chapter 12
The Daily Planet

80

Chapter 13
Wayne Manor

83

Chapter 14
Smallville, Kansas

88

Chapter 15
Wayne Tower

94

Chapter 16
Luthorcorp

99

Chapter 17
Gotham City

104

Chapter 18
Metropolis

110

Chapter 19
The Luthor Mansion

119

Chapter 20
The Luthor Mansion

126

Chapter 21
The Luthor Mansion

129

Chapter 22
The Daily Planet

135

Chapter 23
Metropolis

138

Chapter 24
Wayne Tower

144

Chapter 25
Mercy Draw, Arizona

148

Chapter 26
Luthor’s Island

154

Chapter 27
Las Vegas, Nevada

160

Chapter 28
The Cave

164

Chapter 29
Nellis Air Force Base, Nevada

167

Chapter 30
The Daily Planet

172

Chapter 31
Las Vegas Strip

175

Chapter 32
Area 51

179

Chapter 33
Area 51

183

Chapter 34
Luthor’s Island

189

Chapter 35
Metropolis

193

Chapter 36
Luthor’s Island

197

Chapter 37
The White House, Washington, D.C.

201

Chapter 38
Wayne Enterprises

205

Chapter 39
Luthorcorp

210

Chapter 40
Above the Earth

220

Chapter 41
Wayne Manor

224

Chapter 42
Luthor’s Island

230

Chapter 43
The Cave

234

Chapter 44
Ariguska Gulag

238

Chapter 45
The Daily Planet

242

Chapter 46
Siberia

246

Chapter 47
Ariguska Gulag

252

Chapter 48
Luthor’s Island

256

Chapter 49
Ariguska Gulag

261

Chapter 50
Ariguska Gulag

266

Chapter 51
Luthor’s Island

272

Chapter 52
Siberia

276

Chapter 53
The Fortress of Solitude

280

Chapter 54
Metropolis

284

Chapter 55
Luthor’s Island

288

Chapter 56
Metropolis

292

Chapter 57
Luthor’s Island

296

Chapter 58
Metropolis

302

Chapter 59
Luthor’s Island

305

Chapter 60
Metropolis

309

Chapter 61
The Daily Planet

316

Chapter 62
The Cave

319

Chapter 63
Above the Earth

321

Chapter 64
Federal Court Building, Metropolis

323

Chapter 65
Gotham City

325

Author’s Note
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Other Books by Kevin J. Anderson
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher

BOVE TH E CLOUD-M ISTED SEAS AN D MAJESTIC CONTI­
B

nents of Earth orbited a small metal sphere that was not
much larger than a basketball. Its stiff antennae extended to send
out a simple, monotonous message, a succession of meaningless
beeps.
The Soviets had named this, the ﬁrst human-made satellite,
Sputnik: “Fellow Traveler.” The only one of its kind, Sputnik
circled at the edge of space, high above proud nations and their
boundaries, oblivious to the political turmoil created by its very
existence.
The late 1950s marked a new era, one of both progress and
international tensions. While space travel to other planets was
still an unattainable dream, the ﬂedgling rocketry programs of the
United States and the USSR scrambled for the capability to launch
nuclear missiles at each other. For the ﬁrst time in history, human
beings had the power to destroy their world.
Crossing into the night on its endless orbit, Sputnik passed
over the great slumbering cities of the United States: Metropolis;
Washington, D.C.; Gotham City; Los Angeles.
But even in the darkest cities below, not everyone slept. . . .

Chapter 1

GOTHAM CIT Y

IGHT. A TI M E FOR HUNTI NG . PREDATORS PREFER SHADOWS

and cool silence. But who preys upon the predators—and
where?
The Thomas and Martha Wayne Memorial Park. A civic
monument to two of Gotham City’s most beloved citizens. A
playground with swing sets and teeter-totters, picnic tables and
baseball diamonds, fountains, statues, a forested arboretum.
In better times, it had been a place where families spent lazy
afternoons together.
A place for families like the one he no longer had.
Now the once-bubbling fountains were empty basins to catch
windblown leaves. The dense trees in the patch of forest were
skeletal and frightening, like props from a Brothers Grimm fairy
tale. Penknife-scratched grafﬁti marred the statues, defacing
honored heroes. Garbage littered the walking paths. Weeds choked
the baseball diamonds.
Some of Gotham’s citizens shook their heads at how the son of
Thomas and Martha Wayne had allowed the park to fall into such

4

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

disrepair and ill repute. With his inherited millions, Bruce Wayne
could certainly afford to make the park a ﬁne place again.
But he had other ideas.
This place attracted the dregs and bottom-feeders of society.
He viewed it as a trap. As bait.
On nights when the pounding guilt and burning anger grew
unbearable, when he felt the need to do something, when he could
no longer sit in extravagant splendor within a memory-haunted
mansion, he went out to watch, to hunt. He could have prowled
Crime Alley, once called Park Row, or guarded the slums of the
East End. Or he could come here, to the park named after his
parents. In a way, it was ﬁtting.
He was ready.
His custom-made suit was both second skin and body armor, its
dark reinforced fabric molded to his muscled form, sheathing his
biceps, shoulders, torso, and legs. It provided as much protection
as any medieval knight’s suit of armor. His gauntlets were ﬂexible
yet impervious to heat, cold, abrasion, impact. His belt contained
dozens of useful devices developed by the greatest minds at Wayne
Enterprises (ostensibly for purposes other than to assist him in his
nighttime activities). His mask, a fearsome cowl with pointed ears,
proved as intimidating as the helm of a ferocious Viking warrior,
and his black cape swirled around him like the trailing shadow of
a demon.
When he donned this outﬁt, this identity, he felt powerful, full
of determination, yet silent and elusive as a specter. Many people
still weren’t sure whether the Gotham City “Bat-man” was real or
just an urban legend, a heroic boogeyman created by a desperate
populace that wanted the crime rate to drop.
The criminals knew he was real, though. And they were afraid
of him.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

5

For the past year and a half since he had ﬁrst donned the
uniform, his crusade had been to clean up Gotham City, a gloomy
place that attracted more clouds than sunshine. Although this
city had wounded him deeply, he loved it nevertheless. He saw
the beauty hidden beneath the warts and scabs. The promise. He
knew what Gotham could become, and he had to do something to
help.
He patrolled the park just after midnight, a time when punks,
muggers, murderers, and rapists were abroad, looking for fresh
victims, fresh blood. Society’s predators abounded. He preyed on
the predators.
As he took a mental inventory of the environs, nobody saw him.
They never did.
A bearded wino huddled in a stained trench coat, clutching a
brown paper bag as though it contained treasure. The wino curled
up under a blanket of old newspapers in the dry basin of an unused
fountain, snoring softly.
Four young toughs, looking as if they had just stepped out of a
government poster warning against juvenile delinquency, lounged
in the trees at the edge of the arboretum, chain-smoking Lucky
Strikes. Snickering in low voices, imitating moves they had copied
from James Dean in Rebel Without a Cause, all had identical
haircuts slicked back with Brylcreem. One had a pack of cigarettes
rolled up in the sleeve of his white T-shirt; the others wore leather
jackets.
A seedy-looking man on a park bench glanced at his watch,
obviously waiting for a rendezvous. After a few moments, a
disheveled stranger casually took a seat next to him, as if they
were simply two men arriving in the middle of the night to feed
pigeons in the park. After conversing in low voices, they exchanged
envelopes.

6

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

A woman came down the path, walking away from the busy
city streets, taking a shortcut through the park’s winding trails.
From the shadows he made a quick assessment: not a prostitute,
just a woman in her early twenties wearing a lightweight coat.
Her hair was dishwater blond, long and straight but covered
with a black and white polka-dot scarf; her shoes were sensible,
and judging from the way she moved, she’d had a long day. As
the woman moved toward the arboretum, he could see she wore
a waitress’s uniform beneath the open coat. A large German
shepherd trotted at her side, eager for a late-night walk.
He was instantly wary. She shouldn’t have been going into the
park. Even the big dog wouldn’t be enough to protect her.
His senses were attuned to every sound, scent, and movement.
Certain something was about to happen, he crouched in the
shadows, his pulse racing, adrenaline ﬁlling his bloodstream. He
focused his whole world around the possibility of a hunt.
He wouldn’t let it happen again. . . .
In the aftermath of a traumatic experience, some people are left
with a ringing in their ears. Some have lingering pain. He saw the
deaths of his parents. Always. More than memory, different from
a nightmare.
After the movie, in the alley, a bad choice, a wrong turn . . .
a man lunging out of the shadows. His father’s voice was calm as
he tried to reason with the mugger, his eyes never wavering from
the gun.
How could the reﬂection of blue steel be so bright in such a dim
alley?
“He just wants the pearls, Martha. Just the pearls.”
“And the wallet, too!”
“All right, and the wallet.” Thomas Wayne’s voice was soothing,
as if he were reading bedtime stories to young Bruce. At only six

ENEMIES & ALLIES

7

years of age, the boy didn’t understand what was happening. His
father sounded calm, protective. Everything would be all right.
The pistol shot was loud. So was his mother’s scream.
Those sounds never stopped echoing in his head.
His parents had taken him to see The Mark of Zorro. At the
time, Bruce had actually believed that masked heroes did sweep
down to protect the innocent. But in that moment in the dark alley
behind the theater, there was no masked avenger. No one came in
response to the gunshot . . . or to Martha Wayne’s screams.
The boy huddled there on the wet pavement for a long time. His
parents didn’t move. Doctors didn’t come to save his mother and
father. Police didn’t rush into the alley to apprehend the mugger—
the murderer.
Spilled blood mingled with the rainwater and slime of the street,
deep red, pooling together, the last warm traces of his parents. His
mother’s hand was very cold by the time young Bruce heard the
ﬁrst siren, but the little boy’s heart had gone colder still. . . .
Suddenly, in the park, the waitress screamed, startling him from
his thoughts. He silently cursed himself for letting his obsession
distract him at a crucial moment. Weak. Dangerous. He needed
to focus!
Over near the trees, the German shepherd was barking and
growling. The waitress tried to pull away, but the four toughs
surrounded her, switchblades drawn, their teeth bright as they
grinned like jackals. “Come on, lady, we’re just asking for protec­
tion money. We’ll save you from the Batman. Fifty bucks will
do it.”
She screamed for help. The wino roused himself groggily from
his hard bed in the dry fountain. The two furtive men on the park
bench looked over, clearly not wanting to get involved. They would
be no help to her. No one would. No one but him.

8

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

For this young waitress, at least, a masked hero would come out
of the darkness. For her, there was a hero to save the innocent.
He struck without warning. A swirl of the black cape to make
himself appear larger, terrifying—all in complete silence. With a
sideways sweep of his left gauntlet, he knocked the switchblade
from the T-shirted tough’s hand. The young thug yowled, springing
backward as if he had touched a hot plate. “It’s the Batman!”
The second hoodlum dipped a hand inside his black leather
jacket, reaching for something, but another gauntleted blow sent
the young man sprawling to the ground, the wind knocked out
of him.
Keep the victim safe. He jerked the waitress roughly aside, out
of the way of the third thug, who also reached inside his jacket.
But instead of grabbing a handgun or a switchblade, the attacker
retrieved something golden and shiny.
A badge.
From behind him, the waitress shouted, “Gotham City PD—
freeze, Batman!”
His mind immediately clicked with the realization. A trap! The
police had laid an ambush for him. The thugs, the waitress . . .
undercover cops.
Time to make an exit.
The waitress released the German shepherd, and the snarling
dog launched itself at him, all claws, fur, and fangs, bowling him
to the ground. Using the muscles of his thighs and back, he threw
off the heavy dog, but it bounded toward him again. Now the
woman—the supposed victim—had a police-issue revolver in her
hand and a badge of her own. The other “toughs” had regrouped
and pressed closer, working together, surrounding him.
“I said freeze!” the waitress said. “You’re under arrest.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

9

With a ﬂourish, he swirled the weighted, scalloped hem of his
cape, knocking the revolver out of her hand, then bolted toward
the shelter of the arboretum and the concealing shadows of the
trees.
The police dog gave chase but was unable to bite through his
armored fabric, though the weight and pressure threw him off
balance. Only one way to react: He let himself trip, then purposely
rolled, using momentum to take the dog with him, and shoved it
away as he ran in the opposite direction.
As a boy, even with all the riches in the world and a large manor
house with expansive grounds, Bruce Wayne had never owned a
dog—or any kind of pet. He had not wanted to get attached to
anything. Too dangerous.
Now his suit gave him plenty of options. With a crunch and a
twist, applying just the right pressure from his left boot heel, he
released a cloud of stinking purple gas. The stench and the smoke
drove the dog away yelping.
Now, however, the wino sprang out of the fountain and drew
the service weapon he had been concealing within the rumpled
paper bag. The two furtive men from the park bench also came at
him, carrying a net between them.
Everyone was part of the trap.
Though he raised an arm to protect himself, the thrown net
caught the sharp points of his mask and his forearm gauntlets.
From the trees, a voice on a bullhorn bellowed, “Batman, this
is Captain James Gordon of the Gotham City Police Department.
Surrender yourself.”
He saw ﬂashing red lights, heard sirens coming from the
streets outside the park—more policemen homing in on the same
quarry: him.

10

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

He slashed the strands of the net with his gauntlet’s sharp
razors, pulled himself free, and began to run through the shadowlatticed moonlight.
The “wino” opened ﬁre, and bullets splintered bark and wood
from a thick-boled oak. Swirling his dark cape like a toreador
to distract the aggressor, he disguised the position of his body.
Bullets stitched along the ﬂailing fabric; none touched his skin.
His armored outﬁt would stop or slow most bullets, but a solid
impact from a slug might knock him to the ground.
And then the police would be able to catch him.
He made for the trees. Though the police captain’s voice had
come from that direction, he had to hope a large contingent of the
GCPD wasn’t hiding among the closely packed trunks.
All this manpower was being wasted on him. The corrupt police
force clearly didn’t like the fact that he worked against criminals—
successfully, though outside of their laws—and worse, several of
his recent captures were little hoodlums who had squealed about
cops being on the take, which had led to ofﬁcial investigations. He
knew the Gotham City PD protected its own, and they didn’t like
to be embarrassed.
And he had embarrassed them.
They wanted to bring him down.
The two men from the park bench rushed toward him, guns
drawn. He struck one of them with a hammer blow to the stomach,
the other with an uppercut to the jaw. Both men fell hard.
He refused to kill—not cops, not even criminals—but some­
times he couldn’t avoid inﬂicting an injury or two, a broken jaw, a
shattered tooth. He had to do what was necessary to get away. The
pain of bruises and broken bones would heal.
The pain of his parents’ deaths would not.
He melted into the trees, trying to be silent, but his boots were

ENEMIES & ALLIES

11

heavy, and the underbrush made crackling sounds. Even against
a background of wailing sirens and shouting police, the noises
seemed incredibly loud.
But this was the Thomas and Martha Wayne Memorial Park,
and it held plenty of secrets. His secrets. If only he could ﬁnd the
cleverly concealed hollow tree stump, his emergency exit.
Two uniformed policemen from the squad cars tried to cut him
off, and now it was time to use his Bat-shuriken, small projectiles
he had modeled after ninja throwing stars. They came into the
palm of his gauntlet, each one no bigger than his curled foreﬁn­
ger. He threw them accurately, their gleaming black curves shaped
like an emblematic bat. The pointed tips nipped his pursuers’ skin,
leaving behind small wounds, surprise, and a sting of pain—and
a fast-acting tranquilizer he’d obtained from the cloud forests in
Ecuador. The two men yelped and went down.
He kept pushing ahead. The tree stump wasn’t far now.
Suddenly he came upon a man with glasses, a thick mustache,
light brown hair, a police captain’s uniform. James Gordon,
recently transferred from Chicago and making quite a name for
himself in the Gotham City PD. Apparently not corrupt. Yet. In a
ready stance, Gordon pointed the revolver’s barrel directly at the
bat symbol in the middle of his chest armor.
How could the reﬂection of blue steel be so bright in such a dim
forest?
“There are two ways this can end, Batman. You come with me
now—or you die.”
Policemen had so little imagination. Only two ways? He raised
his black-gloved hands as if in surrender. Though Gordon was
not fooled, the movement distracted him for a critical instant.
A small set of bolos ﬂew forward, tiny balls tethered by hightensile-strength polymer threads that wrapped themselves around

12

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Gordon’s closely aligned wrists. With a reﬂexive twitch of the
trigger ﬁnger, Gordon’s gun discharged.
A quick leap to the left. The bullet smashed into a tree trunk,
cutting a long, pale gouge in the fresh wood.
In an instant he had tackled Gordon, using his larger bulk and
greater strength to overpower the captain. “You are wasting my
time—and your own,” he growled, the ﬁrst words he’d spoken
since donning the outﬁt that night. How could he make this man
see that they were on the same side? “Gotham would be a safer
place if you’d worry less about me and more about criminals.”
Struggling, Gordon hissed at him, “I am stopping a criminal—
it’s what I do. It’s what the police do, not vigilantes. I’ll have you up
on charges of assault, avoiding arrest, and terrorizing the citizens
of Gotham City.”
“It’s the criminals who are afraid of me, not the citizens.” This
naive and idealistic police captain might have become an ally
under other circumstances. “Think, Gordon! How many muggers,
thieves, assassins have I taken off the streets? That should be your
job. What crimes have I committed, exactly? Taking justice into
my own hands when the Gotham police won’t do their work?”
Though he was pinned to the ground, glasses askew, Gordon
looked angry. “A criminal with a moral conscience?”
“Ask yourself who’s really doing a better job of law enforce­
ment. How many real criminals could your ofﬁcers have caught
tonight if you hadn’t wasted so much manpower trying to trap
me?” He jerked his masked head to indicate the police swarming
through the park, all the squad cars that had converged on the
street. “Those ofﬁcers could have been on patrol, protecting the
innocent. How many people became victims tonight because of
your skewed priorities?”
Gordon appeared brieﬂy confused by the idea—until the quick

ENEMIES & ALLIES

13

anesthetic spray beneath his nose sent him into slumberland. At
least he would have something to think about. The chemical would
put the captain out for an hour.
Five minutes would have been long enough.
Slipping away, he covered all traces of his passage, careful to
leave no sign that even the police dogs could ﬁnd in the morning.
His boots and uniform were specially treated to leave no scent.
He found the disguised tree stump, slipped into the underground
passage, and made his way back home.
To the manor.
To the Cave.
The ﬁne dinner Alfred had prepared for him was still warm
and waiting for him as though just laid out on the tray, the dishes
covered. The sardonic butler always seemed to know exactly when
he would return.
It had been a frustrating night. He had stopped no crimes,
saved no innocents. The hollowness in his chest remained unﬁlled.
There was too much work to do in Gotham City, and he was only
one person. He had no allies.

Chapter 2

GOTHAM CIT Y
WAYN E MANOR

H E ELABORATELY APPOI NTED DRAWI NG ROOM WAS TH REE

ti
times
the size of Clark Kent’s apartment in Metropolis. After
the thin butler had ushered them inside and closed the double
French doors, Clark and Jimmy Olsen waited for nearly twenty
minutes. Bruce Wayne apparently wasn’t a very punctual person,
at least when it came to meeting with reporters. Clark supposed
that men like him operated on their own schedules, with little
regard for regular people.
Jimmy stashed his Graﬂex Speed Graphic camera and his
leather equipment kit on the seat of a large club chair as he gawked
at all the strange items the millionaire had on display. The objets
d’art would have been considered museum-quality relics anywhere
else, but here they were simply knickknacks.
“Gosh, Mr. Kent, have you ever been in a house like this?”
Jimmy picked up an ornate bronze dagger that had actually been
used by a soldier in the Roman legions. Bruce Wayne apparently
used it as a letter opener.
“Don’t break anything, Jimmy.” Clark stood in the middle of

ENEMIES & ALLIES

15

the room on a lovely Moroccan carpet, as if keeping a safe distance
from all the antiques.
The young photographer guiltily set down the knife and opened
an old leather-bound book. The pages, which seemed to be vellum,
slightly frayed at the edges, were covered with handwritten text
and lavishly illuminated with gold leaf and colored inks. “I’ll
bet Mr. Wayne spends money on antiques like I spend money on
bubblegum.”
The extravagance made Clark uncomfortable. How different
this was from the homey Smallville farmhouse where he’d grown
up, with its inviting front porch and a kitchen that always seemed
to smell of fresh-baked apple pie or pot roast. Comparing his home
with the lonely, empty luxury here, Clark decided he preferred his
own upbringing.
He straightened his glasses and smoothed back his dark hair.
His blue suit was somewhat rumpled, despite his best efforts to be
careful during their train trip from Metropolis. He adjusted his tie
and, for the tenth time, consulted his new Timex watch.
The French doors opened, and the butler returned, impeccable
in his tuxedo. In one hand he carried an ornate silver tray, polished
to a high gleam that reﬂected the light of the ﬁre blazing in the
hearth. Perched atop the tray was a single tumbler ﬁlled with a
bubbling purple beverage.
“As requested, sirs, a Nehi grape soda for Mr. Olsen, and
nothing for Mr. Kent.” Jimmy took the soda pop, aligned the straw,
and drew a long and thankful slurp. The butler paused at the door
on his way out. “Master Wayne should be with you shortly.”
Within moments another man stood at the hall doorway on the
opposite side of the drawing room. He wore a ﬂamboyant smoking
jacket and exuded a kind of animal magnetism. He was about

16

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Clark’s age, with dark hair and handsome features. “Wayne,” he
announced. “Bruce Wayne.”
Clark stepped forward, extending a hand while purposely yet
discreetly catching the toe of his shoe on the fringed edge of the
Moroccan rug. He stumbled, caught his balance, and pretended
embarrassment. “I’m Clark Kent from the Daily Planet. Thank
you for agreeing to this interview.”
At the same time, Jimmy snatched up his camera, pressed the
opening button, and pulled the focus bed down until it locked into
position. He inserted a ﬂashbulb and kept himself ready.
Bruce said airily, “My apologies for being late. This is rather early
in the day for me.” He looked a little bleary-eyed as he smoothed
a hand down the front of his smoking jacket, then walked over to
a tray where Alfred had set out a martini glass containing a clear
drink in which ﬂoated a twist of lemon peel.
“But . . . it’s past noon.” Clark could never forget his years of
getting up before dawn to do his farm chores before going to school.
“I keep late hours.” Bruce sipped his martini, closed his eyes,
and smiled with pleasure. “Oh, forgive my manners. Would you
like one as well?”
“No, thank you, Mr. Wayne—I don’t drink.”
Amused, Bruce took another sip. “Exactly what I’ve heard
about you.”
Clark remembered to keep his shoulders somewhat slumped to
diminish his physical size. “You checked up on me? I thought I was
doing the story.”
“It never hurts to know who you’re up against.” Bruce lounged
in a high-backed club chair near the ﬁreplace. “Too bad Lois
Lane isn’t doing this interview. I read that famous proﬁle she did
on—what do they call him in Metropolis? ‘Superman’? A very
imaginative piece.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

17

Jimmy felt the need to defend Lois’s honor (though she could
have done so perfectly well herself, had she been there). “Miss
Lane really should have won the Pulitzer for that article. We were
all rooting for her at the Planet.”
“Too many people found it preposterous.” Bruce set his martini
aside and managed to make himself look even more comfortable
than he had a moment earlier. “Is it true that Superman claims to
be an alien from another planet? And that Miss Lane took him at
his word?”
Jimmy squared his shoulders. “Gosh, Mr. Wayne, who
wouldn’t? Superman ﬂies! Bullets bounce right off his chest—I’ve
seen it myself!”
Bruce rolled his eyes. “Technology can give someone superior
abilities. No need to make up aliens. I think you’re all a tad too
gullible in Metropolis.”
Clark cleared his throat, took out his reporter’s notebook,
and withdrew one of his three well-sharpened pencils. “At the
moment, Miss Lane is on another assignment. The Planet wanted
a proﬁle piece on you, Mr. Wayne, not an exposé or headline
story.” He ﬂipped to a blank page, keeping up the appearance of
slight fumbling. “Could we get started, please?”
Bruce took another careful sip of his martini, though the liquid
level didn’t seem to diminish. “Fire away, Kent. I’m all yours for
ﬁfteen minutes, before my next engagement.”
“Since you raised the question of Superman,” Clark began,
“I hear that Gotham has its own costumed hero—or vigilante,
depending on whom you ask. The Batman. As one of Gotham City’s
most prominent citizens, what are your thoughts on the Batman?
Is he a psychopathic vigilante or a self-styled Robin Hood? And if
he is one of the good guys, why doesn’t he just cooperate with the
police?”

18

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Bruce let out a very small sigh. “You don’t know the police in
Gotham City.”
“We heard on the radio that the police tried to apprehend the
Batman last night,” Clark said. “Apparently, they failed, despite a
large-scale manhunt.”
Bruce looked bored. “That’s local news, nothing the Planet
would be interested in.”
The man seemed inclined to be evasive, and Clark sensed that
a stronger hand might be necessary in dealing with him. “Then
let’s make it relevant to our proﬁle. Last night, Batman was
supposedly lurking in the Thomas and Martha Wayne Memorial
Park—a place meant to honor your parents’ memory. According
to the Hall of Public Records, the park has become a haven for
muggers and drug dealers of late, and no law-abiding citizen would
willingly go there. Now it also seems to be the nighttime haunt of
the Batman. Any comment?” He held his pencil poised.
When Bruce Wayne set his martini down and straightened in
his chair, Clark noticed just how muscular the man really was.
His question seemed to have sparked a hint of anger. Clark didn’t
like to upset people, even though Lois advised him that keeping
an interview subject off guard was the best way to get candid and
interesting answers.
Bruce ﬂushed as if embarrassed. “Last night’s incident made
it plain that I have to make a priority of cleaning the place up.
I’m ashamed I allowed the park to become so run-down. Wayne
Enterprises keeps me a very busy man, but that’s no excuse.”
Clark wasn’t buying it. “Really? I’ve heard from other sources
that you don’t put much time into running the company. Your
board of directors handles most of the decisions.”
Bruce spread his hands. “Well, to an outsider maybe a gigantic

ENEMIES & ALLIES

19

company seems to run itself, but in truth I am responsible for
hundreds of vital decisions.”
In an effort to capture this vague answer verbatim, Clark began
scribbling with his pencil. The lead point snapped off, and he was
disconcerted by his momentary loss of restraint. At least he hadn’t
accidentally pulverized the pencil into sawdust as he clenched his
ﬁst. He smoothly pulled out another and continued transcribing
Bruce Wayne’s answer. He added, “Lex Luthor himself has been
quoted as saying that he thinks you should take a closer personal
interest in running your company.”
“Mr. Luthor has a different managerial style.” Bruce gave
a casually dismissive wave. “He tends to all the minutiae of his
business because he doesn’t trust his subordinates. My board of
directors, on the other hand, has helped keep Wayne Enterprises
strong and lucrative since I was a young boy. They ran the company
quite proﬁtably while I was abroad for many years.”
Clark skimmed down his list of questions and notes. “If I
might change subjects, you’ve been called Gotham’s most eligible
bachelor, Mr. Wayne. Suave, rich, and single, you’re practically
made for media attention, yet in most ways you remain a mystery.”
Bruce visibly relaxed, as though glad to be in safer territory. “I’ll
tell you a secret, Kent. I take my inspiration from Ian Fleming’s
novels. James Bond is a truly intriguing character—well dressed,
cultured, leading a life full of action and romance. Isn’t that
something we could all aspire to?” He raised his martini glass.
“Like this, for instance. A Vesper: three parts gin, one part vodka,
half a part Kina Lillet, a slice of lemon peel. Shaken, not stirred.”
He took another appreciative sip. “Delicious discovery.”
Jimmy butted in. “Gosh, you read James Bond novels, Mr.
Wayne?”

20

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

“Diligently. In fact, I am such an admirer of Mr. Fleming’s
works that I can’t wait for the American editions, so as soon as
Jonathan Cape publishes them in Britain, I have a copy ﬂown over
here. I ﬁnd the books highly entertaining, though I must admit
that some of the Bond villains are a little outrageous.”
Clark pressed, still looking for his lead. “Besides imitating
James Bond, what are your other secrets? Do you emulate any
other ﬁctional characters? Our readers want to know.”
Bruce chuckled. “It’s difﬁcult to keep secrets when people like
you are watching my every move, Kent. Photographers everywhere,
reporters, gossip columnists. I can’t go out to dinner without the
whole world knowing what I order or how many crumbs I leave on
the tablecloth.”
Obviously, Wayne didn’t completely avoid media attention,
though most of the articles about him were surprisingly shallow
and devoid of facts. Clark wasn’t sure he liked this aloof and
hedonistic man. Yes, he had a tragic past and an isolated upbring­
ing, but he also bore the hallmarks of a spoiled rich kid with more
money than he could spend. Clark supposed that Bruce Wayne
had never really needed to work a day in his life. A week on the
Kent farm in Kansas would certainly have taught Bruce Wayne a
little humility and a solid work ethic.
The butler stepped through the French doors and raised his
eyebrows. “Mr. Wayne, the commissioner of police is ready for
your luncheon. Shall I have the Bentley brought around?”
Bruce glanced at the gold Rolex Oyster Perpetual on his wrist.
“Sorry, Kent, but I do have another engagement. Alfred, please see
these gentlemen out.”
“Wait just a moment, please!” Jimmy, who had been listening
with rapt attention, held up his camera. “I need some photos.”
Striking a casual pose, Bruce stood by the club chair near the

ENEMIES & ALLIES

21

ﬁreplace, accustomed to having his photo taken. Jimmy adjusted
the focusing bed and pushed the button, and the ﬂashbulb erupted.
He quickly unscrewed the hot bulb with his ﬁngertips, wincing,
and replaced it with another. “I’d better get a few more shots.”
When Jimmy was ﬁnished, but before he could pack his camera
away, Bruce extended his arm in a magnanimous gesture. “Kent,
come take a picture with me. One photo with the two of us. Clark
Kent with Bruce Wayne. Mr. Olsen, if you please?”
Clark raised his hands. “That’s not necessary, Mr. Wayne.”
“I insist.” No argument.
Embarrassed, Clark moved to stand beside him. The two men
were almost equally large shoulder to shoulder. Bruce smiled and
stood close. “Make sure you send me a copy of this one, please. I’d
like to frame it for my ofﬁce wall.”
Jimmy took one last photo in a blinding ﬂash.

Chapter 3

M ETROPOLIS
TH E DAILY PLAN ET

ITH SOARING SKYSCRAPERS, BUSTLING PEOPLE, MUSIC,

aand the constant noise from trafﬁc and pedestrians,
Metropolis was an entirely different world from the American
heartland where Clark Kent had grown up.
Surrounded by tall buildings of concrete and glass, the Daily
Planet ofﬁces were alive with energy, ringing telephones, chatter­
ing employees, and clacking typewriters. A harried switchboard
operator made connections, plugging in wires as if she were
performing emergency surgery on an octopus. On the streets below,
cars honked their horns; a trafﬁc cop blew his shrill whistle.
Clark knew he wasn’t in Kansas anymore.
Since his hearing was incredibly acute, he had trained himself
to tune out distractions and focus on his manual typewriter and
the sheet of bond rolled into the platen.
On the trip back from Gotham, Clark had compiled his notes
and impressions about Bruce Wayne, pulling together enough
details to make an interesting story. Once the ﬁlm was developed,
Jimmy’s photos of the millionaire and his imposing manor had
turned out well, including the embarrassing one of Wayne acting

ENEMIES & ALLIES

23

all chummy with Clark. (Jimmy had already sent a glossy print of
that one to the Wayne Enterprises headquarters.) Even gruff Perry
White had pronounced three of Jimmy’s shots “decent enough to
use.”
At his desk in the bullpen on the thirtieth ﬂoor, Clark hunched
over the keys, hunting and pecking his way through the ﬁ rst draft
of his proﬁle article. He had learned to control his muscles and
give the machine relatively delicate taps, careful never to let on
how fast he could really type. His ﬁrst experience writing at the
Planet had been rather unfortunate; intent on his article, he had
pounded away on the keys with such vigor that his ﬁngers had
smashed directly through them and shattered the machine. Now
he was both a better typist and a better reporter.
But this proﬁle of Bruce Wayne was hardly news. Unquestion­
ably, the man did plenty of good work and contributed large sums
to charity. His extravagant lifestyle pegged him as someone who
belonged out at night, dressed in a ﬁne tuxedo, with a beautiful
woman on his arm. Clark couldn’t understand why the man was
so devoted to his dreary Gotham City; on the other hand, Clark
himself called a dot on the map in Kansas home. No accounting
for tastes.
Clark soon ﬁnished his ﬁrst draft, pulled the sheet from his
typewriter, and removed a sharpened red pencil from a cup on
his desk. He combed over the words, marking corrections. Most
reporters wouldn’t bother typing a clean copy before showing the
piece to the editor, but Clark wanted to make the best impression.
Always. It was something Jonathan Kent had expected of him.
Clark glanced around, inserted a sheet of bond into the type­
writer, and when no one was looking, retyped the whole article in a
blur. With the clean copy in hand, he walked toward Perry White’s
ofﬁce. Several pool reporters gathered around the shortwave radio

24

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

set in the bullpen, always looking for a story. They monitored the
various frequencies, hoping to pick up a scoop.
Passing through the bullpen, Clark gave Lois Lane a polite
smile, but she grabbed the phone on her desk and dialed a number
with an intensity that showed she had a hot lead. He had always
found Lois both beautiful and fascinating, with her dark eyes and
her long dark hair in a no-nonsense but stylish cut. He’d been shyly
watching her ever since he started working at the Planet.
She presented an all-business attitude to anyone who doubted
her while revealing her generous heart to only a few. Since Clark
was still a new kid on the block, Lois had not yet decided whether
to consider him a competitor or harmless (apparently the only two
options, in her view). One of these days, Clark would ask her out
to lunch, but he wanted to let her notice him ﬁrst.
He held up his article as he knocked on the editor’s door. “Here’s
the proﬁle you asked for, Mr. White—everything you wanted to
know about Bruce Wayne.”
Perry White chomped on a cigar. His ashtray was continually full
of the ugly chewed brown ends, and his ofﬁce reeked of resinous,
pungent smoke. “I don’t want to know anything about Wayne, but
our readers are suckers for this stuff.” Perry absently brushed his
ﬁngers through the white fringe of hair at his temples. He let his
cigar droop and made rough grumbling noises as he scanned the
paragraphs. “It won’t win a Pulitzer, but it’ll sell enough papers
to pay for your expense account.” He waggled a ﬁnger. “You and
Olsen better not submit any extravagant meal receipts.”
“Why no, Mr. White. We just ate hot dogs.”
“You should have let Wayne pay for lunch. He’s got enough
money to give you prime rib.” Perry tossed the copy onto his desk.
“If you add a few more quotes, maybe some titillating details, it’ll

ENEMIES & ALLIES

25

lead off the section-three society page, but it’s not a headline. From
now on get me headlines. We’re a newspaper here, not one of those
gossip rags.”
“Yes, Mr. White. I’ll do one more draft.” Clark pushed his
glasses up on his nose.
Through the constant chatter and background noise in the bull­
pen, Clark noted a sudden urgent change among the staff reporters,
indrawn breaths, excited conversation. People began to cluster
around the shortwave radio, listening intently. Lois hurried to join
them.
With an instinct for news, Perry poked his head out of his ofﬁce.
“Great Caesar’s ghost, what’s going on out there? And why aren’t
those people at their desks working?”
“I think something’s happening, sir,” Clark said.
“This is a newspaper, Kent. Go ﬁnd out what it is.”
“It’s an SOS call!” snapped Steve Lombard, a reporter who
primarily covered sports. “A passenger boat sinking forty miles
off the coast, one hundred twenty-three passengers and crew.” He
looked up from the shortwave set. “It’s the Star City Queen. One
of the engines exploded, blew out the lower hull, and she’s going
down fast. They’ve called for the Coast Guard, but they’re still
miles away.”
Clark gave the matter his full attention as he backed out of the
editor’s ofﬁce. Perry pushed past him, no longer interested in the
Bruce Wayne article. Lois was in the middle of the excitement. Her
face showed clear concern as well as frustration. “It’ll take rescue
ships more than an hour to get out that far.”
“Gosh, by that time the ship will be sunk!” Jimmy said.
“Better hope they stocked up on lifeboats,” Lombard cracked,
as if the situation were a joke.

26

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Lois grabbed her purse and her notepad. “Jimmy, follow me
down to the docks. Maybe we can get aboard a Coast Guard ship
before they head out.”
The young photographer had already snatched up his camera.
“Sounds like they’ve already been dispatched, Miss Lane.”
“Then we’ll wait for them to come back, gather some informa­
tion in the meantime, do man-on-the-street interviews. Let’s hope
this doesn’t turn out like the Hindenburg or the Titanic.” In a
ﬂurry she was gone.
Clark knew what he had to do. He made an excuse to a dis­
tracted Perry, mumbling something about checking his sources on
the Wayne proﬁle; then he ducked down the hall. Not a moment to
lose—the people aboard the doomed Star City Queen must have
been terriﬁed, knowing that even the swiftest Coast Guard rescue
would be a long time coming.
It was easy to ﬁnd a secluded closet, where he stopped being
Clark Kent and became someone else entirely.

Chapter 4

TH E STAR CIT Y QUE E N

RESSE D I N RE D AN D BLU E, H I S CAPE STREAM I NG BE H I N D

him, Kal-El shot out of a window on the opposite side of
the building. Right ﬁst extended, he soared into the sky, circled the
rooftop’s golden sphere with the orbiting words “Daily Planet,”
then raced toward Metropolis harbor.
Every second counted. No time to enjoy the euphoria of ﬂying,
the freedom of not having to hide his secret identity. Martha and
Jonathan Kent had raised their adopted son to be much more than
a passive observer. Seeing a problem, Kal-El had to do something
about it. It was the core of who he was.
Leaving Metropolis and the shoreline behind, he headed out
over the ocean. He streaked past the diligently chugging Coast
Guard boats that churned a white wake behind them. Lois had
wanted so badly to get aboard one of them to be an eyewitness
reporter with the rescue operations; he realized he could have
deposited her on the deck right before the surprised faces of the
Coast Guard sailors. But he didn’t want to put Lois in the middle
of a dangerous situation. She had a bad habit of doing that all by
herself.

28

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Kal-El had to think of the desperate passengers ﬁrst, all those
people who needed him. More than forty miles from port, the Star
City Queen was all alone.
Except for him.
With an odd combination of super-hearing and enhanced vision,
he was able to push his senses from the short-wavelength band of
the X-ray spectrum out to intense infrared, and from there to the
very-long-wavelength radiofrequency range, where he picked up
the urgent SOS transmission bleating from the Star City Queen.
He could even hear—ever so faintly above the wind and the stirring
waves—the cries of terror from the passengers and crew.
He tightened his ﬁst and ﬂew faster, slicing through the salty
air and across the open expanse of deep water until he found the
curling plume of smoke from the burning engines. Below, in the
middle of blue-green emptiness, he spotted the wallowing Star
City Queen.
The large boat canted at an unusual angle, its lower decks
ﬂooded. Below the waterline at the level of the engine rooms was
a large hole made by an explosion, and portions of the hull bent
outward from the blast. The frightened passengers had congre­
gated out on deck, clinging to the rails as the ship tilted more and
more, taking on water.
He could see no other boats within range, no rescuers who
might offer any help. He’d have to do this himself.
The Queen was an old ship, repainted and recommissioned,
but Kal-El could see that she should have been scuttled long ago.
Two of the white-painted lifeboats had already been set out on the
water, whereupon they had immediately sprung leaks, and several
passengers now splashed in the water, clinging to life preservers.
Kal-El let himself drop down, red cape ﬂuttering as he alighted
on the bow, where a gray-faced, bearded captain stared at the

ENEMIES & ALLIES

29

disaster with red-rimmed eyes. “You seem to be having a few
problems, Captain. I’m here to help.”
Superman’s arrival startled them all. The passengers began
cheering so exuberantly that several people lost their balance on
the slanted deck and had to clutch their companions to keep from
falling overboard.
The captain straightened, showing a fresh burst of conﬁdence.
“Superman, you don’t know how glad we are to see you! I doubt
we’ll be aﬂoat for more than another hour. How close are the
Coast Guard vessels?”
“More than an hour away,” he said. His voice became stern.
“Why don’t you have enough lifeboats for all these passengers?”
The bearded man seemed ashamed and embarrassed. “The
owners ﬁgured it would be a waste of their money to follow the
recommendations from the safety inspection, and now these poor
passengers will have to pay for it.”
Kal-El answered with an angry frown. He looked at the ten
people bobbing in the water who had been in the sunken lifeboat;
they were clinging to life rings. “I take it you don’t have enough life
preservers either?”
“We never expected to sink, sir,” said the ﬁrst mate, looking
sheepish. He was even younger than Jimmy Olsen.
Kal-El’s brows drew together. “No one expects accidents.
That’s why it’s so important to take precautions.” He dashed off
and promptly returned carrying two dripping passengers he had
ﬁshed out of the water from the wallowing lifeboats. After another
four trips, he had retrieved all the sodden people from the waves,
but they weren’t much safer on the slanted deck of the Star City
Queen.
The crowd hung on his every word. Straightening his hornrimmed glasses, a balding businessman said, “Even if you ﬂy us

30

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

to the nearest port, Superman, you can only rescue two of us at a
time.”
“Maybe he can carry one of the lifeboats loaded with people,” a
plump woman suggested; then, lowering her voice, she said, “But
the boat could fall apart on the way.”
“You’re thinking too small,” Kal-El said as an idea came to
mind, though he wasn’t sure he could manage something so
extravagant. “Find a way to secure yourselves here on deck, all of
you.”
“What are you going to do?” the captain called. “Is there a way
to save my ship?”
Another thump came from belowdecks, a secondary explosion
in the engine room. A cry of surprise and fear rippled through the
crowded passengers. The Star City Queen lurched.
Kal-El nodded briskly. “Trust me. This will work.” He sprang
into the air, shot up high over the listing passenger ship, turned,
and dove deep beneath the water.
As the cold ocean folded around him, his eyes adjusted to the
dimness. Above him, Kal-El saw a stream of air bubbles gushing
out of the damaged hull as water continued to ﬁll the Star City
Queen. The ship gave a stuttering groan like a death rattle.
Swimming upward, gathering speed and concentrating his
strength, Kal-El approached the bottom of the large hull. The
passenger ship seemed so enormous, and he was just one small
man.
But he wasn’t just a man. He was Superman.
Kal-El spread his hands on either side of the keel, pushing his
shoulder against the metal hull. The whole ship shuddered as he
heaved with all his strength. He had never lifted anything so large
before, had never tried, but he didn’t allow doubts to enter his

ENEMIES & ALLIES

31

mind. He would lift this sinking ship because he had to. There was
no other option.
Holding his breath, Kal-El exerted himself, shoving the huge
hulk high enough to raise the gaping engine-room hole above the
waterline. If nothing else, holding it here would stop the Star City
Queen from sinking.
But that wasn’t good enough.
Kal-El kept straining. Slowly—like a spoon being pulled out of
Martha Kent’s jar of thick molasses—the passenger ship rose out
of the water. He pushed higher and higher, until the vessel itself
was airborne. Salt water streamed from its sides in a drenching
downpour, falling with a whisper-roar back into the waves.
The passengers on the deck were astonished. Some cheered;
some hung on for dear life.
With the ship suspended in the air, rocking slightly as if in
heavy seas, Kal-El turned its bow and ﬂew off toward the harbor
in Metropolis Bay. The damaged vessel groaned and creaked with
the strain, but it held together as he carried it along.
He passed directly over the Coast Guard rescue ships, which still
churned across the open water as fast as they could go. Uniformed
crewmen stepped out of the wheelhouses and onto the decks,
shading their eyes and looking up into the sky at the astounding
sight. Releasing the Star City Queen with one hand, Kal-El waved
at them as he ﬂew past. Surprised and confused, the crews stared,
then began to cheer. The Coast Guard captains turned their ships
about and began chugging back toward the harbor.
Excited and tense crowds had already gathered on the docks in
Metropolis harbor. Smaller boats moved out of the way, clearing
a spot in the shallower water as Kal-El came in and gently set the
damaged vessel down at an unoccupied slip on the wharf. He

32

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

surfaced again, dripping wet, and landed on the wooden dock. The
elated captain of the Queen threw him a thick hawser, and Kal-El
pulled the boat closer to the pilings, lashing it ﬁrmly in place.
At the edge of the crowd he saw Jimmy Olsen dutifully taking
photograph after photograph. Lois pushed to the front, eager to be
ﬁrst to talk with the rescued passengers and crew. Kal-El was glad
she would get her big story, and he raised a hand to greet her. Their
eyes met, and when Lois returned his wave, he would have sworn
that she seemed much more interested in interviewing him than
the captain or crew. Though he would have loved to do her a favor,
he didn’t consider it fair to give her such obvious special treatment.
She was an excellent reporter and could do very well by herself.
Later on, Clark Kent would be sure to congratulate her.
Emergency crews arrived to help the shaken passengers. All of
the rescued people applauded Superman. Many began jabbering
about their experience; some of them cried. Kal-El stayed on
the docks long enough to receive their thanks, smiling politely
but uncomfortable with all the attention. He had done his good
deed, and that was all that truly mattered to him. Although it was
difﬁcult to show modesty after carrying a giant passenger ship
across the sky, the Kents had taught him to be humble.
With a wave—and a last wink at Lois—Kal-El ﬂew into the
sky. He had to get back to the Daily Planet, change clothes, and
return to his desk before anyone noticed he was gone. Clark Kent
had an article due.

Chapter 5

SIBE RIA
ARIGUSK A GU LAG

OM MUN ISM IS TH E GREATEST M ENACE WESTERN CIVI LIZA­

tion has ever faced,” declared Lex Luthor, prominent
American industrialist and one of the world’s richest men.
Leaning across the rough pine table inside the administration
cabin, the brawny Soviet general chuckled. “And you capitalists
want to destroy the working class by denying the fair distribution
of wealth.” He grinned, exposing square teeth.
“I prefer to keep my own wealth, thank you.” Luthor leaned back
in the distinctly rustic and distinctly uncomfortable chair. “We’re
both satisﬁed with our propaganda, General.” He was perfectly
comfortable speaking in Russian, having become ﬂuent in eleven
different languages before he turned his genius to nonlinguistic
pursuits.
General Anatoly Ceridov folded his sausagelike ﬁ ngers
together. The two men were alone in the Siberian work camp’s
headquarters—nothing more than a primitive hut, but it was the
best meeting place the Soviet KGB ofﬁcer could manage.
Ceridov had ice-blue eyes, a squarish face, and rough skin,
either from standing too long in the frigid Siberian wind or from

34

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

using too harsh an aftershave. His reddish hair was carefully
slicked back with a perfumed hair tonic. Considering that he lived
in one of the most godforsaken areas on earth, his obvious vanity
was both peculiar and incomprehensible.
The general wore two obsidian—rather than gold—rank stars
on a red epaulet, denoting that his rank carried both great power
and great secrecy. No one outside the innermost levels of the KGB
knew of Ceridov’s projects, or his existence. But Lex Luthor did.
Ceridov extracted a silver cigarette case from a uniform pocket.
He snapped the case open and extended it invitingly. “Cigarette,
comrade Luthor? American tobacco is quite a luxury.”
Luthor gave a withering answer. “I can always get American
tobacco.”
His cordial gift snubbed, the general snapped the case shut. “Ah,
but you cannot get real Russian vodka.” He went to a corner of the
wood-paneled room, where an empty diesel barrel had been ﬁlled
with packed snow, in which rested an unmarked bottle of clear,
oily liquid. Without bothering to ask, Ceridov poured two glasses
and handed one to Luthor. “We have many plans to discuss, and
vodka makes even weighty problems seem lighter.”
Luthor took a sip and found the taste of the ﬁery alcohol rough
and harsh. He despised wasting valuable time on social niceties,
since he knew full well how much his time was worth. (He had,
in fact, done the calculations himself.) “I’d prefer to get down to
business. Immediately.”
He had already taken incredible precautions to keep their
meetings secret—a private jet with no ﬁled ﬂight plan, ﬂying below
radar so that even the Distant Early Warning–line guard stations
did not detect him. Now he took control of the meeting. “General,
as the weapons stockpiles increase on both sides, so does our power

ENEMIES & ALLIES

35

and inﬂuence. The USA and the Soviet Union must remain equally
matched so that you and I can continue to build our respective
arsenals. A cold war thrives on tension.”
Ceridov drained his glass. “The very best kind of war: no
shooting, but a great deal of money being spent on both sides.”
Only Luthor understood the delicate balance he had to achieve.
He was not just an important businessman, not just a wealthy man,
he was also a smart man who played chess on a global scale. He
owned a sprawling mansion in the swanky Lake District north of
Metropolis and more secondary homes than he could remember.
He could have a gorgeous woman on his arm whenever he
pleased. He could buy the ﬁnest things anyone might imagine.
But such triumphs and successes had begun to bore him.
Instead, Lex Luthor craved things less tangible: power, obedience,
and respect. Once he set his mind on those goals, he treated them
like any other business proposition. He created a perceived need,
then set out to become the only man who could ﬁll it.
Ceridov had a similar aim in the Soviet Union. While the pair
might have seemed to be rivals, their shared focus made them
convenient allies. Each man worked behind the scenes in his own
hemisphere. LuthorCorp and its military-industrial subsidiar­
ies reaped proﬁts hand over ﬁst, and the black-star KGB general
became extraordinarily inﬂuential in the Communist Party.
Luthor had recently completed the construction of a new base
on an island in the Caribbean, for which he had used mostly
expendable workers—much like the Soviet gulag slaves here—
to do the hazardous parts of the job, particularly in constructing
the small power reactor on the island. Many of the workers,
especially the weak and less valuable females whom he had placed
in the most hazardous activities, had succumbed to lethal radiation

36

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

exposure . . . which had the added beneﬁt, in Luthor’s view, of
ensuring that they could not reveal the existence or location of the
base. Yes, indeed, chess on a global scale.
“Unfortunately, comrade Luthor, you Americans have tipped
the balance of power by developing a super-weapon that we cannot
match. I have read reports of your ‘Superman’ in Metropolis. They
say he can leap tall buildings with a single bound, that he moves
faster than a speeding bullet.”
Luthor tried to cloak his annoyance with a mocking laugh. “You
of all people should know not to believe propaganda! According to
the newspapers, he also claims to be an alien. Personally, I’m not
convinced.”
“But I have seen the photographs and read the interview he
gave to Miss Lois Lane. Who is this man? How does he get his
powers?” Ceridov’s ice-blue eyes narrowed. “More important,
how will you keep him under your control? He is a loose cannon,
and a powerful one at that.”
“Don’t worry about some costumed man showing off abilities
that belong in a circus act. He’s a freak of nature.”
The general brooded in silence for a long moment. “If I learn
you are lying to me, that he is a product of your own secret eugenics
program . . .”
“Like the Soviet eugenics program?” Luthor smirked wryly. “I
know you’ve been trying to breed your own superman for years.”
Ceridov seemed embarrassed by this. “Your program appears to
have been more successful than ours.” He poured himself a second
glass, then offered the bottle to Luthor, who had taken only one
sip. “More vodka? It will keep you warm.”
Luthor rubbed his hands together briskly. Although Ceridov
had offered him a fur parka as soon as his private jet had landed,
Luthor still wore his business suit. “Why not just heat this cabin

ENEMIES & ALLIES

37

instead?” He knew that a modern scaled-down nuclear reactor
provided ample power for the whole gulag and the industrial
operations in the adjacent quarry. “We’re in the middle of one of
the largest untouched primeval forests in the world—can’t you
spare a few sticks of ﬁrewood?” He indicated the old-fashioned
potbellied stove that sat in the corner.
“It will do no good. The wood from these forests around the
meteor crater is . . . tainted, somehow. The ﬁre burns cold.”
Luthor scoffed. “Nonsense.”
Ceridov opened the stove, and Luthor noted that while a ﬁre
was blazing inside, it generated no warmth. The general added a
log from the ﬁrewood stack against the wall and shut the stove
again. He didn’t even need gloves to touch the metal. “If only I
had the manpower to investigate the mystery. Fortunately, our
beloved premier is bound to arrest more Soviet scientists soon,
charge them with crimes against the state, and sentence them here
to my gulag. Then, perhaps, I will have the luxury of conducting
research.”
Luthor had noticed an odd smell in the headquarters cabin—
wood smoke with a spoiled, vinegary undertone. “The wall
paneling? And this table? Made from the same local trees?”
The wood grain on the polished table, as well as the tongueand-groove paneling that covered the wall, had strange, hypnotic
swirls that drew Luthor’s attention. The patterns were quite un­
settling. Though he was not a superstitious man, Luthor thought
he saw hints of ghostly faces in the whorls, loops, and lines that
stained the wood—screaming faces. He shook his head, sure it
was some trick of Ceridov’s.
“Our workers cut down the trees, chop the ﬁrewood, and use
the lumber. Sometimes it is difﬁcult. Saw blades shatter. Trees fall
and crush woodcutters. Our teams have a very high fatality rate.”

38

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Ceridov drained his vodka and shrugged. “It is fortunate that we
have an inexhaustible supply of workers.”
“Let me see these workers and your quarry.” Impatient, Luthor
looked at the rectangular face of his wristwatch, a white-gold
Cartier Tank. “I’ve ﬂown halfway around the world not to see
you, General, but to observe the operations here. We’ve put a great
deal of effort into this boondoggle, and I have yet to be convinced
of its potential.”
“Then come look at our excavations of the meteor impact site.”
Ceridov pulled on his heavy jacket. He opened a desk drawer
and withdrew a Russian ushanka, the familiar fur hat, which he
proudly placed on Luthor’s bald head. “My gift to you. This will
keep your brain warm.”
“My thoughts keep my brain warm.”
Ceridov opened the wooden door to the watery sunshine of a late
Siberian spring. “The crater is very large. You will be impressed.”

Chapter 6

TH E DAILY PLAN ET

ITHOUT KNOCKING, LOIS MARCHED INTO PERRY WHITE’S

ofﬁce and dropped a newspaper on his desk, folded open
o
to section 3 and Jimmy Olsen’s photo of Bruce Wayne. “This
isn’t news, Chief. It’s entertainment. What’s so interesting about
a playboy who ﬂaunts his wealth and then tries to soothe his
conscience by doing charity work? You shouldn’t have sent Clark
to do a puff piece.”
“Wasn’t meant to be a puff piece.” Chomping on his cigar, Perry
picked up the newspaper and perused the article again.
Lois pushed the paper back down so he had to give her his
full attention. “I’ve got a better story to pitch. Forget Bruce
Wayne—Lex Luthor is a different breed entirely. I want to do a
proﬁle on Metropolis’s own rich industrialist, and you can bet your
ass my story won’t read like something written by the LuthorCorp
public relations department.”
Perry raised his bushy eyebrows. “Luthor doesn’t give feature
interviews. He likes his privacy too much. We’ve tried dozens of
times.”

40

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

“Superman doesn’t give interviews either, and I managed to
pull that off.”
“Good point.” Perry ﬁddled with his cigar, pondering. “You just
have a bee in your bonnet because Luthor invited Steve Lombard
to cover that ﬂamethrower demonstration last month instead of
you.” He actually chuckled, and a hot ﬂush came to her cheeks.
Lois had submitted requests to LuthorCorp to attend the
big-ticket military demonstration, but Luthor had turned her
down ﬂat. “Lombard is a sports reporter. What credentials does
he have to cover such an important story?”
“Lombard is also a man, and you’re not.”
Lois harrumphed, knowing that Perry had put his ﬁ nger on
the reason, though she hated to admit it. She knew full well the
difﬁculties a female journalist faced every day. “Then he might
as well have asked for Kent.” She tried to summon scorn into her
voice, but Clark was a decent reporter and so endearing with his
small-town innocence that she couldn’t think ill of him.
Lois leaned over the desk. “I have it on good authority that
there’s been a recent and very disturbing shakeup among the
employees of LuthorCorp. Lex Luthor has been rapidly, but very
quietly, getting rid of dozens of older men and all the women on
his workforce, even though they’ve been a vital part of his military
production lines for years. Tomorrow I’m meeting with a conﬁden­
tial source who’ll tell me what Luthor’s really doing in his weapons
factories. My guess is he’s got a whole boneyard of skeletons in
his closet.” She smiled at him. “By now you should know to let me
follow my instincts, Chief. How many other reporters have gotten
an interview with the Man of Steel?”
Perry sighed and leaned back in his creaking desk chair. “Go
ahead, Lois. See if you can dig up any dirt on Luthor. Once you

ENEMIES & ALLIES

41

make up your mind, no force in the world can stop you—not even
Superman. But be careful!”
She agreed quickly, but after hearing him give her the go-ahead,
she wasn’t really listening.

BACK AT HER DESK, LOIS SMILED TO HERSELF AS SHE REMEMBERED

how she had gotten her big scoop on Superman.
Sure, Clark Kent had been the one to break the story about the
strange ﬂying man clad in blue and red. Clark, a country bumpkin
fresh off the bus from Nowheresville, Kansas, had arrived at the
Daily Planet ofﬁces when Lois, like every other reporter in town,
was scrambling to get the story. In a single day, the mysterious
hero had saved an airplane from crashing, foiled a robbery at an
art museum, and saved ﬁve children and a puppy—never forget
the puppy!—from a burning tenement. But nobody knew who he
was or where he’d come from.
And Clark had waltzed in with a ﬁnished report, a front-page
article that gave the amazing details of all the hero’s exploits. He
had meekly asked for a job at the paper, and Perry gave it to him
on the spot. Clark Kent—with his self-effacing sense of humor, his
chivalry, and his bumbling kindness—had somehow scooped Lois
Lane.
While Clark’s article introduced Metropolis to the mystery,
Lois had given them the man. She had been the ﬁrst to speak with
him, had pried out answers to the most intriguing questions. . . .
On that terrifying, wonderful day, Lois had been hot on the
trail of jewel thieves who’d stolen the famed traveling exhibition of
exquisite Buccellati jewel-encrusted cups from the Siegel Museum
of Precious Gems and Geological Oddities. The thieves had

42

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

peppered the air with a barrage of bullets while innocent bystand­
ers dove for shelter.
Lois had joined the chase, racing along in her 1951 white Ford
convertible. The police were desperate to catch the robbers, the
thieves were desperate to get away, and Lois was desperate for
her story. She meant to scoop the whole world with an up-close­
and-personal eyewitness account. She gunned the engine, swerved
to pass a slow-moving car, and closed the distance to the ﬂeeing
robbers. She yanked her head to one side when a bullet drilled a
spiderweb crack through her windshield and punched a hole into
her car’s beautiful red upholstery. She didn’t slow down.
The thieves reached the Twelfth Street Bridge, a monstrosity
that sprawled over the sluggish green-brown Metropolis River.
On the other side, once the robbers got into the lower-end slums, a
rats’ nest of alleys clogged with grocers’ carts and festooned with
laundry-draped clotheslines, they would be able to elude pursuit.
On the span of the bridge, the jewel thieves shot at the lead police
car, striking its front tires. The car spun out, and the closely
following squad cars swerved and dodged; one cop car scraped the
guardrail, sending sparks ﬂying.
Lois was driving too fast, intent on the chase. She slammed on
the brakes to keep from plowing into the halted police cars, laying
a smear of black rubber on the metal gridwork of the bridge. Her
bumper smashed through the guardrail, and the shrieking metal
slowed her momentum. But not enough.
Her convertible pushed through, its front wheels rolling into
space, and the undercarriage caught on the edge. Lois held her
breath as the snappy convertible teetered slowly, tipping her
inexorably toward the river. Lois let go of the wheel and scrambled
into the back seat, clawing her way toward the trunk in an attempt
to keep the car balanced for just a few more seconds.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

43

The other cops jumped out of their vehicles and rushed to help,
but Lois knew they’d never get to her in time. She absolutely hated
being the damsel in distress! The thieves, laughing and shooting at
random in celebration, raced over the bridge and escaped into the
maze of the slums.
Metal groaned as the convertible pitched forward, its heavy V8
engine dragging the front down and off the edge of the bridge.
Lois scrambled from the back seat, seized the folded canvas of the
convertible top, and tried to pull herself onto the trunk. So close!
Two policemen had almost reached her, hands outstretched, eyes
wide as saucers.
The car dropped off the bridge.
Lois found herself falling, then screaming, more in disbelief
than panic. She didn’t have time to panic. She was plummeting
toward the river, and when she hit from this height, the sluggish
water might as well be cement.
Suddenly she was in the arms of a man who simply scooped her out
of the air, a red-caped stranger who could ﬂy! Her stomach lurched
and so did her heart; she didn’t seem to weigh anything at all.
Below, her car plunged into the river with a ferocious explosion
of spray, but Lois was being gently carried back up to the bridge.
The air seemed remarkably still, and her world had focused to a
tiny space, just her and this amazing man who was simply there
exactly when she needed him.
Lois’s heart pounded, and she looked up into the face of this
hero, realizing that she was the ﬁrst person ever to see him clearly,
since all the earlier photos had been blurry. He was classically
handsome, square jawed, with beautiful blue eyes and dark hair
with a sassy-looking curl that hung over his forehead. His smile
was warm and generous. He could have been anybody, yet he
exuded a kind of strange familiarity.

44

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

He ﬂew up toward the bridge, where the gathered policemen
watched in slack-jawed wonder. “Please watch your driving more
carefully from now on, all right, Miss Lane?” the ﬂying man said.
“You . . . you know my name?” She struggled not to stutter, trying
to remember how to be a real journalist, instead of behaving like a
woman who had just survived a terrifying brush with death.
“I’ve read some of your articles. You’re a good reporter.”
She laughed despite her awe, unable to grasp this surreal
conversation. “So the great costumed hero of Metropolis reads the
Daily Planet?”
His face displayed a slight frown as he returned her to the
edge of the bridge, setting her on her feet. “That wasn’t a product
endorsement.”
Her arms had automatically looped around his neck for a better
grip, but once she touched down on the solidity of the bridge, she
could barely stand. Nevertheless, her journalistic instincts kicked
in, and she blurted before she lost her chance, “Now that you’ve
rescued me, I’d like an interview, whoever you are.” Her tone
suggested that he owed her.
“I don’t speak to reporters, Miss Lane. That would be unfair to
your competition.”
“It’s unfair to the people of Metropolis! You seem to be ﬁghting
for the forces of good, but how can we know? If you keep secrets,
people will suspect that you have some sinister purpose.”
That made him pause, even though he seemed anxious to go
after the jewel thieves. “You make a fair point. Maybe the people
of Metropolis do deserve a few answers. Shall we say eight o’clock
tonight, at your apartment?”
“You know where I live?” Lois was taken aback in spite of her
triumph.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

45

He responded with a mysterious smile. “Of course.” Then he
ﬂew off into the sky, dwindling to a speck above the skyscrap­
ers, in pursuit of the thieves. Naturally, he rounded them up in
due course, dropping the men like a weekly trash collection at the
precinct station, but by then the jewel heist had become a much
less important part of the story for Lois.
If possible, that evening had been even more surreal.
As the appointed hour approached, Lois grew more and
more nervous in spite of herself. She spent the entire afternoon
deciding what to wear, though she didn’t normally waste valuable
time making herself gorgeous to impress a man (even though
this particular one had saved her life). Was he expecting to have
dinner with her? Should she light candles, open a bottle of wine or
champagne? Did he even drink wine or champagne? Who could
know the answer to that? She would . . . and in just a short time.
She watched the door, watched the clock.
“I’m here, Miss Lane.” He stood on her open balcony, startling
her. Of course—a man like him wouldn’t use the front door!
She regained her composure, surprised that her voice sounded
so normal. “Do you often peep in on single women like myself?”
“That wouldn’t be proper.”
She smiled. “Exactly what I expected you to say.” She indicated
the davenport. He declined both wine and champagne (no
surprise) and got right down to business. He remained standing in
her living room, his red cape moving in the slight breeze from the
open balcony door. Lois urged him, “Please have a seat.”
Moving with a ﬂash of endearing awkwardness, as if he didn’t
know how to be casual, he walked to the davenport, adjusted his
cape, and sat down. Lois took a seat on the cushion next to him, as
close as she dared, and picked up her notepad and pencil, crossing

46

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

one shapely leg over the other. She was pleased to see from a slight
widening of his blue eyes that he noticed.
She cleared her throat, pretending to be all business. “First
things ﬁrst. What do we call you?”
Lois thought it was a straightforward question, but his brow
furrowed. “You mean like a stage name? I haven’t really thought
about it.”
“You have many amazing abilities, and you certainly seem like
a real hero. Someone super . . . Superman! I like that, unless you’d
prefer something else?”
“No, I like it, too, Miss Lane.” She was surprised at how pleased
his approval made her feel, and she moved a little closer to him,
trying to be nonchalant. He didn’t notice . . . or maybe he did.
“What’s the signiﬁcance of the symbol on your chest and cape?
Is that the letter s?”
He touched his chest. “It’s a symbol with its own meanings. But
yes, it could be seen as the letter s.”
She sighed, trying to disarm him with charm. “Is this how it’s
going to be, then? Evasive answers to direct questions?”
His eyes sparkled. “It depends on the questions.”
“What’s your telephone number?”
“It’s unlisted.”
“I ﬁgured as much.” As Lois scribbled a note to herself, she
continued her questioning. “One other thing. Why do you wear
your red trunks on the outside of your pants? Isn’t that a little
backward?” Her lips quirked in a smile.
“Oh, now, Miss Lane,” he said, blushing. “I thought this would
be a serious interview.”
“Just trying to break the ice. All right, I’ll be serious. Tell me
more about these powers of yours. What, exactly, can you do?”
Superman explained that he could ﬂy (obviously), that he had

ENEMIES & ALLIES

47

super-strength, that he possessed certain other powers, many of
which were just emerging. He seemed a bit mystiﬁed about them
himself.
Lois was fascinated, even forgetting to take notes. “And how
did you come by these powers? A radiation accident? A scientiﬁc
experiment? Vitamins?”
He laced his ﬁngers together, holding his hands in his lap as if
the answer was a difﬁcult one for him. “No, you see, I . . . I don’t
exactly come from Earth. I’m from another planet, a place called
Krypton.”
Lois stared at him incredulously. “An alien, you mean?”
“Do I look like an alien?”
Lois recalled the rubber monsters she’d seen in the movies. If he
was telling the truth, she had her hands on the story of the century.
The hard part would be deciding which headline to use. No, she
thought, the hard part would be convincing people of his claims.
“Do you realize how preposterous this is going to sound to my
readers?”
“Preposterous?” Superman crossed his muscular arms. “You
mean like a man who can ﬂy? A man with heat rays that lance out
of his eyes or X-ray vision?” She couldn’t argue with that.
“X-ray vision? Does that mean you could see right through
my dress if you wanted to?” The question had sounded coy and
demure in her mind, but when she said it aloud, it sounded stupid.
She blushed furiously, kicking herself for letting her guard down.
“Again, Miss Lane, that would be an improper use of my
powers. I was raised better than that.”
Of course you were. “Who raised you? Where do you come
from?”
“I had good parents, a wholesome childhood, in an average but
beautiful town, the real heartland of America.”

48

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

“Can you be more speciﬁc?”
“It’s better if I’m not. I have to keep some of my secrets, Miss
Lane.” He just gave her a mysterious smile. “And now I think I
should be going. It’s a big city. Somebody always needs rescuing.”
He had such sincerity in his voice that she didn’t doubt him for a
minute.
He had already started for the balcony by the time she jumped to
her feet in alarm. “Wait—how do I get in touch with you again?”
“I’ll know when you need me, don’t worry.” Waving good-bye
from the edge of the balcony as Lois followed him out into the
open night air, he added cryptically, “And say hello to Clark Kent
for me. I’m sure he’d love to hear your advice as a reporter.”
“I—wait . . . Clark?” She had struggled to think of a compelling
last line, something that would make him remember her, something
that would make Lois Lane sound like a person he’d want to know
better. She certainly felt giddy and smitten—and embarrassed by
it!—but he had rescued her from death, holding her ﬁrmly in his
muscular arms, so she had good reason to have intense feelings
about him.
But what did Clark Kent have to do with anything?
“Promise me I’ll see you again!” she called.
“That’s a promise,” he said with a smile, and then added
teasingly, “unless you stop getting yourself in trouble.”
“I won’t!” She waved as he silently sprang from the balcony.
Instead of falling, he shot up into the air, waved good-bye, and
vanished into the night.
Lois stared after him, reeling, swept off her feet twice in one
day.
Afterward, it had taken an unheard-of three hours for her to
compile her notes and draft a story. The story of the century:
“Superman: A New Hero for Metropolis.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

49

Lois Lane had always been a reporter to watch; after publica­
tion of the Superman article, she was the reporter every other
newspaper envied. Suddenly every paper wanted to feature
Superman, but he never stopped to talk with reporters after his
heroic deeds. Lois hoped she hadn’t disappointed Superman with
her article, but she hadn’t had the opportunity to talk with him
again (though she did make a habit of leaving her patio doors open
in the evening, just in case he decided to drop by).
In retrospect, she should have won the Pulitzer for that article,
but mocking skeptics had laughed at her “absurd and undocu­
mented claims” that Superman was a “strange visitor” from a
planet called Krypton.
Now, as she thought about it, Lois remembered Perry’s cautions
about following up the Lex Luthor exposé. The notoriety she
had gained from her Superman interview suddenly put her in a
different league, made her work even harder as a reporter, though
it hadn’t yet earned her a raise.
This story would be different. Superman was clearly a hero,
but Luthor came from a different mold entirely—she would have
to approach her story with a certain amount of healthy trepida­
tion. She could do it, though. After all, how could a story about
Lex Luthor be any more problematic than getting the scoop on the
greatest hero in the world?

Chapter 7

SIBE RIA
ARIGUSK A GU LAG

N TH E WAN SI BERIAN DAYLIG HT, TH E STAI R-STEP LEDGES OF

the quarry excavation emphasized the crater made by the
Ariguska meteor strike in 1938. Joseph Stalin had kept the Soviet
Union under such a tight cloak of secrecy that very few Westerners
knew about the devastating impact.
Lex Luthor was one of those few.
At around the same period, two decades ago, several large
meteors had peppered Earth and astronomers were bafﬂed as to
what had caused the sudden spate of high-velocity space rubble.
Here at Ariguska, where the Soviets had established a large gulag
for political prisoners, General Ceridov had found fascinating and
unusual mineral fragments that could only be attributed to the
massive meteorite itself.
When the Ariguska object had hit, the dense pine forests had
been ﬂattened outward for miles, like ripples in a pond when a
rock is thrown into it. In the two decades since, the regrowth had
come in stunted and twisted, as though the soil itself was tainted.
Fish caught in the forest lakes were often horriﬁcally mutated and
always poisonous. Crops did not grow. Even the small garden

ENEMIES & ALLIES

51

plots planted outside the gulag fences yielded only inedible
horrors.
The impacting meteorite had tunneled deep and shattered,
spraying fragments of itself throughout the strata. Now, in an
ever-expanding pit, the workers quarried out the dirt and dis­
carded the bulk of the useless rock, sand, and soil, searching for
the core meteorite mass.
Luthor stared at the quarry operations, at the hundreds of
sweating workers who were watched over by guards in olive-green
woolen uniforms. Each guard carried a workhorse Kalashnikov
AK-47 assault riﬂe. The sullen prisoners toiled with picks and
shovels, ﬁlling rusty metal carts. As the diggers worked their
way toward the main mass, they left a wide corkscrewing ramp.
Debris was hauled away and dumped in ugly piles of naked rock in
the tainted forest.
“Impressive, is it not, comrade Luthor?” Ceridov made an
expansive gesture.
“This operation has been under way for . . .” Luthor calculated.
“A year?”
“Seventeen months. And in that time we have excavated a
substantial amount of meteor mineral.” They walked to the edge
of the open pit, and Luthor looked down at the pathetic wretches
laboring in it.
“How long do the slaves last?” Luthor asked.
“They work until they die, then are replaced by others who also
work until they die. We have a large enough pool of replacements.
Look at how much they have dug out!”
“Such a large open quarry is a bit obvious,” Luthor warned.
“Some high-ﬂying spy plane could easily photograph it.”
“They will see nothing more than a large quarry. However,
our workers are about to begin constructing a dome to cover

52

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

the bottom of the quarry when we expose the main meteorite
mass.”
Luthor observed a commotion among the scrawny captives.
Guards rushed to a man holding a jagged green lump that gave off
a faint intrinsic glow.
Ceridov signaled the guard. Red-faced from both excitement
and exposure to the cold air, the man came pufﬁng up and saluted
smartly to the general as he extended a glowing emerald fragment
about the size of a baseball.
Ceridov held it in his hands. “Give that worker an extra cup of
water tonight as a reward.” He offered the fragment to Luthor,
who did not move to take it.
“That glow . . . it could be a form of radiation.”
“You are a cautious man.” As if to show his bravery, Ceridov
squeezed the lump, holding it up. “Prolonged direct exposure
to the meteorite emanations does have unpleasant effects on
human physiology.” He shrugged. “Small exposures, though, are
harmless . . . to the best of our knowledge.”
“The best of your knowledge!” Luthor accepted the meteor
fragment with lingering reluctance and prodded the rock
suspiciously. “What sort of physiological effects?”
Ceridov guided Luthor away from the quarry edge to a low
bunker with extremely thick concrete walls, not far from the
steaming coolant tower and containment dome for the camp’s
power reactor. The bunker’s windows were reinforced with bars,
its doors covered with two-inch-thick metal sheeting.
“A fallout shelter?” Luthor asked. It looked as if it could
withstand an A-bomb blast.
“It is not to protect those inside, but to contain them. Listen.
They are restless today.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

53

Luthor could hear a roaring, thudding sound like a blacksmith
hammering an anvil. But it wasn’t a blacksmith. Something
pounded on the metal doors while growling loudly enough to be
heard through the thick concrete walls.
The KGB general explained, “When certain workers are heavily
exposed, they change. Their bodies grow. They become much less
human. They have extraordinary strength. Our geneticists are
investigating the effects for our eugenics program. Some of the
best Soviet minds have come to study them. You Americans have
your Superman, comrade—the Soviet Union needs its own.”
Luthor could hear clear evidence of amazing strength just by
listening to the damage the former workers were doing to the
reinforced bunker. His mind was racing with ideas about how
to exploit the properties of the odd green meteorite: as a power
source, a medical treatment, a means to transform workers into
a superpowerful force of his own. He would have his LuthorCorp
labs run a full analysis on the specimen. “And?”
Ceridov seemed embarrassed. “Unfortunately, these mutants
burn up a lifetime of strength within only a week or two, and then
they die.” He added, as if it was an afterthought, “Our studies
remain incomplete, since the beasts have also killed four of our
best researchers.”
“And what happens to the bodies after the mutants die?”
“If we can remove the cadavers before the others tear them to
shreds—not a trivial operation, I assure you—the specimens are
dissected.”
“I would like to see one. Just how . . . extreme are the physical
alterations?”
“Quite extreme.” General Ceridov took him to a nearby building
made of concrete blocks, and he shoved aside a metal door. The

54

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

interior was dank and full of shadows, kept at a very cold tempera­
ture. Wisps of steam curled around two large misshapen bodies
lying on slabs, waiting to be autopsied.
Luthor stared. Extreme indeed. They no longer looked human
at all. Seeing the horriﬁc changes, he looked uneasily at the glowing
green rock in his hand. “I would like a lead-lined box to contain
this, please, for my journey home.”

Chapter 8

GOTHAM CIT Y

H E H EADQUARTERS OF TH E LARG E CORPORATION WAS A

sh
sshining
steel tower, a gleaming monument in the heart of
Gotham City. Wayne Tower’s modern architectural design
stood out amid the downtown’s lesser, yet still imposing, Gothic
monstrosities.
On Tuesdays, Bruce attended the main board of directors
meeting in the glass-enclosed boardroom. Wayne Enterprises was
so widespread, with so many divisions, investments, interests, and
facilities, that no single discussion could cover all aspects. But
once a week the ten directors were supposed to discuss the most
important issues that concerned the company as a whole. Although
the administrators expected little from him, Bruce insisted on
sitting in nevertheless. Because he owned the controlling share of
the company, they had to tolerate his presence.
Bruce took care to pretend a certain lack of interest at each
meeting. Outside of these Tuesday gatherings, though, he watched
the men far more closely than they realized. They would have been
very surprised to learn how much he already knew about them.
“On today’s agenda, Mr. Wayne,” began Scott Thomson, vice

56

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

president of administration and marketing, “is the redesign of the
Wayne Enterprises logo. Our corporate logo is the face we show to
the world. It symbolizes all we do, and we have received input from
all the division heads. But now we very much need your input.”
With his smooth, deep voice, he made the matter sound exception­
ally important, to mollify Bruce.
Sitting at the head of the long conference room table, Bruce
could think of many matters that were more vital, but he simply
smiled. “Show me the designs. I assume the marketing department
has narrowed the ﬁeld down to the best?”
“Of course, Mr. Wayne,” said Larry Buchheim, vice president
of the propulsion systems division, with a nod. Buchheim rarely
had good news to report, always insisting that he needed a budget
increase (though whenever Bruce secretly inspected the ledgers he
found surplus funding).
Thomson stepped over to four easels at the far end of the room,
which his underlings in marketing had prepared. As though he
had rehearsed it for a scene, he unveiled the potential logos one at
a time.
The ﬁrst design was a complicated affair with ornate and virtu­
ally unreadable letters that spelled out the entire phrase “Wayne
Enterprises—Hope for Gotham City and the World.” The next
was a confusing amalgam of a missile, a medical caduceus, a sheaf
of wheat, a lightning bolt, and a clockwork gear—which apparent­
ly symbolized the diversity of Wayne Enterprises. The other two
designs were equally unimpressive and even less memorable.
Bruce frowned. “Do we want people to stare in confusion
whenever they pick up one of our products? Our company logo
should be an icon, something streamlined and memorable that
people instantly associate with Wayne Enterprises. The choices
you’ve given me are all muddled.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

57

“Simple, you say?” scoffed Paul Henning, the VP of manufac­
turing. “Would you prefer a big W perhaps?”
Bruce shook his head. Though this was purportedly the most
prominent item on the agenda, he knew they had most likely
concocted it only for the purpose of making him feel “useful”
during his weekly appearance.
For the last several years, he had cultivated his public persona
as a dashing playboy, the rich heir who loved cocktail parties,
beautiful women, and the nightlife. Clark Kent’s recent proﬁle
in the Daily Planet had bolstered that perception. Bruce ﬂaunted
his riches, all the while being generous to the point of childlike
innocence. Unfortunately, though the disguise successfully kept
people from thinking of Bruce Wayne and Batman in the same
sentence, it also gave him an air of incompetence. Though he
was chairman of the board and the sole heir to his parents’ vast
fortune, the ten directors had taken it upon themselves to “shelter”
him from the day-to-day business.
At the end of each ﬁscal year, the corporate balance sheet
was healthy, and thanks to the advent of the Cold War, many
subsidiaries of Wayne Enterprises had landed government
contracts to provide urgently needed military supplies, services,
armor, and vehicles. Only LuthorCorp had a greater number of
direct contracts with the U.S. military.
Paying little attention to the new logo designs, Bruce gazed
around the table at these men. After the death of Thomas Wayne,
the original set of directors had been excellent regents to watch
over the company. Bruce’s father had been a well-known surgeon
as well as an innovator and inventor. He had created a new type
of iron lung that saved the lives of tens of thousands. The money
from those patents had gone directly back into medical research.
Vivid in Bruce’s memory was the time when the head of one

58

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

of Gotham City’s well-known crime families had been shot
and severely wounded. Thugs in business suits had brought the
bleeding man to Wayne Manor, pounding on the door late one
night and pushing their way in when the door was answered. They
didn’t want to be seen at a hospital.
Understanding the wounded man’s need, Thomas Wayne did
not hesitate to operate, no matter who he was. Instead of viewing
the men as criminals, instead of noticing the threatening bulge
of handguns beneath the blood-smeared business suits, Thomas
saw only an injured human being. He worked using the expensive
dining room table as an operating surface and succeeded in saving
the crime boss. He urged the thugs to take the man to a hospital
for further treatment, but they had carried their boss away into the
night with only grunts of thanks.
Some months later, an anonymous two-million-dollar donation
had been made to the Wayne Foundation. Bruce remembered how
upset his father had been, claiming the money was dirty, since he
knew exactly who the donor had been. But as he wrestled with his
conscience, Thomas had also realized how much good he could
do with the untraceable money. Therefore, he built a new cancer
wing at Gotham General Hospital. His father found it ironic and
gratifying to think of how many lives the crime family was inadver­
tently saving. Once, when he didn’t know Bruce was listening,
Thomas had told his wife, “I don’t like using money from such
people, Martha, but I suppose it’s better for their souls than simply
lighting a candle in church.”
As a skilled surgeon, Bruce’s father had an acute awareness of
how capricious death could be. He had loved his son and his wife
ferociously, and he had made certain his family was well cared for.
He’d left very detailed instructions in his will, and his ironclad
testaments and codicils had directed Wayne Enterprises for years.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

59

The original handpicked board of directors had been close
friends of his father, men who owed their lives to Thomas Wayne
in one way or another. Newly orphaned and alone, young Bruce
had gone off to boarding school for years, and those directors had
carefully and honorably watched the company.
But Bruce had been gone for a long time, wrestling with his own
demons, learning how to become more than just a man, building
his skills, his mind, and his body—paying little attention to his
fortune. More than twenty years had passed. Directors, and whole
departments, had changed dramatically. These men now were two
or three times removed from the ones Thomas Wayne had hired.
The directors thought more about proﬁt than about the great
dreams of a skilled surgeon gunned down in an alley long before
his time.
Several years ago, Bruce had returned to Wayne Manor to dust
off the cobwebs, pull the sheets from the furniture, and turn the
long-empty house into a glorious mansion once again. But he’d
still needed time to prepare himself for his real work—to develop
his armor, his weapons, his entire plan.
Obsession was not enough. With Wayne Enterprises, he
had resources as well. Although he spent his nights protecting
the innocents of Gotham City, becoming a caped and masked
avenger—like Zorro in that last wonderful movie, at a time when
Bruce had been so young and innocent—he also had to protect his
parents’ legacy.
While the board members assumed they had the time and
freedom to run the company as they wished, Bruce was watching
them. Always watching. This was the only thing he could do for
his parents now. Wayne Enterprises was his, and the directors
would be reminded of that—when the time was right.
The oldest of the directors, a thin, quiet, and extremely intelli­

60

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

gent man named Richard Drayling, sat silent during the meeting.
Come to think of it, the man had said nothing the previous Tuesday
either. Bruce pretended to ignore him but quickly picked up on
Drayling’s mood of simmering anger and discomfort. He occasion­
ally cast a sharp glance at Bruce, his disappointment palpable. A
great battle seemed to be going on in his conscience.
Although Drayling, the director of materials science, had
worked with Thomas Wayne and respected him greatly, it was
abundantly clear that he did not approve of Bruce’s aloof playboy
behavior. It was also clear that Drayling had no great love for the
other board members.
Bruce interrupted a droning report from the director of chemis­
try applications. “Mr. Drayling, I sense that you have something
to say.”
Drayling sat up stifﬂy, looked at Bruce, swept his gaze slowly
over his fellow directors, and sighed. “Very perceptive, Mr.
Wayne. Yes, I do.” He reached inside his suit jacket, paused for
just a moment with eyes closed, as if gathering his strength, then
withdrew an envelope. He set it on the table in front of him.
“This is my letter of resignation from the board of directors of
Wayne Enterprises.” He stood as if carrying a great weight on his
shoulders. “This is no longer a company I can believe in. It is better
if I’m not a part of it, and it’s time for me to retire.”
Bruce was surprised by the brash move. Despite his careful
study of the actions of the board members, he had not expected
Drayling to leave. Something else was at the root of it. “No further
explanations?”
“Not at this time. As you’ll note in the letter, my resignation is
effective immediately. I’ll be going now.”
The remaining directors expressed their surprise and disap­
pointment, but not too convincingly. The tenor of the overlapping

ENEMIES & ALLIES

61

conversations sounded more like relief and farewell rather than
any attempt to persuade Drayling to change his mind. The old
man didn’t seem to hear any of it as he turned and left the meeting
room with pride and dignity.
Disturbed, Bruce pocketed Drayling’s letter of resignation. He
would read it in detail later. Right now, he studied the reactions of
the other board members, and he learned from them.
“We should get back to business,” Henning said into the
awkward silence, glancing down at the agenda, as if resignations
were a weekly occurrence.
“The dinosaurs are ﬁnally extinct,” someone muttered with a
snicker; Bruce couldn’t tell who had spoken.
“We should get him a retirement gift,” added Frank Miles, one
of the research VPs, to a chorus of muttered approval.
“We have prepared the annual report for you, Mr. Wayne,” said
Terrence McDonnell, the chief ﬁnancial ofﬁcer, with a smile. He
proudly handed over a glossy report that boasted impressive color
photographs and a specially commissioned painting on the cover: a
handsome Bruce Wayne standing in front of the monolithic Wayne
Tower. The design and printing of this one report had probably
cost enough to feed Gotham’s poor for almost a year.
He remembered to remain aloof, despite his troubled thoughts.
“Thank you. I’ll glance at it when I get a chance.”
“We’re very pleased you’ve decided to devote your energies to
charity work,” said Shawn Norlander, VP of pharmaceuticals and
medical applications. “Not only does it put the best public face
on all our activities, it’s also closely in line with what your father
would have wanted.”
Norlander sounded sincere, but Bruce knew that most of the
directors looked upon his charity work, extravagant society
functions, and huge donations as a ball and chain, despite the tax

62

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

deductions—unnecessary expenditures that could have been better
used to build new factories, make more extensive investments, or
provide bonuses to management. Nevertheless, the directors let
Bruce manage his charities without complaint, as if they were
throwing him a bone.
Bruce slipped the ﬂashy report into his briefcase. “I have to
cut this short today, gentlemen. I’m holding an important charity
gala at the manor tonight with quite a few celebrities. We expect
to raise hundreds of thousands of dollars for polio research, and
Eleanor Roosevelt has promised to come. Marilyn Monroe and
Arthur Miller may even be there.”
“Interesting. I’ll try to make it,” Buchheim said, but Bruce knew
the directors usually made excuses.
“I’ll expect to see some of you there,” Bruce added with
an undertone of warning, which he then turned to a ﬂippant
suggestion. “Draw straws if you have to.”
“You know you have our full support for your humanitarian
activities,” Thomson said in an irritatingly sycophantic tone,
trying to mollify him. “In any case, you are the best spokesman for
the company, Mr. Wayne.”
“I suppose I am,” Bruce answered, lifting his chin. “And it’s
quite a full-time job. Please be sure to show me a list of candidates
for Mr. Drayling’s replacement. Thank you again for the report,
and”—he gestured gravely toward the easels—“let’s try a little
harder on those logos for next week.”

AS TH E CHAUFFEUR DROVE H I M HOM E FROM WAYN E TOWER,

Bruce went over the ﬂashy report the directors had given him.
None of the information was new to him. Though they believed
Bruce to be an indifferent manager—an impression he had actively

ENEMIES & ALLIES

63

cultivated—he familiarized himself with every department,
scrutinized every project, analyzed every budget.
Two questions continued to weigh on him: Why had Drayling
resigned? And why now? Bruce had tried to intercept the man to
talk to him before he left Wayne Tower, but Drayling was gone, his
desk cleaned out beforehand, his ofﬁce dark. He would have to dig
deeper, seek out the man so they could have a real conversation in
private.
Back inside the Cave, surrounded by shadows, he found that
his concentration always improved. This was far more than just
a cave—it was a nerve center from which he kept watch and truly
observed what work he needed to do to clean up his city. The cave
roof high overhead was jagged with sharp stalactites. He had
electric lights, surveillance cameras, an extensive library, all the
information he could possibly need at his ﬁngertips. Communi­
cations systems monitored police radio bands. The sophistication
of his whirring, cutting-edge computer banks surpassed anything
the U.S. government would admit existed. Part of the Cave was
a chemistry lab; another grotto held an engineering bay and a
machine shop. Small periscope cameras were hidden at strategic
points on Gotham’s prominent buildings, their images viewable
from his command center.
Since he needed to be present at the gala reception above, he
didn’t plan to go out hunting, and so he had not taken the time to
don the uniform. But the persona was always there. The Batman
within gave him a different perspective, helped him think clearly
and make difﬁcult but necessary decisions. The dark suit remained
on its stand nearby, always there as a reminder.
So many crimes in Gotham City were not obvious, and virtually
the entire police force was corrupt, especially under Commis­
sioner Loeb. Graft and blackmail ran rampant. Strong-arm tactics

64

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

were used against anyone who accidentally witnessed activities
best unseen.
He activated the high-tech cameras and receiver screens. As
the cathode-ray tubes warmed up, he observed a black and white
image fed directly from the boardroom of Wayne Tower. Hidden
microphones had captured every word uttered since his departure
and recorded everything on reel-to-reel tapes, gathering informa­
tion. Now he watched the recent recording of these men, who had
thought their conversations secret once Bruce left for the day.
Surprisingly, the directors did not seem concerned about the
loss of Drayling. The conversation was more about Bruce and his
increased interest in running Wayne Enterprises.
“Do you think he’s been meddling more lately?” asked Dennis
Huston, vice president of applied technologies.
“Maybe he’s started believing the title on his ofﬁce door,”
answered Frank Miles with a snort. “We’ll just have to deﬂect
him. Point him toward a new crusade, ﬁnd a famine in Mongolia
or something. He’s like a magpie—show him a bright and shiny
object, and he’ll chase it. Then we’ll be able to do the real work
without any interference.”
Bruce was not surprised by the scorn in their voices; he’d been
hearing it every week, but lately he had suspected that something
truly ﬁshy was going on, and Drayling’s resignation had convinced
him even more.
Alfred had to clear his throat a second time to make himself
noticed. “Excuse me, Master Bruce. This evening’s ﬁrst guests
will be arriving within the hour.” The butler frowned disapprov­
ingly at his rumpled clothes. “You might wish to change into more
appropriate attire.”
“I see your point.” Bruce rose, switching off the monitor. He
would review the recordings in much greater detail later. He

ENEMIES & ALLIES

65

turned to the butler. “Alfred, you knew Richard Drayling well.”
“Well enough, sir. He was an acquaintance of your father, and
he and I have remained in touch. He is, after all, the last member of
the ‘old guard,’ as it were.”
“He resigned today. He said something vague about not believ­
ing in the company anymore, but I get the feeling that something’s
happened.”
Alfred frowned deeply. “I’m very sorry to hear that. He was a
good man, one of the last good men on the board.”
“I agree, but I don’t think he respected me. My public persona
fooled him completely.”
“You are quite convincing, sir.”
“Thanks.” Bruce frowned. “But you were his friend, Alfred.
Talk with him. Find out if he’ll tell you more about his reasons,
and see if he’ll have a private conversation with me. Discreetly.”
“Discreetly. Of course.” Alfred cleared his throat. “But this
evening, sir . . . the party?”
Bruce gazed at the empty cowl of his uniform with its empty
eye sockets, the stylized and frightening bat silhouette. He heaved
a deep sigh at the thought of the party he had to endure upstairs.
“Time to put on my other mask.”

Chapter 9

TH E DAILY PLAN ET

LARK KENT PICKED TH E WRONG MOM ENT TO GO TO TH E

watercooler. He bent over to ﬁll a conical paper cup, and an
air bubble belched up from the bottom of the tank. He straightened
just in time to see Perry White lugging a swollen canvas mailbag
across the bullpen.
When he spotted Clark, the editor in chief turned directly
toward him. “Kent! Today’s your lucky day. I need somebody to
take over the ‘Lorna for the Lovelorn’ column.”
Clark nearly dropped his water. Lorna Bahowic, who wrote the
Planet’s personal advice column, was a spinster in her forties, thin,
with mousy brown hair. Hundreds of letters arrived weekly from
people begging her for help with their love problems. Lorna had
also just gone into the hospital for gallbladder surgery and would
be recovering for at least a month, maybe two. Clark had already
sent her a small ﬂower arrangement and a “get well soon” card.
“But, Mr. White, I—I wouldn’t have the foggiest idea how to
give advice on relationships.”
Perry whistled loudly. “Lane! Kent needs your help understand­

ENEMIES & ALLIES

67

ing women and their problems. You’re a woman. Give him
suggestions on how to write Lorna’s column.”
Lois turned, clearly annoyed by the editor’s whistle. “And
just because I’m a woman, that means I’m an expert on women’s
problems? I’m a reporter, Chief, not a psychiatrist.”
“Besides, surely all the letters aren’t from women,” Clark
pointed out. “A few must come from men—”
“We usually don’t publish letters from whining men. It can be
embarrassing. The two of you have worked together before, and
I need that column.”
Clark made a last-ditch effort without much hope. “But, Mr.
White—the Korean War Veterans parade is today!”
“Olsen can cover that. I just need pictures.”
“And the ribbon-cutting ceremony at the new observatory—”
Perry snorted. “No excuses. You’re the reporters, I’m the
editor.” He lobbed the bulky mailbag, which Clark caught easily.
“And this is your assignment. We’ll still run it under Lorna’s byline.
Nobody needs to know she’s in the hospital.”
Lois bustled past, purse already on her shoulder, pulling on
her jacket. “Sorry, but I’ve got an interview scheduled. Conﬁden­
tial source about LuthorCorp, remember? Clark, you’re on your
own for this one.” Then her expression softened, and she smiled
at Clark. “All you really need is a soft heart. You’re halfway there
already. And I promise I’ll help—just not right now.”
“I’ll give it a hundred percent—I always do,” Clark managed
forlornly, not needing X-ray vision to realize that the satchel
contained hundreds of letters, each one written by a sad or tor­
mented person. The only saving grace was that he would get to
spend more time with Lois, working closely on the column.
He had admired her from the ﬁrst day he’d walked into the

68

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Daily Planet with his original story about Superman. Lois was
smart, funny, talented, and beautiful—a girl as different from
anyone in Smallville as the moon was from the sun. Lois carried
an energy around her, as if Metropolis itself charged her like a
power substation. He felt like a small-town boy whenever he was
with her, and he couldn’t help but blush any time she paid him
attention.
With a sigh, Clark carried the heavy sack of letters back to his
desk and thunked it on the ﬂoor beside his rolling chair. He pulled
out the letters one by one, opening them, reading the problems,
and setting them aside. He was quickly overwhelmed.
I’m sure my husband is cheating on me. Should I confront him?
Should I forgive him?
My boyfriend keeps hitting me, even though I know he doesn’t
mean it. My friends tell me to leave him, but I love him. What
should I do?
We’ve been going steady for three whole months—will he ever
propose?
My husband doesn’t like my cooking. . . .
Letter after letter left him mystiﬁed about basic human nature.
He could bend girders with his bare hands, outrace a speeding
locomotive, ﬂy from one side of the country to the other faster
than the most advanced ﬁghter jet. He could grab Lois Lane out of
the air as her car plunged off the Twelfth Street bridge. He could
whisk victims of a school bus crash to the hospital faster than
any ambulance. He could carry a sinking passenger ship to the
docks in Metropolis Bay. He could hunt down jewel thieves, stop
kidnappers.
But this? He had no idea.
My boyfriend won’t look at me anymore. He didn’t even notice
my new $20 hairdo.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

69

We’ve been trying to have children for ﬁve years, but nothing’s
worked. Should we adopt? My husband says there must be
something wrong with those babies, otherwise why would the
mother give them away?
For the rest of the day, Clark felt he was reading the same basic
letters over and over. These people posed difﬁcult questions and
had deep emotional problems that couldn’t be solved by simply
twisting steel or outracing a bullet.
He thought about going to visit Lorna in the hospital, to ask
her advice on giving advice. How did she deal with this every
day? Clark tried to imagine the conversation in the sterile hospital
room, with him awkwardly attempting to discuss love with an
older spinster who, despite being single, still knew a lot about the
human heart.
In fact, everyone seemed to know more about emotions than
he did.
Clark had a deep-seated desire to help people, and he had never
questioned his own motives or feelings on the matter. To him, it was
the obvious thing to do whenever he saw someone in need. Until
today, he had always felt he could overcome any challenge, but
now he thought perhaps he was wrong. Helping people overcome
emotional pain and suffering was obviously a lot more difﬁcult
than exhibiting feats of strength.
Still, in a different way, by answering these letters and writing
the “Lorna for the Lovelorn” column he would also be doing
something important for people in need.
But he couldn’t do it alone.

Chapter 10

M ETROPOLIS

H E LUTH O RCO R P AN G LE . LO I S HAD AN I N STI N CT FO R

tthese things.
She’d arranged to meet her source for coffee at a Canal Street
diner. Blanche Rosen was a forty-eight-year-old widow whose
husband had been killed in the Korean War. Though she had
worked on various factory assembly lines for twenty years, and
the last ﬁve at LuthorCorp with an exemplary job performance
record, Blanche suddenly found herself jobless. Lex Luthor had
systematically removed all of his female and older male employees
and put “a man in a man’s job.”
It had happened previously in American industry, particularly
after World War II. With the overseas war wrapped up and all the
men returning home, many women had found themselves booted
out of the factories and sent back to become barefoot and pregnant
homemakers.
But with no such ﬂood of returning soldiers now, LuthorCorp’s
deliberate action really stuck in Lois’s craw. Worse, Blanche
Rosen’s surreptitious message strongly implied that something
more sinister was going on. Lois was doing some digging, but so

ENEMIES & ALLIES

71

far she couldn’t ﬁnd anyone else willing to talk. In fact, she could
ﬁnd few of the ﬁred LuthorCorp employees at all.
Very ﬁshy indeed. She couldn’t wait to hear what Blanche had
to say.
Lois waited in a bright red Naugahyde booth. Exactly on time,
an older, severe-looking woman arrived and took the seat across
from her. She wore a nice dress, perhaps her best, the one reserved
for temple on Saturdays. Her voice was gruff, no-nonsense. “Are
you Lois Lane?”
“Yes, I am. I’m the one who can get your story told, Mrs.
Rosen.”
Blanche nodded. “It’s not only my story. There’s a lot of women
and men just like me from LuthorCorp, but most of them aren’t
alive anymore.”
Lois was shocked. “Are you saying Lex Luthor killed them?”
“In a manner of speaking. Hazardous duty, no safety proce­
dures or equipment, harmful radiation exposures . . . ‘Caribbean
vacations.’ I’m one of the last few left, mainly because I’m a tough
old bird.”
Lois took out her notepad, her expression intent. “I’m all ears,
Mrs. Rosen.”
The waitress came over. Both women ordered coffee, but
Blanche also asked for a pastrami sandwich and potato chips. With
only the briefest hesitation, she added, “And wrap up a second one
to go.” She clung to her pride as she looked across the booth at
Lois. “You don’t mind, do you, newsgirl?”
“A girl’s gotta eat.” Lois felt a tug at her heartstrings. “But you
have to sing for your supper.”
Blanche looked around the diner, studying the other customers.
She lowered her voice. “How do I know you’re not in Luthor’s
pocket?”

72

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Lois let out a laugh. “That’s not an image I want to think about.
My journalistic credentials should speak for themselves.” She
leaned across the table. “Frankly, Mrs. Rosen, Lex Luthor makes
my skin crawl. I’ve been face-to-face with him. I’ve seen him smile.
Ever see a snake smile? There’s nothing behind it. Nothing.”
Blanche slurped her coffee and heaved a long sigh. “The things
I’ve seen, Miss Lane. LuthorCorp and their munitions factories,
the military bases, the test ﬂights, black programs that don’t
show up on any ofﬁcial paperwork. I had a security clearance,
and I performed the most delicate work . . . and now look at
me. Crumpled up and discarded like a chewing gum wrapper—
practically living on the streets, without a job, without a pension,
my husband’s death beneﬁts almost gone. It’s a damn shame, I
tell you. Forget what Senator McCarthy rails about—this is unAmerican! This is not what my family left Germany for.”
Blanche paused to take a large bite of her pastrami sandwich
as soon as it arrived. Lois stole a potato chip and pressed for more
information. “What kind of work did you do, exactly? And what’s
this about a ‘Caribbean vacation’?”
“Reactor assembly. Luthor has his own island, complete with a
small atomic power reactor.”
Lois began scribbling in shorthand as quickly as possible. “Is
that where he works on his secret projects for the government?”
“Miss Lane, the government doesn’t know half of what Luthor
does. That uncharted island is a test bed for some of his most
dangerous technology. Once Luthor’s weapons systems function,
he’ll sell them to the U.S. military for ten times his investment.”
“So how did you get involved?”
“He invited some of his employees to help build facilities there
and do the technical work. He hired Cuban locals to do the heavy
construction of remodeling an old fort into a new base. Many

ENEMIES & ALLIES

73

of those men and women were just like me, divorced people and
widows living on a shoestring without much to keep us here in
Metropolis. When we got the offer to spend a few months in the
Caribbean, who were we to complain? At the time, it didn’t occur
to us that we were the employees Luthor considered the most
expendable . . . the ones who wouldn’t be missed.”
Lois nodded, letting the woman continue.
“But then they started getting sick. The Cuban work crews left,
and we didn’t see them again. I heard something about their boat
sinking in open water, all souls lost. On the island, those poor men
and women in charge of installing reactor fuel rods and coolant
systems fell terribly ill, and Luthor—such a generous man!—took
them to his own hospitals back on the mainland. He said he would
provide the best possible medical treatment.” She set down her
sandwich as if she’d lost her appetite. “They’re all dead now.”
The cheery waitress came back to ﬁll their coffee cups.
“Apparently there was a radiation leak. All their hair fell out—I
heard Luthor make jokes about them being bald.” She shook her
head. “I haven’t shown any symptoms yet, but Luthor swept all of
us under the rug.”
The story made Lois’s blood boil. “Do you have any proof of
this, Mrs. Rosen?”
“They took everything from me. I have no records, no photos,
nothing tangible. But you’ll ﬁnd everything you need in the
LuthorCorp munitions factory in the barrens outside of Metropo­
lis.” Her eyes lit up. “And I can tell you how a smart, resourceful
reporter might be able to slip inside and take a look around.”

Chapter 11

WAYN E MANOR

OTHAM CITY’S MOST I LLUSTRIOUS CITIZENS ATTEN DED
O

B
Bruce
Wayne’s famous parties, and ample front-page coverage in the Gotham Times society section went without saying.
Sparing no expense, Bruce always centered these soirees around
an important humanitarian cause; though most of the celebri­
ties and important personages attended just to be seen, they also
brought their checkbooks.
“Wayne Manor is, after all, my father’s house,” Bruce had once
told the lovely reporter Vicki Vale for a feature article. “Thomas
Wayne devoted his life to helping people, and I intend to honor his
memory.”
“You can’t possibly remember him very clearly, Mr. Wayne.
You were only six years old when—”
He had been tempted to cut off the interview then and there,
but instead he interrupted and said, “I remember him, Miss Vale.
I remember him well.”
The guests arrived in limousines that glided into the porte
cochere. They displayed their most expensive formalwear, furs,
and jewels. The glitterati included Gotham’s most prominent

ENEMIES & ALLIES

75

citizens, as well as celebrity guests: movie stars, singers, and
sports personalities, including Rock Hudson, David Niven, Buddy
Holly, Paul Anka, Sugar Ray Robinson. The quiet, revered star of
the show was Eleanor Roosevelt, the former ﬁrst lady, who had
turned her considerable energies to supporting the cause of polio
research.
Though he’d changed promptly into his ﬁnest tuxedo, Bruce
did not step through the entry doors until he considered himself
fashionably late. His aloof nature was well known, and the guests
had started without him.
When he ﬁnally descended the grand staircase, moving with
an air of casual mystery, all conversation stopped. A few—the
ﬁrst-timers or the nouveau riche—applauded politely until Bruce
alighted in the main hall and held up one hand for silence, the
other for a drink. Alfred appeared immediately with a tray bearing
a martini glass and his specially mixed Vesper (in reality, a bit of
lemon peel and chilled ice water).
“Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to my humble home.” There
was a quick titter at the old joke. “Tonight I offer you an opportu­
nity to be generous—to raise funds for polio research. Countless
poor children around the world are crippled by this awful disease.
The medical research and new vaccine of Dr. Jonas Salk shows
great promise, and we must not let him lack for resources.” He
nodded toward Eleanor Roosevelt, who stood stoic and proud, like
visiting royalty; she applauded loudly, though her gloved hands
mufﬂed the sound.
The former ﬁrst lady cleared her throat and spoke in a strong,
conﬁdent voice that might have been used in a Shakespeare
performance. “You all know my personal reasons for wanting
to rid humanity of this terrible scourge. My wonderful husband
would have congratulated Mr. Wayne for his efforts. And I

76

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

congratulate you all for being here. Please help ﬁght this disease
with the weapons you all wield—your checkbooks.” The audience
responded with a ripple of laughter.
Bruce stepped forward to conclude his speech. “Let us show
Mrs. Roosevelt the generosity and vision of Gotham City. Tonight
we can make our mark on the world—a mark that begins with a
dollar sign.”
“Bruce, dear, you have more money than all of us combined,”
purred Selina Kyle, dusky, lithe, and beautiful as she came up
behind him as if to take possession. “For the cost of this party, you
could have made a substantial donation of your own.”
Bruce lifted his glass to salute the beautiful socialite. “I intend
to do both, Miss Kyle. After you all make your donations, Wayne
Enterprises will match the total, dollar for dollar. So if you’d like
to make me dig deep into my pockets, then dig deeply into yours.”
A squawking chortle emanated from a dapper, rotund man,
whom Bruce instantly recognized as Oswald Cobblepot. “At that
rate, he’ll fund a cure for polio in a single night.”
“Don’t worry, Mr. Cobblepot, I’m sure we can ﬁ nd other
worthy causes.” Bruce bowed slightly. “All of you, please enjoy
yourselves.”
Alfred ran the manor household and serving staff like a militia.
No tray of hors d’oeuvres was allowed to circulate half-empty;
glasses of wine and champagne always had to be ﬁlled. Cuban
cigars and Turkish cigarettes were offered in ornate silver cases.
Bruce worked his way through clusters of the rich and famous,
shaking hands, trying not to spend too much time with any one
person or group. Selina Kyle slipped her arm through his and
walked along smoothly beside him. Her well-trained society voice
carried perfectly. “We really should see each other more often,
dear. You know, we are absolutely perfect for each other.” She

ENEMIES & ALLIES

77

rolled her r’s as she talked. He had never been able to place her
accent precisely.
Despite the temptation, he expertly cut her out of his sphere and
slid into another clutch of the well-to-do, pleading an important
bit of business with the city treasurer (though he had met the man
only once). Selina accepted the brush-off with a ﬂirtatious smile
and a promise that they would talk again soon.
The conversations generally had nothing to do with polio,
extending well beyond the concerns of Gotham City. Bruce
repeatedly heard the excited buzz about the so-called Superman
from Metropolis. Gotham police commissioner Loeb, a corrupt
man at the top of a blue pyramid of corrupt ofﬁcers, delighted in
talking about strangeness in another city rather than the problems
of his own. He lost no opportunity to make disparaging comments
about the inept Metropolis police.
“But Gotham has its own costumed maniac.” Cobblepot
chomped down on his ebony cigarette holder. “Maybe the Batman
has alien superpowers, too, eh, Commissioner? That would explain
why your men can never catch him.” He let out a nasal snicker.
Loeb’s face darkened. “Superman’s a hero, saves children from
burning buildings in broad daylight. The Batman slinks around
at night, evades arrest, and assaults on-duty ofﬁcers. He’s nothing
but another criminal. We have twenty-nine pending charges
against him, and that’s just for starters. He’s Gotham’s numberone most wanted.”
Cobblepot took a long draw, then tapped a stem of ash into a
silver tray as he let out his birdlike laugh again. “You’re just upset,
Commissioner, because you can’t make the Batman pay you a
bribe.”
Loeb bristled. “I will not be insulted by a petty gangster in an
ill-ﬁtting top hat and tails!”

78

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Now it was Cobblepot’s turn to take umbrage. He screwed a
monocle into his eye to inspect the commissioner as though he
were an interesting specimen. “I am a respectable nightclub owner,
sir.”
“Respectable!”
“And what is your opinion on the Batman, Mr. Wayne?” said
an unmistakable breathy voice. Bruce turned from Cobblepot and
Loeb to see that Marilyn Monroe had shown up, accompanied by
her new husband, playwright Arthur Miller.
“He bafﬂes me, Miss Monroe. Why should the Batman spend
his nights lurking in alley shadows when he could be at a cocktail
party instead?” His ﬂippant comment drew polite laughter
from the nearby listeners. “Speaking of which . . .” He raised his
now-empty “martini” glass. “Time to freshen my drink.”
He melted away again, seeking Alfred. The butler was handing
a leather jacket back to Rock Hudson, ushering him genteelly out
the door. The heartthrob actor had to leave early due to his shooting
schedule. As they watched Hudson’s sports car swirl away down
the drive, Bruce asked quietly, “How much longer, Alfred?”
“The evening has barely begun, Master Bruce. Chin up.”
“All for the greater good, I suppose,” Bruce said, then lowered
his voice again. “Are you marking the glasses carefully when you
collect the empty drinks?”
“Indeed, sir. You’ll have plenty of new specimens for your crime
lab—tomorrow.” He emphasized the word with a scolding tone.
“Tonight, you must play your part and socialize with your adoring
public, no matter how difﬁcult it may be for you.”
“Yes, Alfred.”
With a wry expression and freshened faux-Vesper, Bruce
returned to the social fray. The people were laughing and drinking

ENEMIES & ALLIES

79

and smoking in a background drone, a blur of sensation and sound
and smell. He made them all feel welcome.
Trays strategically placed about the halls and exit received
checks and envelopes of cash donations. It was a bright and glitter­
ing party, one of his best, judging by the amount of money raised
for charity. The members of Gotham’s high society would consider
it a triumph. Even Eleanor Roosevelt seemed to be enjoying herself,
and Bruce spent a generous amount of time talking with her. She
sat alone at the side of the room, watching the people who seemed
too intimidated to engage her in casual conversation.
Bruce, though, was a gracious host. Mrs. Roosevelt sipped her
soda water. “Thank you for this evening, Mr. Wayne, but you don’t
need to bother with me. I know you have many social obligations.
I’m doing just ﬁne, thank you.”
“Why, you’re no bother at all, ma’am. We wouldn’t be here if
not for your work. I’m just helping to rid the world of an awful
blight on humanity.” At least this was one blight he might be able
to eradicate completely, forever.
She shooed him away. “Now, you go on and talk to your other
guests. You’re making me all teary eyed.”
He bowed politely and went to attend his party. Through every
excruciating moment, Bruce maintained his cordial smile. He had
an innate aversion to being relaxed in public, but he had a ﬂair for
looking comfortable in almost any social setting, while his sharp
eyes and ears picked up on every bit of knowledge that might prove
useful. It deﬁnitely made his detective work easier.
He didn’t view the event as a party so much as a chance to
gather data on some of the wealthiest people in Gotham society so
that he could analyze the information in his secret lab tomorrow.
For tonight, he had his role to play.

Chapter 12

TH E DAILY PLAN ET

H E N EXT MORN I NG, LOIS LAN E STRUTTED I NTO TH E DAILY

Planet ofﬁce as she always did, head held high, heels clicking a
P
conﬁdent staccato. She ﬂung open the glass doors into the bullpen
with her typical saucy “What’s news, everybody?” (countered by
the just-as-usual daily groaning at her corny joke).
At his desk, Clark was buried in letters, still not sure which
ones to answer or how. When she noticed him, she paused, her face
showing a sudden and unexpected warmth. “Were you working
all night on that, Clark?”
“Oh, hi, Lois. I went home, but I didn’t stop thinking about
it. I’m a ﬁsh out of water with this stuff.” He shrugged his big
shoulders helplessly. “I sure could use your advice.”
She hesitated, as if on the verge of turning away with a dismis­
sive “Not my problem,” but then she stopped. “You’re a sweet
aw-shucks kind of guy, Clark, but I wouldn’t call you an expert
on women. I don’t know what the Chief was thinking giving you
that assignment.”
“He did suggest that we work together.”
Lois plainly heard the hopeful lilt at the end of his sentence.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

81

He showed her a few of the toughest letters. “What kind of
advice can I give these people?”
Lois read the handwritten pages with an eagle eye, face tighten­
ing and frown deepening. She ﬁnally slapped them down on the
desk. “I see what you mean. These women don’t really want to
do the work to solve their problems. They just want someone to
commiserate with them. If you give them an honest answer, they
won’t want to hear it. So you’ve got to give them the right answer
instead.”
Clark was confused. “The right answer isn’t the honest an­
swer?”
“Trust me. Just look at the letters. This one”—she pointed
sharply—“and this one. Her boyfriend keeps beating her, and she
goes back to him every time? I’d like to give that guy a knuckle
sandwich myself, see how he likes a taste of his own medicine.”
She sighed. “Then again, even if she left him, that woman would
probably ﬁnd someone just the same, or worse. I know the type,
Clark. If they knew how to ﬁnd the strength within themselves to
see their own worth, then they wouldn’t let men take advantage of
them, much less write letters complaining about it. Unfortunately,
they’ve gotten themselves in up to their necks, and they just expect
some hero to swoop in and magically save them.”
Clark baited quietly, “You mean like Superman?”
“He’s the exception.” Lois was obviously embarrassed, but
a bashful smile crept across her face. “If only there were more
exceptions like him.” She covered her blush quickly. “Do your best,
Clark. You’re good at showing compassion. Just be yourself.”
“Would you read over the draft before I turn it in to Mr. White?
I . . . I’ll buy you a cup of coffee.”
She smiled. “It’s a deal.”
Clark watched her go, not sure whether or not he had actually

82

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

asked her out for a date. He faced his task once more, wanting to
do a good job. He still didn’t understand these problems . . . but he
knew someone who might. Someone who would also understand
just how lost he was—and why.
His mother had always helped him out when he couldn’t
understand the nuances of life from a human point of view.
Mind made up, he went directly to Perry’s ofﬁce. He straight­
ened his tie, smoothed down his shirt collar, then knocked on
the door. “Excuse me, Mr. White, I’m feeling a little under the
weather. I’d like to take the rest of the day off, please.”
“I need your column by tomorrow, Kent—no excuses!”
“You’ll have it, Mr. White. I’ll be back at my desk in the
morning, I promise.”

Chapter 13

WAYN E MANOR

PPLAYBOY LI KE BRUCE WAS EXPECTED TO SLEEP I N AFTER

a party, and the doors of his bedroom suite remained
locked for hours. While armies of housekeepers and cleaning staff
restored the manor to its quiet grace, however, he got up early and
descended through a secret passage to the Cave, where he could do
his research.
First off, he stood before a table where Alfred had arranged a
line of empty, dirty glasses from the night’s party. The butler had
been careful to collect at least one item from each guest, and now
every specimen sat on a handwritten card identifying the user.
Getting out his packets of powder and a thick brush, Bruce
quickly and gently dusted the smooth surfaces. The ﬁ ngerprints
came out quite clearly, and Bruce spent an hour photographing
them so that he could add them to his detailed library and catalog
the results. By now his ﬁngerprint collection must have rivaled that
of the Gotham City Police Department. He had no way to tell when,
or if, the information might become vital for an investigation.
But his mind was elsewhere, focused on a much more challeng­
ing riddle.

84

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Ever since the ﬁrst appearance of Superman, Bruce had been
intrigued by the man’s amazing powers, and the previous night’s
party gossip had only sharpened his interest. Now he hunched in
his large chair and pondered. Next to the blinking lights of his
computer banks with spinning reel-to-reel tapes, a set of rounded
cathode-ray tubes projected images and information.
He watched newsreel footage of Superman’s exploits; he studied
photographs, newspaper clippings, eyewitness accounts. Even
though most photographs were motion-blurred due to Superman’s
incredible speed, the hero wore no mask, as if conﬁdent that his
identity would remain a secret.
Bruce could not understand how a mere man accomplished so
many amazing things. Superman had hefted a huge passenger ship
with ease and set it down safely in the Metropolis harbor. As the
rescued passengers ﬁled onto piers toward rescue teams with warm
blankets and hot coffee, they were thrilled and giddy. The weeping
boat captain had practically fallen to his knees in gratitude. After
acknowledging the sincere thanks, Superman had simply waved
and ﬂown away. . . .
Another time, he’d burst from a burning building with a child in
each arm as ﬂames raged all around. The children were coughing
and gasping but largely unharmed. The ﬁre hadn’t singed a hair
on Superman’s head. . . .
Bruce studied photographs of Superman cornering a group of
gangsters. With their backs to a brick wall, they brandished tommy
guns and unleashed a hail of bullets—which bounced harmlessly
from the big s emblem on his chest.
Bruce paused the tapes, used magniﬁers to study every image,
but he could not ﬁgure out the trick. What sort of fabric could
deﬂect bullets so perfectly, so painlessly? Even with the best-known

ENEMIES & ALLIES

85

bulletproof technology on his armored Batman suit, he still felt
bullet impacts like the blows of a hammer.
What about Superman’s heat vision? Some sort of laser built
directly into his optic nerves?
His strength was incredible. He bent iron girders in his bare
hands. The ﬂashy blue and red uniform must have been augmented
somehow—with reinforced ﬁbers? Pulleys? Hydraulics? Bruce
tapped his ﬁngers, deep in thought.
Superman ﬂew effortlessly through the air, but beneath the
cape, there was no room for a hidden jetpack, and none of the
images showed any indication of exhaust or rocket ﬂames. Where
did the man get such technology? Lois Lane at the Daily Planet
would have had the world believe he was an alien with extraordi­
nary inhuman powers, but Bruce didn’t buy that for a second.
Carefully dividing the problem into several apparently unrelated
parts, he had slipped technical challenges into the workload of
Wayne Enterprises’ divisions, but so far his crack scientists had
yielded no answers. Even they could not come close to what this
costumed hero did on a routine basis.
Only one other U.S. company approached the technological
innovation of Wayne Enterprises. Could Superman actually be a
LuthorCorp creation? An experimental soldier released by Lex
Luthor? So far, the bald genius had been curiously silent on the
matter of Superman, making only offhand skeptical statements
about the “so-called hero” who had “walked onto the stage with
his grandstanding exploits.” That alone made Bruce suspicious
that Luthor was behind Superman himself—or at the very least
deeply engaged in an investigation of his own.
Alfred interrupted him, wearing a singed and stained labora­
tory coat and insulated black rubber gloves. Protective goggles

86

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

hung on a strap from his neck. Leaving the household staff to
continue their work, the butler often assisted Bruce in his largescale experiments. On a test rack in a side grotto, he had ﬁred up
a set of small, self-contained rockets designed to be installed in a
jetpack. The gauges recorded stresses, thrust, stabilization.
The butler shook his head. “I’m afraid that these bulky jets
have the thrust to carry a person through the air, Master Bruce,
but not smoothly or with any precision. Even with a more compact
design, the pack would require a full-body support framework
and ﬁreproof materials, practically a suit of armor.”
Bruce sighed. “That won’t do. Superman moves with ﬂexibil­
ity and speed.” He had given the problem to the applied technolo­
gies division, and Director Huston had accepted the task, but he
had not expected to ﬁnd an easy solution. “I’m beginning to doubt
I’ll understand Superman’s abilities any time soon. The more
questions I ask, the fewer answers I get. I don’t have the slightest
idea how he does it or how to re-create those abilities myself.”
Alfred raised his thin eyebrows. “Have you considered, Master
Bruce, the possibility that Superman may be exactly who he says
he is? That he does indeed come from another planet?”
Bruce frowned. “That’s not a rational suggestion at this point,
Alfred. There must be some other answer.”
Alfred shucked off the thick gloves and removed his lab
garments to reveal incongruously formal garb underneath. Bruce
was sure that few other scientists wore a tuxedo (sans jacket)
beneath a white lab coat. “It is time that I oversee the household
staff—a far more difﬁcult job than this, if you ask me, sir.”
The butler hung his lab coat on a peg, pulled his jacket from
another peg, and brushed off the front of the dark fabric. Before
leaving the Cave, he turned. “You will be pleased to know, sir,
that I’ve arranged to have a conversation with Richard Drayling

ENEMIES & ALLIES

87

later this afternoon, as you requested. Based on our longtime
friendship, I believe Mr. Drayling does want someone to conﬁde
in. He and I are of an age, and we’ll talk casually of old times,
of your father . . . and of why he felt the need to resign from your
board of directors.”
“Thank you, Alfred.” Bruce pinched the bridge of his nose,
concentrating. “If there’s something going on at Wayne Enter­
prises, then I need to know about it. Let’s hope we can solve that
mystery at least.”

Chapter 14

SMALLVILLE , K ANSAS

MALLVILLE WAS HALFWAY ACROSS TH E COUNTRY, BUT A

man who could outrace a supersonic jet covered the distance
in no time. As Kal-El ﬂew, lighter than air and faster than the
wind, his thoughts remained unsettled by reading about so many
troubled romances and complicated emotions.
After crossing the Great Plains, looking down at the colorful
checkerboard of crops, he found his beloved Kansas town. When
he saw that the Smallville Cemetery was empty, he alighted there
ﬁrst, just to have some time alone.
The grave was immaculate, the vase on a stand ﬁlled with
fresh-cut ﬂowers: bright yellow daffodils and scarlet tulips, signs
of spring. His father had always loved spring: planting season,
time to ready the soil for a new year. Clark had been a one-man
army on the farm, helping Jonathan Kent.
Now that his mother was all alone, she didn’t even try to handle
all the acreage. Martha had her garden, her chickens, and her
house. The rest of the land she leased to neighboring farmers, the
Hubbards and the Schmidts.
Kal-El knelt by the headstone.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

89

J O NATHAN KE NT
FAITH F U L H U S BAN D
LOVI N G FATH E R
YO U WE R E O U R G R EATE ST STR E N GTH

His vision shimmered a little. Jonathan Kent had been a man of
few, but wise, words, and now no words were needed. The silence
felt comforting rather than empty. For hours and hours, Clark and
his father had done their chores, baled hay, planted crops, ﬁxed the
fence line, without needing to reassure each other with incessant
conversation. Their relationship was comfortable, no frills, just a
solid core.
When his father did decide to make a comment, it was bound
to be important. “If you don’t need to say anything, son, there’s no
need to talk. These days, with their radio programs and phono­
graph records, people forget the virtues of an hour of good, quiet
thinking.”
Though he knew his true name was Kal-El, here in Smallville—
especially at his father’s grave—he would always be Clark Kent. It
didn’t matter what he learned about the destruction of Krypton or
his biological father, Jor-El. It didn’t matter that he was the only
one of his kind on Earth. Here in Smallville, he would never be
alone.
He rufﬂed his palm through the thick, lush grass of the
gravesite. He closed his eyes and remained quiet, though he badly
needed to say many things. Jonathan Kent had always understood
his thoughts, even when they remained unspoken.

IN TH E FARM HOUSE KITCH EN, MARTHA KENT WAS JUST TAKI NG

a golden-brown apple pie from the oven. He didn’t need super­

90

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

senses to detect the aromatic cinnamon, sweet sugar, and tart
Cortland apples. Martha’s face showed her delight when he opened
the front screen door. “Welcome home, son. You’re just in time.”
She displayed the luscious-looking pie.
“You always seem to have one ready, Ma. How do you know
when to make them?”
Her eyes crinkled behind her gold-rimmed glasses. “Superman
always knows when people need him. How can you underestimate
a mother’s ability to do the same with her baking? There’s coffee
in the percolator and a jug of whole milk in the icebox for you.”
Her gaze traveled over him, and she nodded at his red boots, blue
suit, and scarlet cape. “You go change clothes while I cut you a big
slice of pie. That nice Pete Ross comes around to check on me at
least once a week. He’d love to see Clark Kent, but it wouldn’t do
for him to catch a glimpse of Superman at my kitchen table!”
Clark dashed up to his old bedroom and returned seconds
later wearing an old plaid shirt and dungarees. Martha was just
scooping a generous slice of pie onto an aqua Melmac plate. She
cut herself a much smaller wedge and settled into her chair at the
Formica-topped kitchen table.
“So how is Pete these days?” He did his best to follow the lives
of the friends he had left behind in Kansas.
“Oh, still running the general store, still talking about heading
out into the world and making his fortune someday.”
Clark laughed. “And still not doing anything about it?”
“That boy has never driven across the county line, as far as I
know.” Martha sipped her coffee. They chatted about his daily
work at the newspaper, his apartment in Metropolis, the new
gladiolas she had ordered from the seed catalog, which would
really spruce up her ﬂower garden.
But Martha wasn’t fooled. During a brief lull in the conversa­

ENEMIES & ALLIES

91

tion, she leaned forward and spoke in her no-nonsense way.
“Something’s troubling you, Clark. What is it? You didn’t come
here in the middle of the week just to chat with your old mother.”
Clark straightened quickly. “That’s not true! I missed you.”
Martha set her cup down and gave him the “mom” look.
“I know that’s not technically a lie, Clark, but you didn’t an­
swer me.”
With a sigh, he told her about his predicament with the
“Lorna for the Lovelorn” column. “So many people have so many
problems, and I don’t know how to solve them all. I don’t know
what to tell them.”
Martha patted his hand. “For a man of steel, you’ve got a heart
of gold.”
He was ﬁnally able to confess his deeper concern. “I’m not
from Earth, I’m from Krypton—and I’m the only one of my
kind. What if I never understand this world and this world never
understands me?”
“Do you think any of us humans really understand each other? If
the troubles of people could be so easily ﬁxed, then nobody would
be jumping out of windows, no marriage would end in divorce, no
crime would ever be committed. But that isn’t the world we live in,
so we have to do our best to make it a better place. And believe you
me, son, you do far more than your share.”
Though she was trying to comfort him, she had inadvertently
touched upon another thing that troubled him. “But I can do so
much more, Ma. From the moment I ﬁrst put on that suit, I’ve
been helping people in danger, stopping criminals, preventing
accidents—but people need to be saved every hour of every day.
How many car wrecks have happened in the time I’ve been here
talking to you? How many robberies? How many shootings?
“And it’s narrow-minded for me to worry only about crimes

92

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

committed in Metropolis. What about the whole world? Couldn’t
I prevent wars? Stop slavery? Divert rivers and prevent drought?
Distribute food and stop hunger? I could work every second, and
still the job wouldn’t be done.” He looked at her, his blue eyes
sorrowful and intense.
His mother gave him a wistful smile. “Your father used to talk
like that when he saw how much work needed to be done around
the farm. Thought it would never get done . . . and yet it did.”
Clark shook his head and took the last bite of pie. “Here I am
in your kitchen as mild-mannered Clark Kent. But what business
do I have trying to lead a ‘normal’ life? Doesn’t the world need
Superman to be a hero twenty-four hours a day, seven days a
week?”
Surprisingly, Martha chided him gently. “Clark, you’re entitled
to your own life. You deserve to know people, to observe them, so
that problems like the ones in those letters you’re reading won’t be
such a mystery to you.” She couldn’t resist and leaned over to kiss
him lovingly on the cheek. “You have to learn to be human as well
as a super hero. Pay more attention to your friends, your relation­
ships. Spend time with your pal Jimmy Olsen. And I know you’re
sweet on that Lois Lane.”
He glanced away, embarrassed. “She certainly likes Superman,
but I doubt she notices Clark Kent.”
His mother patted him on the shoulder. “Dear, you keep
forgetting that they’re one and the same. It doesn’t matter whether
you wear a suit and tie or a blue outﬁt and red cape. It’s who you
are inside. You’re a good man, Clark. Lois seems to be as sharp as
a tack—I guarantee you she’s noticed. Give her the beneﬁt of the
doubt.”
“I will. In fact, we’re planning to have coffee together. If she
remembers.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

93

“Of course she’ll remember, dear. How could a girl forget
something like that? But as for you, young man, remember that
life isn’t just one emergency after another. You need to live and
experience the joys that are around you. Don’t deﬁne yourself as
nothing more than a hero. Let yourself be a man, too.”
He felt choked up listening to her, and he knew she was right.
“Pa always told me that the harvest wasn’t only about the grain
we loaded and earning a living—he made me smell the fresh-cut
hay, sweet as it dried in the sun, and feel the cool spray of water
from the irrigators on a hot day. He would just stand there after
the sun set and the night dew started to come out, and he’d take a
long inhale . . . and just breathe in the farm and the crops and the
earth itself.”
“That’s it, Clark. Jonathan helped me see the same thing when
we were just courting.” She hugged him.
“I’ll pay more attention to being human and not just look for
emergencies to solve. I promise.”
Martha smiled. She knew one thing for certain—Clark Kent
always kept his promises.

Chapter 15

WAYN E TOWE R

S TH E MAJORITY CORPORATE SHARE HOLDE R, BRUCE

Wayne occupied the most desirable corner ofﬁce in Wayne
Tower, complete with leather-upholstered furniture, mahogany
desk, thick carpeting. An engraved holder with a pen and a letter
opener graced the olive-green desk blotter. The few papers in his
in-box were neatly stacked. Nothing was marked urgent.
Behind him, the wood-paneled wall was covered with civic
awards, thank-you letters, a framed crayon drawing from a child
whose cancer had been treated at the Thomas Wayne Memorial
Wing. He had recently hung (partly as a joke) the framed glossy
photograph of himself with Clark Kent.
No one expected a man like Bruce to keep regular hours or to
spend a lot of time at his actual ofﬁce. He rarely put in a full day’s
work—after all, a playboy millionaire had many other things to
do. However, he intentionally adhered to an eccentric schedule so
that no one would think twice if he came in at odd hours, stayed
late or wandered the halls. It worked to his advantage now.
His suspicions about the Wayne Enterprises directors were
growing; the time for quiet observation had passed. Bruce decided

ENEMIES & ALLIES

95

to take a more active role in uncovering the blight at the core of his
father’s company. . . .
Shirley, his executive secretary, guarded the gates with utmost
professional courtesy and tact. “Will you be staying late tonight,
Mr. Wayne? Shall I order you dinner?” Both beautiful and
efﬁcient, she endured his whims, produced memos whenever he
felt like issuing them, maintained his stack of telephone messages,
and most important, maintained his privacy.
“I’ll be ﬁne on my own, thank you. Close up, put out the lights,
and go home. Have a good weekend.”
As a gracious gesture, Bruce had decreed that anyone who took
public transportation was allowed to leave a half hour early on
Fridays. His employees had readily embraced the habit, and Wayne
Tower emptied out as dusk set in. Ostensibly, he was staying
behind to work on the donations from the polio beneﬁt, which
had raised $47,862. He had upped the amount to an even $50,000,
then matched it from his own fortune.
Tonight, though, he had other things to do.
He waited as darkness fell and the lights winked out in the other
ofﬁces. Since he couldn’t begin to prowl until the building was
silent and empty, he sat pondering in the dark, running through
his plan. . . .
Bruce was very troubled by what Alfred had learned from
Richard Drayling during their conversation that afternoon. The
butler’s gaunt face had shown clear distaste for the news he had
to relate. “Mr. Drayling resigned because he is concerned for his
family, sir. He fears for his life and theirs.”
Bruce hadn’t expected that. “In what way?”
“At ﬁrst it was an offered bribe, a substantial amount of money.
Naturally, Mr. Drayling declined. Next came blackmail, which he
also brushed aside. Finally, they made overt threats.”

96

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Bruce felt a storm growing inside him. “Alfred, what are you
talking about? Who are ‘they’?”
The butler sniffed. “Lex Luthor, sir. He has been systematically
corrupting your board of directors, getting them in his pocket. Mr.
Drayling is certain that most of the others have already succumbed.”
Bruce felt cold. “And what does Luthor want from them?”
“Mr. Luthor has bribed, or otherwise coerced, the directors
to pass along crucial Wayne Enterprises research. Several of
LuthorCorp’s major technological breakthroughs originated in
your own divisions.”
Bruce’s hands clenched into ﬁsts. “Five times in the past six
months, LuthorCorp edged out our bids on large government
contracts. Now I know why.”
Maybe he had bided his time too long, played his part too well
as a carefree heir only marginally interested in business matters.
He was disappointed that Drayling had not felt comfortable
enough to talk to the son of Thomas Wayne, but perhaps the older
man had seen Bruce as part of the problem, no different from the
corrupt board members.
He knew full well that Gotham City ran as much on graft and
blackmail as it did on electricity and heating oil. During the years
of Bruce’s absence, the Wayne Enterprises directors had gotten
more complacent and less adept at covering their indiscretions.
Alfred continued, “Mr. Drayling resisted LuthorCorp’s
advances out of respect for your father. When his refusal led to
direct threats against his family, however, he could not tolerate the
situation. Therefore, his only alternative was to resign. I explained
that he should consider giving you the beneﬁt of the doubt . . . but
actions speak louder than words, if you will forgive the cliché.”
With a heavy heart, Bruce understood the man’s decision. “Start­
ing tomorrow, I’m hiring private security to watch over Drayling’s

ENEMIES & ALLIES

97

entire family. The time has come to show the board members that
I’m not completely harmless or incompetent. Once I do some house­
cleaning, maybe I can convince Drayling to come back.”
But ﬁrst he had to gather his ammunition and investigate exactly
what the nine remaining directors were up to.

AS TH IS WAS WAYN E ENTERPRISES, BRUCE COULD HAVE WALKED

into the sealed Records Room and requested any folder he liked,
but he didn’t want to tip his hand. For the moment, he preferred
that his inquiries remain unnoticed—until he had all the proof
he needed. Bruce hoped that the directors, believing him to be
disengaged from the day-to-day administrative details of his own
company, would have let down their guard.
After waiting until midnight, Bruce slipped out of his ofﬁce
and made his way down the dim halls. Most of the ﬂuorescent
lights overhead were off for the weekend; only a few ﬂickered now,
shedding an uncertain light. He moved through the shadows,
cloaked only in his business suit. He could have donned his Batman
outﬁt and returned to break into the building to do his detective
work, but he had a better disguise here. Bruce Wayne had every
right to be in Wayne Tower.
He had full knowledge of the building’s upgraded security
systems; he had, in fact, studied every detail of the plans when
he’d decided to install covert surveillance kits as well as adding
back-door combinations to allow him to go anywhere through­
out the building. He had also created a master key for himself that
permitted access to any of the executive ofﬁces.
He began with Thomson’s.
The metal ﬁle cabinets were locked, but he picked the locks easily.
He rattled open the ﬁrst drawer and shone a penlight down on the

98

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

neatly labeled manila folders. Recognizing project code names, he
skimmed correspondence ﬁles, private calendars, and meeting notes,
then inspected some of the more problematic categories. He ﬂipped
through memos, carbon copies, photostats, and handwritten notes on
legal pads, items that Thomson had not even trusted to his secretary.
Bruce’s speed-reading ability was phenomenal, as was his
retention, but his miniature camera was faster and more reliable,
so he took microﬁlm shots of the pages that appeared important.
What were these men really up to? He needed to obtain proof
of the LuthorCorp connection. He found copies of drawings for
the jetpack prototype, body armor, reinforced structural suit,
small rocket launchers—the projects he had quietly initiated as a
surreptitious investigation into Superman’s abilities. Thomson had
collated all of the projects from various divisions, putting the pieces
together, probably for delivery to a LuthorCorp representative.
But Bruce didn’t see the smoking gun he needed. Not yet.
He prowled through each ofﬁce one by one—Buchheim’s,
Huston’s, McDonnell’s, Fitzroy’s. As he dug into their private
records, he saw that some of these men had been embezzling the
Wayne fortune, while others were using the guise of his legitimate
corporation to engage in unsavory or illegal activities.
He knew it was just the tip of the iceberg.
He had spent so much time developing his Batman persona and
ﬁghting street criminals that he had ignored these white-collar
thieves right in front of his face.
When he ﬁnished with his inspection in Wayne Tower, Bruce
returned to the Cave with all the evidence he had gathered. He still
needed rock-solid proof, not just innuendos. When he challenged
the board of directors, he wanted to deliver a coup de grâce. He
knew he could eventually ﬁnd the proof he needed.
The night was still young, after all.

Chapter 16

LUTHORCORP

N I M POSI NG FIGURE I N BLACK WI NGTI P SHOES AN D A

gray suit, Lex Luthor stormed down the corridor of
his munitions factory. Seeing the expression on his face and the
angry ﬂush that bloomed along his bald pate, even his personal
bodyguard Bertram gave him a wide berth.
Luthor much preferred the civilized comforts of America to the
rough and raw Siberian wilderness. He had been in a good mood
in the several days since his return to Metropolis. All of his plans
had hummed along like good tires on fresh blacktop.
And now this gaping pothole.
He took the elevator from the administrative ofﬁces down to
the manufacturing ﬂoor and walked briskly through the maze of
hallways, past laboratories, noisy high bays, assembly lines, and
shipping docks. He hadn’t spoken a word since learning of the inﬁltra­
tor who’d been caught red-handed, and the men trailing him at a
prudent distance prompted none. As far as Luthor was concerned,
they didn’t exist. He despised people who didn’t respect his boun­
daries or his privacy. There would be an extensive shakeup in his
security department for allowing this breach; he’d have Bertram look

100

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

into the matter personally, and then he would take any necessary
action. Any action, so long as it could be cleaned up later. Luthor
despised mistakes. But that would have to wait for another time.
He ﬁnally arrived at the closed door of an employee lunchroom.
Two straight-backed guards stood outside. “We didn’t want to do
anything until you got here, Mr. Luthor.”
“At least someone is thinking.” He ﬂung open the lunchroom
door.
Lois Lane sat in an uncomfortable plastic chair, looking
completely relaxed. She had served herself coffee from the percola­
tor. Luthor took a moment to let his rage dwindle to a semblance of
calm. He liked to appear in control at all times. Gadﬂy reporters—
especially this woman—were a cross he had to bear, but now it
was time to do some crucifying of his own.
On the lunchroom countertops sat thermoses, packs of
cigarettes, lunch pails. When the whistle blew in an hour, workers
from assembly line number ﬁve would pour into this room, gobble
their food, relax for ﬁfteen minutes, and return to work. Like
drones, they performed their tasks adequately day in and day out.
But people like Lois Lane made him angry. She didn’t know her
proper place.
Seeing him, Lois ﬂipped open her notepad and gave him an icy,
expectant smile. “Ah, there you are, Mr. Luthor. Thank you for
seeing me at last. As you know, I’ve been trying to get an interview
for some time.”
“How did you get inside, Miss Lane? This is a heavily guarded
industrial center working on U.S. military contracts. Did you fail
to see the ‘No Trespassing’ signs?”
Lois shrugged. “Did you fail to read my numerous requests for
a meeting? Our readers want to know what you’re up to.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

101

“The American public has no business looking into my private
affairs.”
“The American taxpayers have every right to know how their
money is spent. The defense of the United States is hardly a ‘private
affair.’ ”
He scowled. “Since you have inﬁltrated this facility, I gather
you’ve seen with your own eyes that we are manufacturing new
models of tanks, artillery shells, and missile components for the
Defense Department.”
Bertram shufﬂed forward to hand Luthor a small camera he
had taken from Lois. With a stern frown, he accepted the camera,
opened the back, and removed the ﬁlm, unspooling it into the
light. “I’m afraid your photographs didn’t turn out, Miss Lane. A
shame.” He let the exposed ﬁlm drop to the lunchroom ﬂoor, where
someone else would clean it up later. He leaned closer, placing both
hands on the lunchroom table. “Are you a Communist spy, Miss
Lane?”
She laughed at that, pointedly ignored her camera and ruined
ﬁlm, and scribbled something on her notepad. “Let’s not waste the
opportunity here, Mr. Luthor. You’re a very powerful man, and
like most powerful men, you’re also very mysterious. Daily Planet
readers are keen to hear all about one of Metropolis’s wealthiest
and most inﬂuential citizens. For instance”—she tapped pen on
paper as though considering what must have been a well-rehearsed
question—“you often go on secretive trips to undisclosed locations.
Why is that?”
“Your precious taxpayers aren’t entitled to know my social
schedule. That’s why I own a private jet.” Luthor turned to a
different and time-proven tack. With fake self-deprecation, he
pointed to himself. “I’m not a rich playboy bachelor like Bruce

102

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Wayne, I’m not a celebrity, and I’m not some . . . man of steel—I’m
just a business executive making a living.”
“I agree, Mr. Luthor—you are no Bruce Wayne. And certainly
no Superman.”
He smiled with acid benignity. “That’s all I have time for, Miss
Lane. I’m a busy man, and my hardworking employees will be
going on their shift break in a few minutes.”
“Your young male employees.” If Lois Lane had a major fault,
it was a poorly developed sense of tact, and she did not know when
to stop pestering.
“My employees. Shouldn’t a woman your age be married, Miss
Lane? Having children, starting a family? You aren’t getting any
younger.”
He snapped toward the guards at the door, “Gentlemen, please
escort this woman off the property. And that notebook will have to
remain here along with the camera—this is a top-secret, classiﬁed
facility. We can’t allow any possibility of espionage.”
The burly men grabbed her arms, and for a moment it looked
as if she would actually thrash and struggle. But Lois appar­
ently realized she would make an amusingly helpless spectacle
as they dragged her off kicking her heels and ﬂailing her arms.
Instead, she angrily allowed herself to be marched out.
Once they had disappeared down the corridor, Luthor’s
composure began to crumble. Extracting his handkerchief, he
wiped a single bead of sweat from his smooth brow. Yes, he was
greatly relieved that she had seen only the assembly line, the tanks,
the large-caliber artillery guns, the missile nose cones. All those
projects were perfectly legitimate.
Not far from where she’d been apprehended, though, Luthor
maintained his secure administrative room, which held a large
wall map, illuminated radar screens, and the information about

ENEMIES & ALLIES

103

his isolated Caribbean island base, not far from the Cuban coast.
If she had managed to get one ﬂoor higher in her prowling, he
thought, that nosy bitch would have seen everything.

A FTE R B E I N G G IVE N TH E B U M ’S R U S H O UT, LO I S B R U S H E D

herself off, regaining her dignity. “Well, that went about as well as
I expected.”
Blanche Rosen had been right on the money. Lois had inﬁl­
trated the facility through a delivery dock when all the men had
been on their coffee break. She had slipped up the ﬁre-escape
stairwell and gone directly to the secret rooms. She had taken a
roll of ﬁlm already, stashed the small canister inside her waistband,
and then sneaked to the lower assembly levels, where Luthor
constructed his legitimate munitions for the army. There, she had
allowed herself to get caught.
She returned to her rented car—another Ford convertible, but
chartreuse this time—which was hidden in the trees outside the
fence. Now that he knew he had a weak link in his outer perimeter,
Luthor was bound to crack down. She wouldn’t get inside again,
at least not that way.
Lois climbed into her car and slammed the door. The white
canvas top was up, keeping the interior cool. She opened her glove
compartment and extracted another notebook, then quickly wrote
down everything she could remember, from quotes to details. She
hoped the hidden roll of ﬁlm would yield enough explicit informa­
tion about what she had seen inside Luthor’s locked control
room—the outline of the Caribbean island base, strange military
plans, blueprints for exotic, high-powered weapons.
She felt in her bones that this could be the story of the decade,
hopefully enough to take Luthor down once and for all.

Chapter 17

GOTHAM CIT Y

HAN KS TO DRAYLI NG’S REVELATIONS TO ALFRED AN D TH E

su
ssuspicious
documents he had found in their ofﬁces, Bruce
believed that most, if not all, of the remaining board members
were under Luthor’s thumb.
But he did not believe they were stupid. Arrogant, perhaps.
Overconﬁdent, deﬁnitely. Some might even be terriﬁed. But not
sloppy. They would never leave the truly damning evidence in
their own ofﬁces. He had to dig deeper to ﬁnd what he was look­
ing for.
And the best time for digging deep was after dark. Night after
night.
He sifted through all publicly available information about the
nine men and stripped away their ﬁrst layer of secrets. Then he
donned his other identity and slipped out, targeting each man in
turn. He would investigate until he had the necessary proof or
until he was convinced a particular man was genuinely clean.
So far, no one had fallen into the latter category.
Next on the list was Paul Henning, the vice president of
manufacturing—the ﬁrst appointed board member who had

ENEMIES & ALLIES

105

not been personally selected by his father. Henning had replaced
Willard LaBrie, a good man twenty years Thomas Wayne’s senior,
who had succumbed to a heart attack in his sleep. At ﬁrst Henning
had seemed to ﬁll his predecessor’s shoes very well, but he’d grown
arrogant, greedy. He had made mistakes, and his biggest mistake
was that he left clues.
Though Henning owned a nice house in a good suburb of
Gotham City, he also surreptitiously rented an apartment under
an assumed name. The secret apartment was convenient, discreet,
and readily accessed by his mistress for an occasional rendezvous.
At the moment, though, it was unoccupied.
The ﬁre escape window in the apartment building had been
painted shut. From his utility belt, he withdrew a tiny vial of
solvent and applied it to the cracks on the sill, loosening the paint.
Powerful magnets on telescoping rods dealt with the latch. Then
with a slender metal probe he jimmied open the window.
Several lights were on in the surrounding apartments, and a
radio’s music drifted into the night. A couple downstairs argued
so loudly and constantly that their shouts provided the perfect
distraction. Nobody heard the slight sound of a window opening.
With a swirl of his dark cape, he slipped inside, then gently slid the
window back into place.
He was in the kitchen. Dark, cold. Not a single dirty dish in the
sink. Everything neatly in place in the cupboards. Several bottles
of bourbon, vodka, and gin stood in a row, with two clean highball
glasses and an empty ice bucket. The sitting room contained
a plaid sofa, a round table with a lamp, and a large radio. The
bedroom held little more than a nightstand and a bed with two
pillows, wrinkled sheets. The bathroom was a standard towels/
bath mat/medicine cabinet affair. The cabinet yielded nothing.
Too clean. Too innocuous. Henning couldn’t be that careful.

106

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Back to the sitting room for a more thorough inspection. The
walls were bare. Nothing in the lamp’s base.
He slid the sofa forward and found a central heating vent
that shouldn’t have been there, since a functional radiator stood
plainly against the opposite wall. He pried loose the metal grill
and discovered not a duct, but a wall safe. The man had a much
deeper secret than the fact that he had a mistress.
Donning small earphones from his utility belt, Bruce extracted
a sensitive gauge, and in ten minutes he had the safe open. Inside,
he found corporate papers, memos, canceled checks, a ledger
that revealed numerous transfers of technical documents, and
blueprints for highly classiﬁed projects that Wayne Enterprises
had spent years and millions to develop.
Everything had been transferred to LuthorCorp. Henning
had accepted plenty of bribes, and he had kept track of them all.
Perhaps the man wanted his own proof to use against Luthor if
ever the bald industrialist double-crossed him. It was all the proof
Bruce Wayne needed now.
Scowling beneath his mask, he reread the details to make
certain, took microﬁlm photographs of each page, and carefully
repackaged the contents.

OF ALL TH E M EN ON TH E BOARD, SHAWN NORLAN DER SEEM ED

like someone Thomas Wayne would have chosen. He had a
normal-appearing life, a wife and two children, and no evidence
of living above his means. But that did not clear him of suspicion.
If a payoff had not been enough enticement, Luthor could have
threatened his family or blackmailed him somehow.
Norlander lived in a two-story Tudor-style home on a maplelined suburban street, with a backyard enclosed by an incongru­

ENEMIES & ALLIES

107

ous chain-link fence. A Chrysler station wagon with lacquered
wood-panel sides sat outside in front of a white-painted detached
garage. A push lawn mower leaned against a wall.
He decided to enter from the back, but the fence gate was locked.
The chain links rattled as he clambered over to drop with quiet
grace to the concrete pad behind the house. His boots barely made
a sound. He approached the back porch cautiously and found a
locked Dutch door. Producing lock picks from his belt, he squatted
and went to work. The dead bolt posed only a small difﬁculty, and
the knob caused no problems at all.
Before he could open the door, however, he sensed movement
outside in the yard and saw something large and faintly growling.
It was a dark-furred monster loping forward under the thin sliver of
moonlight. A mastiff. Only its fangs and gleaming eyes showed in
the darkness. Now he understood the reason for the fenced yard.
The well-trained mastiff neither barked nor howled—it simply
attacked. The weight of the huge body drove him down. As he
raised a defensive forearm, powerful jaws clamped down on the
reinforced gauntlet, biting but unable to penetrate the armor
fabric. Everything was completely silent save for the hungry growl,
like a badly misﬁring engine, that continued to emanate from the
beast’s throat.
He punched its snout, and the dog released its grip. He pulled
his arm free, but then the dog drove him back down to the porch.
Claws scrabbled on the reinforced fabric over his chest.
Grabbing for the utility belt, he tried to reach his capsules. The
forgotten lock picks clinked on the cement porch step, and he
ducked so that the fangs barely brushed his exposed chin, striking
only the cowl’s dark face shield. The mastiff’s jaws sank into one
of the pointed false ears.
Finally ﬁnding the right compartment on the belt, knowing he

108

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

had to end this brief struggle before the commotion woke anyone
up, he seized the vial he sought. He crushed the thin glass ampoule
in his palm and shoved the sharp, oily scent of chloroform at the
dog’s snout. It whiffed, snufﬂed, began to reel, and ﬁnally collapsed
against the porch. The effects would last about thirty minutes. It
would have to be long enough.
As his breathing slowed, he slipped inside Norlander’s house.
The kitchen yielded nothing; neither did the formal dining room.
He crept upstairs, past the bedrooms of two sleeping children, son
and daughter, the boy no more than six. Six years old. A boy who
probably thought his life would never change, that his parents
would always be there. A boy who might suggest going out to a
new motion picture in the heart of Gotham City. A boy who might
run around the house playing with an imaginary sword, pretend­
ing to be Zorro . . .
Work to do. He couldn’t let himself think like that.
Bypassing the master bedroom, he crept down the hall until
he found the study. He would focus his search there. Indeed, in
Norlander’s desk—in the false bottom of a drawer—he found
documents, photos of a little girl, a bank account set up in two
names, neither of which was his own. A picture of a woman the
right age to be the child’s mother. Not his wife.
And a threatening letter: “No one needs to know about your
illegitimate daughter. She’s safe, and your comfortable life is safe.
Your real family won’t suspect a thing. We ask only one small
favor.”
Digging deeper, he found more evidence of Wayne Enterprises
projects being transferred: pending medical breakthroughs, trade
secrets that were funneled to LuthorCorp. A juicy bribe had
turned Henning; blackmail had broken Norlander; threats to his
family had forced Drayling to resign.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

109

He replaced these items exactly as he’d found them. Nobody
would know he had been here until it was too late. On his way out
he carefully locked the Dutch door once more.
Where it lay sprawled, the mastiff had begun to stir. He bent
down and touched its fur. The beast had simply been defending
its home from a sinister prowler, protecting those who meant the
most to it. Exactly as he needed to do with Wayne Enterprises.
On the chain collar encircling the gigantic dog’s neck hung a
tag bearing its name. ﬂuffy.
Leaving the house behind, he slipped over the fence once more
and moved off into the night to his next target.

Chapter 18

M ETROPOLIS

NCE H E GOT BACK TO H IS DESK AT TH E DAILY PLANET,

Clark Kent wrote the draft of his initial “Lorna for the
Lovelorn” column, but he wasn’t ﬁnished yet. First he needed to
show it to someone.
“Remember I promised you a cup of coffee, Lois?” He held
the typewritten sheets in his hand while he nervously pushed his
glasses up with the other. “Um, would now be a good time? We
can just go to the coffee shop around the corner.” He waved the
article. “I’d really like to know what you think.”
Lois was in a rush, as always, up to her eyebrows in a big new
story she was chasing. If she was on the verge of a real scoop, how
could advice to the lovelorn compete with that? But she stopped,
saw the look on his face, and instantly warmed to his dilemma.
“Oh, Clark—you really look out of your element.”
“That’s how I feel.” He shrugged. “I promise it’ll take only a
few minutes.”
She gave him a quick, compassionate smile. “You buying?”
“Sure.”
“Then I’m having a Danish, too.” She startled him by slipping

ENEMIES & ALLIES

111

her arm through his and steering him toward the elevator. “This
isn’t a date, you know. Just two coworkers discussing a story.”
The elevator doors opened with a ding. Clark was embarrassed.
“A date? Why, no, Lois. I mean, there’s nothing wrong with—”
“I’m ﬂattered by the attention, Clark. Really, I am. But my
heart’s set on someone else.”
The elevator ride seemed to take forever. “Superman’s a hard
act to follow,” he agreed.
She stiffened. “I didn’t say anything about Superman!” When
the doors slid open to the lobby of the building, Lois hurried out,
with Clark following closely.
In the coffee shop she chose one of the stools at the counter
rather than the more intimate setting of a booth. A gum-chewing
waitress hurried over with two cups of coffee, and Lois pointed to
a cherry-ﬁlled Danish in the display case. Nearly twice her size,
Clark swiveled on the stool beside her and handed her his article.
“I’m not sure the advice is correct, but I tried to listen to them,
respond to how they’re feeling, and give them support, one way or
another. My mother told me to be compassionate. She said that as
long as the advice comes from my heart, then the recommenda­
tions can’t be entirely wrong.”
Lois sipped her coffee and skimmed the article, talking to him
as she did so. “When did you see your mother? I thought she’s in
Kansas.”
“I, um, spoke to her on the telephone.”
Lois’s darting eyes danced back and forth along the lines of
text, and he watched her nod slightly to herself. She slowed, read
more carefully, and handed the pages back to him. Her smile of
approval meant more to him than he could have ever expected.
“Not bad, Clark—and I mean that. Not only is it what readers
want, but it’s good advice, too.”

112

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

“Thanks, Lois. It was so hard to choose among all those letters.
Everyone seems to have a different problem.”
Lois tapped her ﬁngernail on one of the paragraphs. “This
one’s a little thin, though—the man in love with a coworker who
doesn’t seem to know he exists. I think you should tell him to do
little things . . . open doors, ask for her advice, bring her coffee or a
newspaper. He doesn’t need to win a football championship or put
an end to world hunger—he just has to show her that he’s a worthy
guy. And believe me, women do notice these things, whether or
not it’s apparent to the man.”
He took a pencil from his pocket and scribbled notes in the
margin while she ate her Danish. “Thanks, Lois. That really
helps.”
“Your heart’s in the right place.” She took a quick gulp, ﬁ nished
her cup, and waved away a reﬁll as she swung off the stool. “Gotta
go. I’m after an important follow-up to the Luthor story. Thanks
for the coffee.” Lois pecked Clark on the cheek and gave him
a quick smile before she hurried out of the coffee shop. “Good
column, Clark. Who knows, you could have a whole new career
ahead of you.”
He knew he was bright red from blushing.

TAKI NG H IS MOTH ER’S ADVICE TO H EART, CLARK ALSO MADE AN

effort to strengthen his friendship with Jimmy Olsen. The frecklefaced young man was delighted when Clark suggested that they
catch a movie after work. Jimmy picked the movie—Earth vs. the
Flying Saucers—and they sat together near the front, munching
on popcorn, sipping cherry cola through straws.
Clark stared at the black and white images, watching the
enemy aliens with their whirling saucer-like ships, their death

ENEMIES & ALLIES

113

rays. Afterward, as the two of them went for ice cream sundaes,
Jimmy chattered with animation and enthusiasm about the ﬁlm.
He had thoroughly enjoyed it. Clark, though, was troubled by
the persistent portrayal of aliens as evil monsters that wanted to
destroy or enslave the human race.
No wonder many of Lois’s readers had been skeptical about
Superman’s declaration that he was not from Earth. He had hoped
to provide a shining example, to expose the silliness of being afraid
of the unknown, but since he knew no other genuine aliens, how
could he be sure?
Hollywood’s murderous craft were drastically different from
how he imagined spaceships from Krypton would have been
constructed, especially ships captained or devised by someone like
Jor-El. . . .

TH E N EXT DAY, CLARK GLANCED UP FROM HIS TYPEWRITER AS

a rush of excitement whirled through the newsroom. Phones
started ringing simultaneously. “Quick, turn on the radio!”
someone yelled. They all gathered around the shortwave, listening
intently to emergency dispatches, alerts that were broadcast on the
public bands.
“—repeat, this is a news ﬂash! At this moment, ﬁghter jets
are scrambling to respond to a strange silver spacecraft that has
appeared over Washington, D.C. Witnesses describe it as a ﬂying
saucer. It refuses to respond to radio transmissions.”
Clark’s glasses skidded down his nose and he pushed them
back up. Jimmy was already on his feet, ﬂushed with excitement.
“Gosh, Mr. Kent—do you think it’s the start of an alien invasion,
just like in the movie last night?”
Lois grabbed her phone, yelling toward Perry White’s open

114

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

doorway, “Chief, I’m calling my father! If anyone knows what’s
going on, the general will.”
“Great Caesar’s ghost! He’s not going to stop to give interviews
in the middle of a national crisis!”
She dialed furiously. “He will if he wants to keep getting
birthday cards from me.”
Thoughts spinning, Clark wondered if this was ﬁ nally his
opportunity to speak with a fellow alien, maybe even another
Kryptonian survivor. He rose quickly from his desk. “Can’t talk
right now, Jimmy. I’m on a deadline in an hour, and I have to ﬁnish
my column for Mr. White.” He picked up papers and bustled out
of the newsroom while the other reporters clustered around the
radio.

RED CAPE RI PPLI NG BEH I N D H I M, KAL-EL STREAKED TH ROUG H

the sky, straight toward the nation’s capital. By adjusting his
senses, both seeing and listening to radio waves on speciﬁc bands,
he could monitor the action. Seven USAF F-100D Super Sabre
jets had taken off from nearby Bolling Air Force base, but the
“unidentiﬁed ﬂying object” had soared away from Washington,
D.C., skimming low to the ground, then looping up into the clouds
in a series of impossible maneuvers. The ﬁghter pilots did their
best to keep up, roaring along at top speed; they left vapor trails
that Kal-El could easily follow.
If this truly was an interstellar ship, it would be capable of
incredible velocities. As the sleek elliptical craft raced westward
across the United States, it outdistanced the supersonic jets. But
Kal-El could ﬂy faster even than that.
The UFO raced across the Great Plains, cutting across
Nebraska, then headed south. Kal-El wondered brieﬂy if it would

ENEMIES & ALLIES

115

arrow toward Smallville. Might a fellow Kryptonian be able to
detect someone from his former home in the middle of Kansas?
Maybe even the remnants of his crashed ship?
Kal-El picked up on the chatter among the F-100D pilots. “So
far the bogey hasn’t launched any bombs or missiles, Cap. Maybe
it’s peaceful—over.”
“And maybe it’s just here to ask for directions to Venus,” one of
the other pilots shot back.
The squadron commander broke in. “Our orders are to pursue
and intercept. We’ve gotten no response to our transmissions, so
we have to assume that thing means no good. Listen up—when
you get in range, ﬁre at will. Acknowledge.”
A chorus of voices responded. “Copy that.”
“Roger.”
If the alien visitor did not speak English, Kal-El wondered how
the spacecraft could possibly respond. He felt a powerful need to
reach the ﬂying saucer ﬁrst, before the ﬁghter jets did anything
foolish. These men might unintentionally provoke an interplan­
etary war.
He soared forward to catch up with the Super Sabres. One of the
pilots detected him on his radar. “Sir, there’s something coming up
on our six! Wait . . . it’s Superman!”
Kal-El streaked by, hand raised, cape now a blurry red line
behind him as he shot past the lead plane.
“Roger that. He’ll knock that alien out of the sky!”
“Maybe so . . . but remember, he’s an alien, too. Over.”
“Eyes front, Cap! Where did those other aircraft come from—
over?”
Three larger planes now ﬂew on a perpendicular course, peeling
out in front of the strange silver craft. The unmarked private planes
also intended to intercept the alien saucer. The Air Force squadron

116

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

sent hails, demanding that the new pilots identify themselves, but
the mysterious aircraft did not respond. The unidentiﬁed planes
cut directly across the UFO’s path, but the saucer zigzagged,
ducked beneath them, and streaked past in an instant.
Kal-El scanned ahead, squinting, pushing with his enhanced
vision to glean information about the three private craft. His
X-ray vision penetrated their hulls, and through the fuselage he
discerned pilots, technicians, and engineers working with analyti­
cal devices, studying screens. They all wore uniforms with a very
familiar corporate logo.
LuthorCorp.
What did LuthorCorp have to do with the alien craft? Kal-El
supposed that someone like Lex Luthor would be fascinated by
otherworldly technology. He probably wanted to seize the silver
craft for himself, and he undoubtedly had his own equipment,
including unmarked supersonic aircraft, so that he could get the
strange ship before the military did. Regardless, it was obvious
that even these new planes had no chance of catching the ﬂying
saucer.
Kal-El put on a burst of speed, pulled ahead of the Super Sabre
jets, and began closing the gap to the UFO.
As he raced past, he saw that the men inside the LuthorCorp
aircraft were activating a kind of pulse beacon from a small
antenna. But instead of aiming it at the ﬂying saucer, they pointed
the spike back toward the oncoming F-100D squadron.
Behind him, Kal-El heard a cry of surprised dismay transmitted
by one of the pilots. “Mayday, Mayday! Flameout!”
The squadron formation broke apart and scattered, with the
trailing jets circling away. The lead Super Sabre, though, began
gushing black smoke from its engines as it tumbled awkwardly
from the sky like a downed waterfowl. The pilot hit his afterburn­

ENEMIES & ALLIES

117

ers, trying everything. “All systems FUBAR. Can’t eject. Malfunc­
tion! Going down, going down!”
Kal-El saw the F-100D enter a deadly and disorienting ﬂat spin,
its engines erupting in a blaze of ﬂame. One of its wings shimmied
dangerously. The pilot inside was doomed.
Meanwhile, the LuthorCorp craft beat a hasty retreat, no
longer pretending to chase the ﬂying saucer, and the UFO streaked
away in a completely different direction.
The remainder of the USAF squadron could do nothing to help
their fellow pilot. Their own cockpit systems were also scrambled,
and the pilots struggled to keep from crashing alongside their
leader.
Kal-El didn’t pause to think about what he should do. He had
to forget about the ﬂying saucer. Someone needed his help. He
whirled about and dove toward the falling jet.
He ﬁlled his lungs and expelled a great gust of air, enough to
freeze the engine cowling and extinguish the ﬂames before the fuel
tanks exploded. Then, as gently as he could, he took hold of the
jet’s belly, raising his hands over his head so he could support the
falling deadweight, taking away the burden of gravity as he eased
the aircraft toward the barren ground below.
The Super Sabre’s systems were completely fried, which pre­
vented the pilot from extending his landing gear. Kal-El brought
the jet down carefully on the desert sand, set it on its belly, then
tore away the canopy. He snapped the pilot’s harness and pulled
the man to safety, still concerned that the jet might explode.
As he stood on wobbly legs, the pilot removed his helmet and
drew deep gasping breaths. He shook his head and looked back at
his wrecked plane. “Thanks, Superman. You saved my life.”
“Glad to be able to help. I wouldn’t leave you stranded.” The
airman brushed himself off, looking both shaken and relieved.

118

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Normally, such sincere appreciation would have been all Kal-El
needed to hear, but he looked up into the sky, where the UFO had
already streaked out of sight. The crippled squadron had sent out
distress signals and requests for backup, then circled around to
retrieve the downed pilot.
With bittersweet disappointment, Kal-El scanned the sky for
any silver glint of the saucer, but too much time had passed. The
mysterious spacecraft had vanished.

Chapter 19

TH E LUTHOR MANSION

E HAD SEEN ENOUGH EVI DENCE, BUT H E DI DN’T HAVE

enough answers. Before confronting the members of
his board, Bruce decided to go to the core of the problem: Lex
Luthor.
The industrial magnate’s private home was in the Lake District
north of Metropolis, an extravagant fortress built along the lines
of a military citadel, strikingly different from the stately Gothic
architecture of Wayne Manor.
Bruce easily found an excuse for a quick trip from Gotham City
to Metropolis using his Wayne Enterprises private jet. Charity
functions, private meetings with potential donors, maybe even a
night on the town—he didn’t need to worry about a cover story.
Before departing for Metropolis, Bruce studied the blueprints
(both the redacted plans on public ﬁle and the accurate versions
that were supposedly not available to anyone), old and forgotten
permit applications and rubber-stamped approvals, the landscap­
ing layout, the architectural elevation drawings. He searched for
weaknesses and considered some of the surprises that might be
waiting for him. Then he got himself ready.

120

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

The ostentatious Lake District homes were surrounded by
a comfortable buffer of forested land. Luthor’s property was
encircled by a dangerous-looking wrought-iron fence topped
with spear points, beyond which stretched a no-man’s-land of
additional fences and booby traps.
Any man who needed so much security obviously had something
to hide. Bruce Wayne knew that from personal experience.
Darkly caped and fearsomely cowled, with heavy-traction
boots and armored bodysuit, utility belt loaded with a cornucopia
of imaginative tools, he prepared to inﬁltrate Luthor’s mansion.
He began his approach as soon as full darkness fell. Given the
perimeter fences, he decided the best approach was from the lake.
Fitting an air mask to his face and immersing himself, he glided
forward underwater, creating not even a ripple—a shark now,
instead of a bat.
Luthor’s mansion had a private dock, but no boat was tied up
to it. While closing the distance and shining a small light into the
murky waters before him, he saw large metal spikes strategically
submerged at the property line. These would tear the hull of any
boat that approached too closely. The placid surface gave no hint
of the jagged tips just underwater.
Intent on avoiding these spikes, he didn’t see the ﬁne mesh of
entrapment wire that snared him. He struggled, but the elastic
net drew tighter. Forcing calm, he worked one gauntlet free and
produced a wire cutter from his utility belt, with which he made
short, methodical work of the lethal strands. He swam free.
Gradually he raised himself above the surface, coming to shore.
His thick suit had been scratched by the sharp entrapment wire; a
normal swimmer would have been sliced to ribbons.
He crept up from the lake, careful not to stir the dried leaves or
fallen branches at the water’s edge. When he reached the spiked

ENEMIES & ALLIES

121

fence, he worked his way over and through, careful to make no
sound. Before taking a step, he scanned the ground carefully. He
found and avoided four trip wires and a land mine trigger. He
hoped that no neighbor children accidentally heaved a baseball
over the fence; Luthor had a lethal prejudice against unexpected
visitors.
After conducting careful surveillance for several hours during
his preparations, he already knew the guards’ habits. While he
waited in the shadows, ﬁve armed men walked about in a standard
patrol pattern. Intimidating yet inefﬁcient. Predictable.
Luthor’s intelligence was also his weakness, because he believed
himself superior to most people. Since his security would bafﬂe
any normal man, he would think he was safe. Arrogant . . . but
sloppy just the same.
The imposing mansion had sharp angles and plenty of glass,
metal, and concrete; it did not at all ﬁt with the natural wooded
surroundings. The highest roof sported a small private obser­
vatory. This “home” seemed designed to convey the impression
that Lex Luthor had many friends and social obligations, but
the mansion was in fact virtually deserted. As the midnight hour
approached, Luthor’s only company was his security team.
With his dark cape helping to hide him, he circled to the wing
that housed Luthor’s extravagant second-ﬂoor study, which was
fronted by a balcony. He suspected that the household safe and
Luthor’s private records would be there.
Withdrawing a sharp-pronged grappling hook, he twirled it,
paying out the thin, strong cable. He let the hook ﬂy, and it sailed
upward on a gentle, precise arc. The prongs caught and lodged
around the stone balustrade. He pulled the cable taut, then braced
his boots against the stone wall. He felt acutely exposed, worried
that a spotlight might happen to brush across the mansion’s

122

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

exterior. According to their unvarying patrol patterns, he had
forty seconds before the guards returned.
He reached the balcony, swung himself over, and crouched in
the shadows just as a guard turned the corner, walked past, and
continued into the grounds.
The French doors of the balcony were locked. The interior
lights were low, the room empty. He peered inside, saw no sign of
Luthor. On the other side of the mansion, the observatory dome
was cracked open, and the telescope within was pointed toward
the starry sky.
Removing a diamond glass cutter from his belt, he scribed a
circle in the inset glass near the lock and easily removed the cut
section of the French door. He slithered his hand inside and turned
the lock, then quietly swung open the door. He felt like James
Bond inﬁltrating the headquarters of SPECTRE. But this was not
a spy novel—this was real.
He would search the ofﬁces quickly, take what he needed, and get
back out. Since this was Luthor’s inner sanctum, past the gauntlet
of security measures and a veritable army of guards, Luthor would
be most conﬁdent of himself here. He had left important papers,
ﬁles, and objects right there on the desk.
After tonight, Luthor would likely be even more paranoid.
Sifting through the memos with gauntleted hands, looking at
folders and labels, he sorted out what he needed. The more he saw,
the deeper the conspiracy went. He found ﬁles on each member
of his board of directors, records of their indiscretions, speciﬁc
descriptions of how each man had been turned into a LuthorCorp
puppet, along with notes on the technical data and prototypes they
had smuggled to Luthor.
With soft clicks of his miniaturized camera, he photographed
everything.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

123

After he viewed the next ﬁles, his anger grew. The Wayne
Enterprises designs that Bruce had quietly encouraged for the
sole purpose of understanding Superman’s abilities—LuthorCorp had put the pieces together into a uniﬁed application. Luthor
had developed a model of armored “battlesuits,” walking robotic
armor shells with enhanced muscles, built-in weapons systems,
even jetpacks for brief ﬂights.
The battlesuit blueprints, though, had been piled to the left of
the desk, as if some emergency had preempted all other concerns.
The urgent work that occupied Luthor was a set of memos and
classiﬁed dispatches, communiqués sent by courier to the White
House, to the Air Force, to the chiefs of agencies not gener­
ally known to the public. The carbon copy of a memo addressed
directly to President Eisenhower sat on top of the stack. Luthor
demanded that the Air Force release his “private property” from a
secret installation in the Nevada desert, a classiﬁed base that the
memorandum called “Area 51.” Responses from the Air Force,
even from Eisenhower, repeatedly denied any knowledge.
Very interesting . . .
Minutes ticked away. Glancing again around the ofﬁce, he
knew he should leave and not press his luck, but he felt violated
and angry at how Luthor had taken advantage of a long-standing
trust built into the corporate structure of Wayne Enterprises . . .
how he had tried to bring down his father’s company. Lex Luthor’s
schemes were like a set of Russian dolls, one nested inside another,
inside another, on and on until any investigator would get lost.
One more thorough search of the ofﬁce. Atop a sturdy ﬁle
cabinet he found a small cubical lead box next to a stack of
printouts, spectrographs, and ﬁltered photos of a crystalline
rock. The label on the lead box marked the specimen’s origin as
Ariguska, Siberia.

124

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

With his attention to details, he noted the casual placement of
the lead box and the unexpected clutter of the documents. The
clues told him that Luthor had devoted a lot of recent attention
to this specimen. He lifted the hinged cover on the lead box to
reveal a baseball-sized fragment of a crystalline substance. The
irregular-shaped rock emitted a faint emerald glow.
Though he had studied geology and could readily identify many
types of gems, natural crystals, and igneous, metamorphic, and
sedimentary rock, he was totally unfamiliar with any substance
such as this. A meteorite, perhaps?
He looked more closely at the analytical reports; LuthorCorp
chemists had been unable to determine the mineral’s molecular
structure. The energy readings, the radioactive emissions, and the
character of its refracted light were all highly unusual. Luthor’s
personal handwritten notes produced more questions than
answers.
“Energy readings exotic, difﬁcult to correlate. Nature of
material conveys the possibility of chemical/radioactive power.
How to release it? Mineral is unlike normal ﬁssile material.
Mutagenic properties—unknown, but likely. Possible uses? Not
yet determined. Potential? Unlimited.”
More mysteries opening up like Russian dolls: Strange items
being held by the government inside a secret military facility in
Nevada. Battlesuit prototypes based on proprietary research and
development done by Wayne Enterprises. Now a mysterious,
energetic mineral specimen from Siberia . . . .
Lex Luthor had already stolen so much from Wayne Enter­
prises, had whisked cutting-edge technological discoveries out
from under Bruce Wayne’s nose. Though this intriguing green rock
appeared to have nothing to do with the corruption of the board of

ENEMIES & ALLIES

125

directors, perhaps it was something that Wayne Enterprises should
investigate as well. It was time to balance the scales.
He lifted the lead box from the top of the ﬁle cabinet to look at
the mineral more closely.
Suddenly alarms shrieked, bells rang, and spotlights blazed all
around Lex Luthor’s household.

Chapter 20

TH E LUTHOR MANSION

ITTING IN THE QUIET DARKNESS OF HIS PRIVATE OBSERVA-

tory, Lex Luthor spent the evening in contemplation. He
kept a blank notepad near the telescope’s eyepiece, both for
astronomical observation and to record the innovative ideas that
invariably popped into his head whenever he let his thoughts ﬂow.
Tonight, though, Luthor remained angry and frustrated. He
was not accustomed to people refusing to give him what he needed
or wanted. Reasonable men did not turn down Lex Luthor’s
requests—yet President Eisenhower had snubbed him. Who did
the man think he was?
With the observatory dome cracked open and his sixteen-inch
refractor telescope pointed to the sky, Luthor continued his study
of the empty, threatening heavens. The evening was chilly, and he
tightened his smoking jacket of patterned silk lined with baby seal
fur.
He maneuvered the telescope into position. His personal
calculations had provided tracking tables, so he knew exactly
where and when the blip of Sputnik would cross the night sky.
It was a fad these days for people to go outside with binoculars

ENEMIES & ALLIES

127

or little toy telescopes to search for the orbiting object. Each time
the Soviet satellite crossed unchallenged over American airspace,
Luthor considered it a provocation. He would keep watching the
skies.
Time and again, the Soviet space program had proven its
superiority. At one time, Luthor had invested in the U.S. space
effort, had studied the progress of the Vanguard project, had met
personally with Wernher von Braun—but it all disappointed him.
Vanguard was supposed to have beaten the Soviets into space, but
it was now overdue and over budget. And so Luthor chose not to
bother with such bumbling bureaucracy. He had decided to do
something on his own, using his Caribbean island base. . . .
Now he peered into the eyepiece, adjusted the focus, and
watched the stars in his ﬁeld of view transform from fuzzy blobs
into diamond sparkles. Sputnik would be along any moment now.
Emergency alarms startled him out of his reverie. Automatic
lights blazed on in the observatory, temporarily blinding him,
but Luthor was already on his feet. He recognized the pitch of
the sirens, knew the location of the clanging bells. This was no
bumbling intruder at the outer fences; it was an inner-perimeter
security breach. He snatched up the master Handie-Talkie and
held the transmit button. “Report! What’s happened?”
“Intruder, Mr. Luthor,” Bertram replied crisply.
“I know that! Have you caught him yet?”
“No, sir. We’re making our way to your study now.”
Luthor was already bolting from the observatory, astonished
that anyone would dare do this to him. Such a person would
have to be suicidal. “Make certain he’s alive when you apprehend
him—I may wish to do some of the questioning myself. No need to
inform the police.”
He’d reached his ofﬁce by the time the ﬁrst security squads

128

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

converged there, but the intruder had already ﬂed. Luthor scanned
his desk, saw that papers had been moved, noted the circle of glass
cut out near the French door lock. A chair had been overturned,
presumably as the burglar made his rapid escape.
With sick dread, he jerked his head so quickly he nearly gave
himself whiplash. The lead box containing the green mineral from
General Ceridov’s quarry was gone.
Astonishing—and bafﬂing. How could any corporate spy have
known about that? He dashed onto the balcony, spied the grappling
hook still anchored on the balustrade. The entire property was
bathed in searchlights.
Shouts from the grounds now, then barking dogs. They would
tear the man apart and probably leave little for interrogation . . .
or even identiﬁcation. Luthor suddenly caught sight of a shadowy
ﬁgure in a dark cape—some sort of costume?—racing along,
dodging nets and spotlights, leaping expertly over land mines and
trip wires, easily maneuvering through the deadly obstacle course.
Whoever this man was, this burglar, this spy, he knew Luthor’s
mansion and property down to the tiniest detail.
An explosion sounded, accompanied by an eruption of dirt and
smoke: One of his own guards had not been so adept at avoiding
the land mines. Luthor made a disgusted sound; they could pick
up the bloody pieces of the clod later.
“Hurry, he’s getting away!”
The intruder kept running.

Chapter 21

TH E LUTHOR MANSION

AL-EL FLEW OVER M ETROPOLIS, HIS RED CAPE FLUTTER­
A

ing in the breeze. Below, he saw nighttime trafﬁc lights
and the winking glimmers of bright skyscraper windows, people
attending shows, dining in restaurants, seeing motion pictures.
Staring at the kaleidoscope of night life, he tried to imagine how
magniﬁcent Krypton must have been, how exotic, how spectacu­
lar. But Earth was his planet now, and these were his people.
He needed to make sure that Lex Luthor did not pose a danger
to them.
Kal-El himself had seen clear evidence of LuthorCorp planes
chasing the mysterious alien saucer. He wanted to look the man
in the eye and ask him why. If he had tried to do so as Clark Kent,
reporter for the Daily Planet, he would have gotten nowhere. As
Superman, however, he could not be ignored.
Kal-El streaked north beyond the city limits, up toward the
Lake District. He skimmed pine forests interspersed with posh
homes until he found the bright lights and incongruous modern
architecture of Luthor’s mansion. It was naive to think he could
simply land on the man’s balcony and talk with him, as he had

130

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

done with Lois Lane. And he would not ﬂy overhead and use his
X-ray vision to spy on Luthor’s private activities in his own home.
By any measure, that would have been wrong. His parents had
taught him better than that.
As he approached, still trying to formulate a plan, he heard
Luthor’s household alarms and saw bright spotlights illuminating
the grounds. With a quick scan, Kal-El watched guards respond­
ing to an emergency—a home invasion. Luthor was being robbed!
Some intrepid burglar had broken through the industrialist’s
security and was now getting away.
With his sharp vision he saw the shadowy shape of a man in a
dark costume, cape, and mask. The caped ﬁgure expertly dodged
booby traps, leaped over wire fences, and raced toward the
perimeter of Luthor’s property. The confused guards shouted and
ﬁred their guns at the uncertain target.
Without hesitation, Kal-El swooped down. Jonathan Kent
had taught him in no uncertain terms that the law was a safety
net that applied to everyone, rich and poor alike. He had foiled
many robberies and heists and would do so again, here on Luthor’s
property. Kal-El could stop this criminal and turn him in to the
authorities, without anyone getting hurt. The law applies to
everyone.
He recognized the prowler’s fearsome disguise from stories in
the Gotham City papers: the Batman, a vigilante who had attacked
the Gotham police and broken as many laws as the criminals
he supposedly apprehended. Batman could have been a hero; he
could have fought for the forces of good, but Kal-El was seeing
him now for what he really was—no more than a petty criminal in
a disguise. Kal-El had dealt with petty criminals before.
He landed silently in front of Batman, assuming a wide-footed
stance, ﬁsts on hips, cape ﬂuttering. “Stop!”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

131

Intent on eluding the guards behind him in the trees, Batman
halted. His eyes narrowed behind the dark mask, but his
response was not what Kal-El expected: “I knew you worked for
LuthorCorp.” He was holding something in one gauntlet, hidden
by his cape.
Kal-El frowned, not knowing what Batman was talking about.
“I do not work for Luthor.”
“Don’t lie to me. And don’t think you can stop me.”
With a ﬂick of his other wrist, he ﬂung a pointed Bat-shuriken,
but the tiny throwing bat ricocheted off Kal-El’s chest and fell to
the ground. The sharp barbs did not penetrate his blue suit, nor
did the tranquilizer toxin come into contact with his skin. Batman
paused only a moment before the same hand let ﬂy a bolo string,
and the weights wrapped around Kal-El’s arms and torso. With a
ﬂex of his elbows, though, the high-tensile-strength cables snapped
like cotton threads.
Spotlights shone through the dark trees. The guards were
coming, shouting, and Lex Luthor was with them.
Kal-El did not abide thieves; Batman had to be held account­
able for what he had done here. The bald industrialist would likely
want to take matters into his own hands. Kal-El couldn’t allow
that either. He did not trust Lex Luthor to provide appropriate
justice.
Bursting through the trees into the clearing, Luthor spotted
the two of them standing there, facing each other. He let out an
astonished gasp.
Acting on impulse, Kal-El seized Batman by his cape-covered
shoulders and bounded into the air, carrying him away. “I’m
taking you to the proper authorities.”
Below, Luthor shouted, “Stop them! Don’t let them get away!”
His guards opened ﬁre, but Kal-El dodged the bullets as he

132

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

ﬂew into the night, heading across the calm surface of the lake.
Batman didn’t struggle, didn’t argue as they raced out of sight,
low over the water. Instead, he said accusatorily, “How did
LuthorCorp create you? Drugs? Controlled mutation? Technolog­
ical augmentations?”
“Luthor didn’t—”
Kal-El was startled when the other man twitched, touched a
catch on his suit, and suddenly his slippery cape detached from
his shoulders. Batman dropped free and plunged into the lake
water below. Kal-El was left holding the scallop-edged cape while
Batman dove deeper beneath the surface, ﬁtting a breather over
his face.
Kal-El’s vision could penetrate the dark waters. Dropping the
useless cape, he dove into the lake himself, kniﬁng beneath the
surface and stroking toward the sleek ﬁgure. Seeing him approach,
Batman released a small canister from his belt, which burst open,
spreading a foaming cloud of bubbles and murky dye, like an
underwater smoke screen.
Kal-El couldn’t believe how quickly the man could move.
Though he sped through the murk, Batman had already changed
direction, stroking toward the nearby shore and the dark, clustered
mansions opposite Luthor’s property.
Kal-El had had enough. With a burst of speed he seized Bat­
man again and ﬂew up out of the water, leaving a splash behind
them like an erupting geyser. Batman punched him in the jaw
with a blow that would have stunned any normal man, but
Kal-El gritted his teeth, ﬂew to the pebbly shore, and dropped his
opponent on an empty stretch between homes. “I don’t want to
hurt you, but I’m not going to let you get away. You’ll stand trial
for your crimes.”
As lake water ran smoothly from his dark suit, Batman seemed

ENEMIES & ALLIES

133

to be studying Kal-El, seeking hidden vulnerabilities. Batman said
in a low voice, “If you take me out of the equation, then who’ll
make Luthor accountable for his crimes?”
Kal-El hesitated. Lois had been clear about her suspicions of
what the millionaire industrialist was doing, and her reporter
instincts were rarely wrong. But a crime was still a crime, and he
could not ignore what Batman had done. Kal-El made accusations
of his own. “I know you broke into Luthor’s home. What did you
steal from him? What’s so important?”
“You tell me why it’s important.” Batman turned slightly,
holding a small lead box in his gloved hand. “What does Luthor
want with this specimen? Why is he protecting it?” He opened the
lead box to reveal a shimmering green fragment of broken crystal­
line rock.
Kal-El suddenly felt as if a locomotive had struck him in the
back. He felt weak, drained. “What . . . is that?”
“You tell me.” Batman pressed forward, and Kal-El’s knees
threatened to buckle. His vision turned dim, and black dots
swirled before his eyes. He reeled, utterly helpless on the stony
shore of the lake as he struggled for breath. Nothing like this had
ever happened to him before. He collapsed to his knees, ﬁghting to
stay conscious.
And in that instant Batman was gone. Among the complex
shadows of the pine forest at the boundary of the estate, the other
man simply disappeared, taking the glowing green mineral with
him.
As soon as Batman was gone, Kal-El felt his strength begin to
return, his senses restored like a rush of cool water. But he was
still weak, disoriented, reeling. And astonished. How could such a
brief exposure to a lump of rock affect him so greatly? What kind
of secret weapon was it?

134

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

On the opposite side of the lake, the lights and commotion at
Luthor’s mansion continued. He heard alarms, shouts, two random
and unnecessary gunshots. Soon even the distant neighbors
would realize something was going on.
Kal-El scanned the forest, the isolated docks, the dark houses,
but he saw no sign of Batman. The other man had completely
vanished.

Chapter 22

TH E DAILY PLAN ET

H E DAY AFTER H IS STRANG E AN D UNSETTLI NG ENCOUNTER

with Batman, Clark returned to his desk to face yet another
w
bag of letters addressed to “Lorna for the Lovelorn.” He adjusted
his dark-rimmed glasses and stared warily, as if these pleas for
help were also made of the mysterious green stone that had so
profoundly affected him the night before.
Yet another problem his superpowers couldn’t solve.
After what he had seen at Luthor’s mansion, Batman’s bafﬂing
comments and accusations, and the LuthorCorp planes chasing
the ﬂying saucer, Clark knew he needed to uncover the truth. He
needed to be a journalist again, a real journalist.
He dumped the mailbag on his desk. All these letters came from
people who truly wanted answers to their personal problems, but
Clark Kent wasn’t the one to give them. He was a reporter, not
a counselor or a social worker. Though he carefully maintained
a meek and harmless demeanor, Clark was far from passive.
Straightening his jacket, he went to the glass doorway of Perry
White’s ofﬁce and knocked politely.
Perry was reading his own newspaper, scrutinizing the head­

136

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

lines, chomping on his cigar. He looked up. “Kent! That ﬁrst
Lovelorn column of yours was lackluster. Those people want
advice, not sympathy. You have to solve their problems, not just
hold their hands.”
Exactly the opposite of what his mother and Lois had told
him.
“You’re right, Mr. White. I don’t think I’m—”
Perry cut him off. “I’ve been thinking, Kent—I didn’t hire you
to be a pen pal for our whiniest subscribers. My wife, Alice, has
been nagging me to take a crack at the Lorna column herself. She’s
always giving me advice—she might as well do it for proﬁt.” He
didn’t seem to expect Clark to laugh at his joke. “I’ve decided to
reassign you.”
“Uh . . . thank you, Mr. White.”
“Don’t thank me—I want you back doing real work for this
paper.”
Clark jumped in, showing his initiative. “I was thinking about
a follow-up on that ﬂying saucer sighting—”
“You must be reading my mind, Kent. Get out there and snoop
around before Lois gets it into her head to investigate. Since
her expense accounts are always higher than yours, I want you
and Olsen to check out this UFO story, especially with the new
information that just came over the wires.”
Jimmy hurried into the ofﬁce, hearing his name. “There’s more
to the UFO sighting? Where are we going, Mr. White?”
“We’ve got reports that a ﬂying saucer crashed in a Podunk
town in northern Arizona. Could be the same one, or maybe it’s all
part of an invasion. The closest airport is Las Vegas, so you’ll have
to land there, rent a car, and drive. You’re sharing a motel room,
mind you. And the Planet isn’t paying for gambling markers or
topless Vegas shows!”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

137

“No, sir, Mr. White!” Clark and Jimmy answered in unison.
“I knew you two would be perfect for this job.” Perry nodded
wryly. “In fact—broaden the story, Kent. Give me a full background
on the whole ﬂying saucer craze. Even the Air Force has launched
an ofﬁcial investigation—Project Yearbook or Project Bluebon­
net, something like that.”
“I believe that’s Project Blue Book, Mr. White.”
“See? You’re already an expert! I want a full investigative piece.
Tell me if this crashed ﬂying saucer has real little green men or if it
has more to do with pink elephants from the bottom of a whiskey
bottle.” He shooed them out of the ofﬁce. “Get to Metropolis
airport, pronto. Lois is at an impromptu press conference Lex
Luthor just called—I want you on your way before she decides
to stick her nose in your story and asks to come along. Besides,
there’s a gambler’s weekend special ﬂight, and you can shave
ﬁfteen dollars off your plane tickets. Move!”
Clark and Jimmy scurried from the ofﬁce, both grinning at their
shared good fortune, though for very different reasons. “Gosh, Las
Vegas, Mr. Kent! I’ll bet the lights on the Strip are bright enough
to attract alien visitors.” The young man began gathering up his
equipment. “Do you think the ﬂying saucer is real?”
“Aliens on Earth? It’s up to us to ﬁnd the truth.” Clark did
his best to cloak his excitement. He had been seeking the same
answers most of his life.

Chapter 23

M ETROPOLIS

EX
X LUTHOR RARELY ISSUED PUBLIC STATEM ENTS H I MSELF,

leaving that chore to his press relations staff. Therefore,
Lois Lane was very interested when the bald industrialist called
an emergency press conference. He was certainly incensed about
something.
Knowing what she did about his shadowy activities, Lois wasn’t
inclined to believe what Luthor had to say; nevertheless, if he took
questions, she could ask him—in public—about why and how he’d
gotten rid of his female employees, about their mysterious deaths,
maybe even about the unmarked LuthorCorp planes that had
chased the ﬂying saucer a few days ago, according to Superman’s
statement after the recovery of the crashed jet.
She was eager to hear how Luthor would answer.
Despite her persistent telephone calls, Lois had been unable to
get any clear answers from her father either; General Sam Lane’s
military reticence had won out, despite his daughter’s pestering.
But the incident could not be ignored: An Air Force jet had crashed
in pursuit of a UFO, and no one seemed to understand why. Had

ENEMIES & ALLIES

139

the alien ship used a secret weapon, or had the systems been
scrambled by the LuthorCorp planes?
She doubted Luthor would admit it, either way.
Now, as she stood among the crowd of reporters, Luthor
emerged from the front entrance of his imposing corporate head­
quarters. He was impeccably dressed in a well-tailored black business
suit with a thin black tie. He strode to the podium that had been set
up for the event, positioned for optimum coverage, and gazed down
at the clutch of reporters as though they were necessary evils. Radio
newsmen proffered bulky microphones. Even a television news crew
was there with an unwieldy, large camera.
Luthor had to force himself not to scowl as he recognized
Lois, front and center, prepared to take thorough notes. His gaze
skated past her, and he fashioned what must have been meant as a
welcoming smile; it seemed to be an expression he rarely used.
He gave a pleasant greeting. “Ladies and gentlemen of the press.
I have done many good things for the United States of America—
and that has made me a target for evildoers and Communists. Last
night an intruder broke into my home.” As he emphasized the
last word, his pale face assumed self-righteous anger. Reporters
eagerly recorded his words, scribbled notes, and followed him
with their microphones. “This burglar might just as easily have
been an assassin. I could have been killed.” He waited a beat, as if
perplexed that his listeners were not as outraged as he was.
Lois seized upon the pause in the conversation. “Average people
are robbed every day, Mr. Luthor. Why is this a big story?”
Luthor leaned forward, relishing his next words. “Because
average people, as you call them, are not robbed with the assistance
of Superman, Miss Lane.”
His words dropped on the crowd like a bombshell. Now the

140

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

reporters did gasp, and photographers snapped pictures of Luthor
standing there, looking smug.
He raised his voice. “Superman claims he’s here to defend
people. He says he wants to stop criminals—and yet, when my
house was attacked, when I was robbed, he came . . . and helped
the burglar get away. I saw him with my own eyes. When my
security men were about to apprehend the thief, Superman ﬂew off
with him, whisked him to safety!” Luthor jabbed a ﬁnger toward
the reporters, toward the TV cameras, and particularly toward
Lois.
Chasing the story, looking for a big scoop, the reporters mut­
tered about this new idea. “Why would he do that, Mr. Luthor?”
“Indeed, why would he do that? Maybe a good investigative
reporter could ﬁnd the answer. Ask yourselves—what is Superman
hiding? What does he really want from us all?”
Offended on Superman’s behalf, Lois refused to consider what
Luthor was suggesting. “Maybe Superman wants to protect the
innocent. It’s what his track record shows.”
Luthor gave a brief, utterly humorless chuckle, as if he found
the very idea of altruism to be absurd. “It seems that Superman
protects only those he likes. Do we really want selective justice
handed out by a man who openly claims to be an alien? From a
man who refuses to disclose his true identity? I look forward to
what you all dig up about him.”
Lois remembered the accusations Blanche Rosen had made and
the corroborating evidence she herself had found inside Luthor’s
munitions factory. Superman wasn’t the one who needed the
persistent attentions of an investigative reporter. But from the
predatory expressions on some of her fellow journalists, she could
tell that at least a few of them would play right into Lex Luthor’s
plans. It infuriated her.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

141

“And how do you explain the unmarked LuthorCorp planes
that were supposedly chasing the ﬂying saucer? Superman says
he saw them with his X-ray vision,” Lois blurted. “Did they have
anything to do with the crashed jet?”
Luthor responded with a sneer. “Listen to yourself, Miss Lane.
Unmarked planes. Supposedly chasing a UFO. All according
to Superman’s X-ray vision? I wouldn’t put much stock in what
Superman has to say after what I actually saw him do last night.”
Seeing that he had achieved his desired intent, Luthor turned
about and disappeared into his headquarters, ignoring the cacoph­
ony of questions that erupted in his wake. It didn’t matter to her if
these other reporters went haring off to uncover Superman’s dark
secrets—they would ﬁnd nothing. Though she had only met him
a couple of times, Lois felt she understood him with her heart. She
had not the slightest doubt that Superman was exactly as brave
and as good as he appeared to be.
Luthor, on the other hand, had plenty of things to hide.

WH EN SH E RETURN ED TO TH E DAILY PLANET, LOIS HURRI ED TO

her desk and pulled out the scrap of paper on which she had written
Blanche Rosen’s phone number and address. She had already
searched through hospital records and obituaries and had found
listings for several of the men and women Blanche had identiﬁed.
All of them had died of “natural causes.”
Since those men and women were either widowed or unmarried,
without families, no one would raise too many questions. Their
deaths would be quietly swept under the rug, unnoticed. No one
but Lois was going to do anything about it.
She had made up her mind to get Blanche a job at the Daily
Planet. With all her years of diligent service for the country, the

142

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

woman could ﬁll some position—in the secretarial pool, in the
cafeteria, on the switchboard. And it would spite Luthor.
Feeling good about what she was about to do—Blanche cer­
tainly needed a break in her life—Lois went in person to the
woman’s small apartment on the Lower East Side. Driving her
convertible, she followed the directions she had jotted down.
As she turned onto the right street, scanning the address
numbers on the brownstone buildings, Lois had to swerve to
the curb as a police car roared past her, siren wailing. With her
reporter’s instinct, Lois looked around, keen to see what might
be happening. As she eased the car back into trafﬁc, another
shrieking siren came up behind her, an ambulance this time, its red
lights ﬂashing.
Now she followed, accelerating to keep up with the emergency
vehicles, and her heart sank with dread as she began to realize
where they were going. The same address she had scrawled on her
notepad.
Outside Blanche Rosen’s apartment building, the police car had
already stopped at an angle to trafﬁc, both doors wide open. Two
ofﬁcers worked to keep the crowd back. Paramedics jumped from
the back of the ambulance, but the body sprawled on the street
had been covered with a sheet, already turning red from seeping
blood. Several old women on the sidewalk were holding each
other, sobbing.
Lois quickly got out of her car and ran over to the scene, but she
already knew. A policeman stopped her from getting closer, though
she pushed against his implacable arm. “Sorry, ma’am—this is a
crime scene. I can’t let you get any closer.”
The paramedics looked under the sheet; both men shook their
heads.
One of the old women from the sidewalk pleaded with the

ENEMIES & ALLIES

143

second policeman, grabbing his shoulders and looking up at him
through owlish glasses. “I saw it all, Ofﬁcer! You have to catch
him—some terrible man ran her down in the street and then just
drove off. Just drove off! He left her there on the street. Oh, poor
Blanche!” The old woman looked at the policeman, then at the
gathered crowd, as if someone there could give her answers. “What
sort of man would do something so awful?”

Chapter 24

WAYN E TOWE R

RUCE SAUNTERED I N TWO M I NUTES LATE FOR TH E BOARD

of directors’ private Thursday session. Though it wasn’t his
regular day to sit in as a ﬁgurehead, this would be quite different
from the average meeting. He had his own item for the agenda.
The men sitting around the boardroom table were startled by
his arrival; he noticed the ﬂash of annoyance that rippled across
several faces. All of the directors had cups of coffee; some of them
held lit cigarettes. An executive continental breakfast was spread
upon a side table.
“Mr. Wayne! We didn’t realize you were joining us. This isn’t
Tuesday,” said Buchheim.
Thomson was a bit surlier. “We have a full agenda today, sir.
If you’ve come about the new corporate logo designs, I’m afraid
they’ll have to wait until later.”
Henning ﬂicked cigarette ash into a large tray in front of him.
“I can have my secretary type up a full summary of our meeting
for you afterward, Mr. Wayne. That should be all you need to
know.”
Bruce went to an empty chair, ignoring their comments. Without

ENEMIES & ALLIES

145

sitting, he rested his briefcase on the table. “You’ll make the time,
gentlemen. Important matters have come to my attention.”
He unsnapped his case and removed a stack of ﬁles. He circled
the table, dropping a sealed ﬁle in front of each man. They gazed
at the folders, perplexed and impatient. Someone muttered about
the time wasted on “another charity boondoggle to save the baby
seals.”
Director Miles heaved a long sigh and whispered (but not so
quietly that Bruce couldn’t hear), “God save us from self-important
millionaires.” Bruce let Miles’s folder fall heavily in front of him,
with a loud slap.
“Wayne Enterprises is about to experience a hostile takeover,”
Bruce said. All nine heads snapped toward him at these shocking
words. “By me.” He calmly returned to the place he had claimed
and sat down. “You can peruse these documents in detail, though
you’ll already be familiar with the contents.” He swept a warning
gaze around the table, pausing brieﬂy on each man. “I have my
own photographic copies of each.”
The men opened the folders in front of them, ﬂipped cursorily
through the memos, photographs, and documents . . . then began
to pay closer attention. The mood in the air changed, and they
whitened in shock. Each man had a different vulnerability, and
now they were all trapped.
Norlander looked up ﬁrst, as if he wanted to slide under the
table and hide. Huston’s mouth hung open, but no words came
forth. McDonnell and Fitzroy gazed at each other, tension building
between them like static electricity.
Bruce folded his hands on the polished table. “I am Bruce Wayne.
This is my company, created and built by my father, according to
his ideals. From now on, we’ll do things my way.”
At once the room erupted into cries of feigned innocence,

146

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

outrage, and accusations. Bruce sharply held up one hand, and
they fell silent as though shot. “Some of our best breakthroughs,
our most innovative solutions, were secretly handed over to
LuthorCorp. In spite of our most brilliant geniuses delivering
excellent work, Wayne Enterprises has been hamstrung. By you.
Richard Drayling resigned because he wouldn’t play your game, or
Luthor’s. Every one of you has betrayed me.”
He passed out a chart of the Wayne Enterprises organizational
structure, showing himself at the top as chief executive ofﬁcer. “I
submitted this material to the authorities and I will decide whether
or not to have you each tried in a court of law. I should have you
arrested here and now. Security is waiting outside this door.” He
poured himself a steaming cup of coffee and took a long sip. “I
could certainly cause a scandal for Mr. Luthor, but he’s as slippery
as an oiled eel. I’d rather beat him at his own game.”
Silent as corpses, the nine men stared at him. “I’ll be tender­
ing my resignation immediately,” Norlander said, breaking the
silence.
“You will not,” Bruce snapped, his eyes ﬂashing. “Your fates
depend entirely on how all of you play your parts. It would not be in
your best interests to let word of your . . . ‘extracurricular activities’
leak to your families, to the community, to the newspapers. I will
have a further, and particularly binding, nondisclosure document
drawn up for all of you to sign, and as I mentioned I have provided
copies of these ﬁles to Captain James Gordon at the Gotham City
PD.” The men muttered, ﬁdgeted, looked away. Bruce felt, though,
that the information itself was the biggest stick he needed to keep
them in line.
“However, I will not press charges—so long as you cooperate.”
He continued. “This is how things will be until I decide otherwise.
No one—particularly Lex Luthor—will know there has been a

ENEMIES & ALLIES

147

change in your activities. He can suspect nothing.” His tone left no
room for questions. “Each Wayne Enterprises team will operate
independently. Each division will report its research results and
show any designs, blueprints, and prototypes directly and only
to me. I will tell you what plans to deliver to Luthor, which
components of prototype technologies. That way I’ll be in control
of what he does and doesn’t have.”
What he didn’t tell them was that he would have them deliver
subtly nonfunctional items to LuthorCorp. Red herrings. He
intended to give Lex Luthor all the rope he needed in order to hang
himself.
When Bruce ended the meeting, the men couldn’t leap from
their chairs quickly enough. Most of them would frantically try
to clean up any incriminating material they still had lying around.
But it was too late.
“One moment, gentlemen.” His voice was a lasso that yanked
them to a halt at the conference room doorway. “Since you’re all
involved with Lex Luthor, which of you can tell me why he’s so
interested in a secret Air Force base in Nevada? It goes by various
names—Area 51, Groom Lake, Dreamland. What technology is
Luthor giving the military?”
Bruce was an expert at reading guilty expressions, but all of
these men were genuinely mystiﬁed by the question. Nobody
answered him for a moment, and ﬁnally Miles muttered, “I’m
sorry, Mr. Wayne, I know nothing about it. Truly.”
Bruce curtly dismissed them, and the directors ﬂed. He would
have to do his own investigating into Luthor’s connection with
Area 51. He remained at the long table, thinking, while cigarettes
still smoldered in the ashtrays.

Chapter 25

M E RCY DR AW, ARIZONA

H E SMALL RANCH I NG TOWN I N SOUTHWESTERN ARIZONA

was named Mercy Draw, and a ﬂying saucer had crashed there.
w
Supposedly.
The town was amazingly far from any other signs of civiliza­
tion. As Clark and Jimmy drove their rental car for hours, the ﬂat
desert scenery looked like . . . desert scenery. And then more desert
scenery. And then more. Clark was very glad he had prudently
topped off the gas tank. Though he pushed the accelerator as far
down as he dared, the lonely highway rolled out for miles and
miles in an endless asphalt ribbon.
When they ﬁnally reached their destination during the hottest
part of the afternoon, they saw a tall, rusty windmill, a general
store, a few shacks, and a saloon. Several dusty pickup trucks were
parked outside the saloon entrance.
“And I thought Smallville was small,” Clark said.
“It’s probably one of those towns where everyone knows
everyone,” Jimmy said. “We should be able to ﬁnd that rancher
without too much trouble.”
Clark went to the general store but found it empty. A handwrit­

ENEMIES & ALLIES

149

ten paper sign taped to the door read at the saloon. The sign
looked as though it had been there for months.
The pair walked through the swinging doors into the dim
warmth of the watering hole. The bar was so ﬁlled with cigarette
smoke that it seemed to generate its own permanent acrid fog.
When he and Jimmy entered, everyone turned to stare at them,
marking them as outsiders, strangers, city slickers. Someone
elbowed a skinny, grizzled cowboy at the bar who sat nursing a
mostly ﬁnished mug of draft beer. “A couple more live ones for
you, Freddy.”
“Excuse me,” Clark said. “We’re looking for a gentleman
named Fred Franklin. He’s supposed to have seen a crashed ﬂying
saucer?”
The good ol’ boys at the bar laughed and groaned. They all dug
into their pockets and slapped down dimes in front of the grizzled
beer drinker, who had just won some sort of bet. “There you go
again, Freddy. They’re all yours.”
The man drained the dregs in a gulp and heaved himself up,
wiping his hands on his jeans. His Adam’s apple protruded from
his neck almost as far as the brim of his ten-gallon hat. “I’m Fred
Franklin.” He lifted his empty mug and pointed an elbow at the
bartender. “Be glad to talk to you—if you’d reﬁll me.”
Clark pulled out a quarter and laid it down on the bar surface,
which was stained by many ring marks. Jimmy whispered, “Mr.
White will never reimburse us for beer expenses!”
“I may have to pay for that myself, Jimmy, in order to get the
story.”
The bartender dutifully ﬁlled Franklin’s mug, leaving a generous
portion of suds on top. The rancher slurped while grinning at
Clark and Jimmy. “Now, since we’re best friends, tell me what
you’d like to know.”

150

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

The other bar patrons retired to a table, where a card game
soon ensued. The ritual seemed all too familiar to them. Glancing
at some fresh newspaper clippings tacked to the walls, Clark noted
that Fred Franklin was a local celebrity. Mr. White wasn’t going to
be pleased that so many other reporters had gotten here ﬁrst.
Clark took out his pad. “We’ve heard rumors about a crashed
object on your property, Mr. Franklin. Could you please describe
it for us?”
“I can do ya one better. Wanna real scoop? I’ll take you out
there, show you exactly where the thing crashed.”
One of the patrons snickered, holding his cards close. “Just like
all those other ‘scoops’ you gave them reporters, Freddy?”
“You hush up—these gentlemen and I are conducting
business.”
“We’d very much like to see the site, Mr. Franklin,” Clark said.
“And I need to take photographs,” Jimmy added.
Franklin shrugged amiably. “Fork over a sawbuck, and you’ll
have my undivided attention and exclusive access for the rest of the
afternoon.”
The two hesitated; then Clark pulled out his wallet and extract­
ed a ten-dollar bill. He noted the transaction on his pad.

TH E LONG AN D BUM PY ROADS CONSISTED OF GRAVEL, DUST,

and an endless sequence of ruts that didn’t bother Fred Franklin in
the least. His pickup roared along, spewing clouds behind them.
Since their rental car was not adequate for the rough ranch roads,
Clark and Jimmy were crowded in the cab with him, Clark’s large
form dwarﬁng Jimmy’s.
“Please tell us more about the saucer, sir,” Jimmy said. “Did it
make any sound? Was it damaged?”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

151

“It sorta hummed and whooshed, then tore a big trench in the
dirt when it crashed. Couldn’t tell if it was damaged or not.” He
drove along, his voice rattling in time with the bumps.
“How big was it?” Clark asked, remembering what his small
Kryptonian ship had looked like. “Was it smooth or made of rough
plates? Did you see any markings?”
“I can’t give everything away!” The old rancher sounded cagy.
“We want to get our ten dollars’ worth,” Clark said.
“Oh, you will. You will!”
After passing through several rickety gates of barbed wire and
creosote poles, they turned off the alleged road onto an even worse
track. Clark scanned ahead with his enhanced vision but could
still see nothing. Finally, at no particularly remarkable spot, the
rancher ground the truck to a halt, turned off the ignition, and
opened the creaking driver’s-side door. Clark and Jimmy were both
covered with reddish-brown dust thanks to the open windows.
Franklin spat out a mouthful of grit as he swung his legs out. His
boots crunched through the gravel to an area where something big
had obviously landed.
The ground was churned and excavated. Deep tire tracks ran
in all directions. Even the meager scrub brush, mesquite, and sage
had been plowed over, leaving a ragged scar. Clark noticed burn
marks on the ground, a few black oil stains, but most of the topsoil
had been scraped away and hauled off.
“Hey, I don’t see any crashed ﬂying saucer,” Jimmy said.
“Well, it’s not here anymore,” Franklin said. “Never said it was.
The government came and took it away, a whole buncha soldier
types. Like a military invasion, it was.”
Clark could not hide his disappointment. “And this is all that’s
left?” Jimmy began shooting photographs anyway.
“Yep, the army beat you and all those other reporters here.

152

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Special squad came out from Nellis Air Force Base, took the
saucer, the debris, the rocks, even the dirt. Everything.” He sucked
on his teeth.
“But where did they go?” Clark asked. “Where did they take
the ﬂying saucer?”
Franklin leaned back on his heels. “Son, they didn’t exactly give
me a receipt or a forwarding address. I doubt they intend to pay for
all the damage they did to my place here.”
Clark looked at the dusty, scrubby wasteland, where a few
dead weeds and some torn-up sagebrush were drying in the late
afternoon heat. He didn’t notice any particular damage.
“You boys might want to check out Nellis. I worked for two
years out at the Nevada Test Site. Saw four A-bombs go off with
my own eyes. People from Las Vegas would drive out to the desert
highways, unfold their lawn chairs, and have a picnic, waiting to
see the mushroom cloud.”
“And what does that have to do with the ﬂying saucer?” Clark
asked.
“You can’t very well keep an atomic bomb test secret, but that’s
not all they do out there. I hear they got a special experimental
base by Groom Lake—super top secret. Nobody admits to it, but
it’s there. It’s called”—he lowered his voice to a conspiratorial
whisper—“Area Fifty-one. But you didn’t hear that from me.”
“And how are you aware of it, Mr. Franklin?”
“Out here in the desert, you hear things. You see things.” He
gestured meaningfully up at the sky. “But it was an alien ship, you
mark my words. Never seen anything like it. And now they’ve got
it at Area Fifty-one.”
Clark refused to give up. “Jimmy, we’ve come this far. We need
to get something for our story.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

153

The rancher hooked his thumbs into the belt loops of his jeans.
“Say, if you really want a headline, for another ﬁve bucks I’ll show
you the world’s largest cow pie. Got to have something to do with
the radioactive fallout from all those nucular tests.”
Clark heaved a sigh. “We’ll pass, but thanks.”

Chapter 26

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

HE SMALL ISLAND WAS SURROUNDED BY A CALM, DEEP BLUE

ocean. The humid air sparkled in the warm Caribbean sun,
o
ﬁlled with the scents of lush tropical vegetation. This was a far cry
from Siberia.
When Luthor met General Ceridov at the concrete jetty on the
island’s south side, the Soviet ofﬁcer reveled in all the sunshine and
heat. He had eschewed his wool uniform and donned a ridiculouslooking ﬂoral-print shirt that already displayed semicircular sweat
stains under his armpits. “Lovely installation. Thank you for
inviting me, comrade Luthor.”
For his own part, Luthor wore a khaki tropical-weight suit.
“You were kind enough to show me your gulag and quarry. I’m
returning the favor.” Since the incident at his mansion, in which
Superman had helped the other costumed burglar steal his
meteorite sample, he’d felt violated. After delivering his damning
press conference, he’d departed immediately for the Caribbean.
“And what is the name of this island?” the KGB general asked.
“I could ﬁnd it on no map.”
“Luthor’s Island, of course.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

155

“Vanity?”
“Clarity. And efﬁciency.”
“Ah, if you say so.”
Ceridov regarded the warm sea and sugar-sand beaches, the
overgrown jungle marred by new gravel roads, and the angular
buildings that housed Luthor’s facility and operational headquar­
ters, using some of the structural remnants of a large old Spanish
fort. “Ah, the tropical climate. I can see why my government
supports Fidel Castro and his Communist revolution in Cuba. Soon
all of these islands will be within the Soviet sphere of inﬂuence.”
Ceridov followed Luthor along the jetty to the beach, where an
unmarked Jeep waited. The KGB general seemed too conﬁdent,
perhaps even teasing. “We will take over the world soon enough.
When all is said and done, perhaps we can turn your little island
into a vacation resort for party ofﬁcials!” He laughed at his own
joke. Luthor did not.
“Don’t believe your own propaganda, General. I like my
island exactly the way it is.” Though undeniably charismatic,
Castro seemed an unruly and unwashed fanatic, dedicated to the
Communist cause with a fervor that had not been equaled since
Lenin himself. Instead, Luthor had paid substantial bribes to the
current Cuban dictator, Batista, ﬁnding it simpler to manipulate
a man who could be bought, a man who showed a healthy and
normal tendency to basic greed rather than a passion for an
esoteric cause.
“My position here is secure, and I am left undisturbed to do my
work. Everyone from Cuba to Jamaica to the Bahamas knows to
avoid this area. I’ve been forced to sink a ﬁshing boat and couple
of pleasure craft to emphasize that point. The nighttime ﬁ res
from my smokestacks and ﬂames from the ﬁring of test rockets
are enough to feed local superstitions that some giant dragon lives

156

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

here.” He rolled his eyes at their gullibility, even if it served his
own purposes.
First off, Luthor drove his guest up to the launch complex,
pleased to show the black-star general what he had accomplished
with his own fortune, his own ingenuity and investment. The
missile launchpads bore dramatic patterns of soot and char from
test blasts. When the general seemed overly fascinated with the
red-painted gantries and cooled tanks ﬁlled with propellant, Luthor
said, “If you think that’s impressive, let me show you something
much more unusual.” The skin around Luthor’s eyes crinkled, the
closest he ever came to a genuine and unrehearsed smile.
He led Ceridov to ranks of dish-shaped projectors, and both
men gazed at all the beam transmitters pointing to the skies.
“These focused energy rays can shoot directly through the
atmosphere and strike any incoming target. It is a perfect defense
against Soviet aggression.” He turned to the KGB general. “I hope
you are as eager to test it as I am.”
Ceridov was intrigued. “Certainly, comrade Luthor. For a
long time now, I have wanted the opportunity to demonstrate our
missiles in a real combat situation. Normally that would lead to
the end of human civilization—”
“But with these beams, I could intercept your missiles before
they cause any damage. This way, we both win.”
“You would take that risk?” Ceridov’s bushy eyebrows lifted.
“The danger to America . . .”
“I prefer not to think of myself as just an American. I am a
citizen of the world. My world.”
During the tour of the island, Luthor intentionally kept the
Soviet ofﬁcer from the secluded north end, where the largest and
most ambitious construction work took place. Ceridov didn’t need
to see any of that. It was a different part of Luthor’s plan.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

157

He brought his guest to the main command center, a modern
structure built around the old fortress walls and a tower of ancient
stone. His headquarters, control room, and ofﬁces were inside
new cinder-block structures whose interior walls were painted
white or seafoam green. Rather than simple hardwood planking,
the ﬂoors were the most modern waxed linoleum in alternating
squares of black and white. His central control room had large
computer banks that displayed amazing constellations of indicator
lights. These electronic superbrains had been modiﬁed from von
Neumann’s original designs for the sophisticated computer called
ENIAC, with an added dash of Luthor genius.
“And what supplies your power?” Ceridov mused as he walked
past the tall computers, regarding the ﬂashing lights as though
they imparted some sort of secret message. “Your own reactor? A
new-model design, I presume?”
“The very best design.” Luthor nodded smugly. “Far superior
to your antique at the Ariguska camp.”
“Antique! That is the most sophisticated new Soviet model.”
Luthor made a bland gesture. “As I said . . .” He merely showed
Ceridov the control rods and indicated the maximum power levels
he could achieve using high-quality radioactive material diverted
from the processing plants in Oak Ridge, Tennessee.
“And how did you build this reactor? In my gulag, we lost many
prisoners to hazardous radiation exposures. Safety measures are
very expensive.”
“I may not have a prison camp, General, but I do have a pool of
expendable workers.”
“You continue to surprise me.”
“As it should be.” Luthor turned back to the much more interest­
ing weapons systems. “My focused-energy-ray defense system will
be complete as soon as I receive a few important components from

158

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

my insiders at Wayne Enterprises. When I am ready for the test
ﬁring, will you be prepared for my signal? We have to give them a
real target.”
“Two of our most hawkish generals are easily provoked.
General Gregor Petreivich Endovik and General Ivan Ivanovich
Dubrov have long advocated a preemptive strike against America.
They are my puppets. They will play right into my hands.”
Nodding calmly to himself, Luthor regarded the large screens
on the control-room walls, which showed live images of oblivious
people going about their daily business in Washington, D.C.;
Metropolis; London; Leningrad—reading newspapers, hurrying
to catch a bus, walking inside skyscrapers, shopping in open-air
markets, playing in parks with their children or pets.
This little “incident” would ratchet international tensions even
higher, thereby beneﬁting both Ceridov and himself. Once Luthor
successfully demonstrated his unexpected defensive system, he
would seem to be a savior, after which he would sell his extrava­
gantly expensive “death ray” to the U.S. Department of Defense.
And after Luthor’s energy beams had destroyed the Soviet missiles,
General Ceridov would be able to demand—and get—more spend­
ing for his military, thereby ensuring a continued and proﬁtable
arms buildup on both sides.
Ceridov frowned. “Once our nuclear missiles are launched, I
will not be able to recall them. You are positive that your system
will be effective?”
“I am entirely conﬁdent.” How dare the man suggest otherwise?
“Complete and total nuclear annihilation would be bad for
business.”
Ceridov took him at his word. “Do you have vodka? We must
toast.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

159

“This is the Caribbean,” Luthor reminded him irritably. “We
have rum.”
“It will have to do.” Ceridov waited as Luthor extracted a bottle
and two glasses from a metal desk drawer and poured them each
a drink. They raised a silent toast, each man mulling over his own
grand dreams.

Chapter 27

LAS VEGAS , NEVADA

HOUG H TH EY I NTEN DED TO PURSUE TH E STORY TO N ELLIS

Air Force Base the following day, Clark and Jimmy had to stay
A
overnight in Las Vegas. Self-conscious about the expense to the
Daily Planet, Clark drove around comparing room rates. Finally,
they found a budget motor hotel with two beds, air-conditioning
(which, unfortunately, didn’t work), and a private bathroom: the
Atomic Age Motel.
After they checked in, Clark and Jimmy were free for a night on
the Vegas Strip (though both of them were somewhat intimidat­
ed by the prospect). Clark ﬂipped through a copy of the Las
Vegas Sun and was surprised to ﬁnd a wire-service article on page
seven about Lex Luthor’s press conference, in which he accused
Superman of collusion in the robbery of his mansion. The reporter
seemed to make much of the fact that Superman had not been seen
in Metropolis for a day or two and had made no public response to
Luthor’s accusations.
Clark pressed his lips together, upset by the implications. He
had not been helping Batman escape—he’d been taking him off

ENEMIES & ALLIES

161

to the authorities. The two had never been partners in any way!
How could anyone, especially Lex Luthor, accuse Superman of
dishonesty?
Jonathan Kent had always insisted, “A man’s actions say
everything about him that anyone needs to know.” Superman did
not need to defend himself against accusations from a man like
Luthor. Clark tossed the newspaper into the wastebasket and tried
not to think about it anymore.
On their way out, Jimmy stopped to stare at a metal slot machine
in the shabby lobby of the motel. It was adorned with a whirling
model of a nucleus and a bright loop of neon light. Jimmy’s small
supply of money was obviously burning a hole in his pocket, and he
pulled out a shiny nickel. “Okay, just once. I don’t usually gamble,
but . . . well, we are in Las Vegas.” He held up the coin and looked
with some trepidation at the seductive machine. “I should give it a
whirl, right?”
“Those things are called one-armed bandits for a good reason,
Jimmy.”
Undeterred, Jimmy plunked the nickel into the slot, pulled the
handle, and set the machine in motion. With a quick glimpse of
his X-ray vision, Clark viewed the mechanism behind the small
transparent windows and saw what lay in store for his friend.
The reels spun, and Jimmy stepped back as though afraid the
machine might turn white hot. The blur of whirling cartoon fruit
halted sequentially, and Jimmy gasped with delight as the ﬁ rst,
then second, then third bunch of cherries thunked to a halt. A light
on top of the machine blinked and a bell clanged. With a clatter, a
wealth of coins showered into the spill tray: twenty nickels.
Jimmy yelped with excitement, scooped up the coins, and
counted them. “A dollar, Mr. Kent—I won a whole dollar!”

162

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

“Actually, ninety-ﬁve cents. You spent—”
“I never won anything before! I can’t believe it. Maybe we
should go to one of the casinos. I’m hot tonight!”
“Jimmy, right now you’re ahead ninety-ﬁve cents. Do you want
to risk losing it?”
“Maybe I should just keep my winnings.” Jimmy settled down,
though he still seemed unable to believe his good fortune.
Clark allowed himself to share his friend’s innocent joy, but his
thoughts drifted back to the crash site of the supposed spacecraft.
As Superman, he had seen and chased a mysterious UFO across
the United States. He’d watched the Air Force jets doggedly pursue
it. Now the military had taken away this crashed vessel from
Mercy Draw, presumably the same one. Had there been any alien
survivors aboard?
He tried to imagine what might have happened if his own
Kryptonian spaceship had been intercepted by the U.S. Army
instead of the humble Kents. How different his life would have
been if he’d grown up on a secret military base rather than in
Smallville, Kansas.
In their rental car, Clark and Jimmy drove along the Strip,
passing one gaudy casino after another: the Sands, the New
Frontier, and the famous Desert Inn. Clark could see that his friend
was about ﬁt to bust, as Jonathan Kent might have said.
“Look at all the colors, the lights! Have you ever imagined
so much neon in the whole world?” Jimmy kept staring at the
marquees. The Dunes advertised what was purportedly “The
Greatest Show in Vegas”—Minsky’s Follies. “What do you
suppose that is, Mr. Kent? Singing and dancing?”
Clark looked at the ﬁne print beneath. “ ‘A daring new topless
show.’ ” When Jimmy blushed bright red, Clark suggested instead
something more their speed. “How about another movie?”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

163

Jimmy agreed immediately. “Invasion of the Body Snatchers is
playing. I’ve been dying to see that one!”

TH E TH EATER WAS MOSTLY EM PTY, AS TH E LOCALS APPARENTLY

preferred gambling to motion pictures. Jimmy sat wide-eyed,
munching his popcorn, while Clark pondered the implications
of this latest installment in the current “evil alien” ﬁlm genre. As
they left, both were unsettled (though for different reasons) by the
frightening invasion of “pod-people,” capped by Kevin McCarthy’s
paranoid tour-de-force performance at the end. They’re coming!
They’re coming!
As they returned to the Atomic Age Motel, knowing they had
to get up early for the long drive out into the desert, Jimmy ﬁnally
asked the question on his mind. “Do you suppose there could be
aliens walking among us—ones that look just like people, so we
can never tell? More aliens . . . not just Superman?”
Clark automatically brushed aside the idea. “It’s just a movie,
Jimmy. It’s supposed to scare you—for fun. It’s not real.”
Jimmy nodded, abashed. “You’re probably right, Mr. Kent.”
Clark gave the young man’s shoulder a comforting pat, and
they walked toward their room in silence, thinking their own
thoughts.

Chapter 28
TH E CAVE

N TH E DAN K SHADOWS OF TH E CAVE, TH E MYSTE RIOU S

mineral fragment emitted its own gemstone light, an eerie
emerald glow, though no unusual radiation registered on Bruce
Wayne’s sophisticated instruments. When he passed a Geiger
counter wand in front of it, the device yielded no clicks, no static.
The rock shed no intrinsic heat; in fact, it felt cold and oily to the
touch.
No wonder Lex Luthor was so interested in this sample. But
why did it have such a dramatic effect on Superman, who seemed
impervious to all other forms of attack? A simple exposure to the
rock had nearly paralyzed him. Bruce had seen it with his own eyes.
After extricating himself from the debacle at Luthor’s mansion, he realized that too many things simply didn’t make
sense—Superman foremost among them. Was the “Man of Steel”
the personal watchdog of Lex Luthor? Superman had denied the
accusation . . . but why else would he have raced in to protect the
mansion and prevent Batman’s escape? On the other hand, why
hadn’t he simply delivered Batman to Luthor and his goons, rather
than ﬂying off with him?

ENEMIES & ALLIES

165

Did LuthorCorp have something to do with his superpowers?
And if Luthor could create a Superman, why would he waste time
dabbling with the bulky and primitive battlesuits based on Wayne
Enterprises technology when those suits were clearly inferior to
Superman’s demonstrated abilities?
And what did this lump of green rock have to do with any­
thing?
Bruce continued to run his tests. Researching the name “Ari­
guska,” he discovered an isolated region of Siberia, unremarkable
save for the fact that a large meteor had hit there two decades ago.
Classiﬁed maps suggested, but did not conﬁrm, that a harsh gulag
was known to exist in the vicinity. Did the Soviets have some kind
of mine there, the source of this rare and unusual mineral? And
what could it be used for in a practical and industrial sense?
Around the United States, thanks to the burgeoning nuclear
industry, prospectors were combing remote deserts and mountains
using Geiger counters to locate natural uranium deposits, hoping
to strike it rich. Atomic power showed great potential, and the
nuclear weapons industry had a constant demand for new ﬁssile
material.
Bruce ran a ﬁngertip along the smooth green face of the stone.
Had Lex Luthor or his Siberian cronies discovered a substance
potentially more powerful than uranium?
Crystalline spectroscopy had broken down the mineral’s content
of heavy elements as well as strange inclusions of inert atoms and
noble gases—argon, neon, even krypton. Other than that, the
mineral itself seemed unremarkable. But if Luthor considered the
green rock so extraordinarily valuable, there had to be something
more to it. . . .
Studying the unusual rock under high magniﬁcation, he detected a shocked crystalline structure, which implied that this

166

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

sample had been subjected to tremendous heat and pressure—an
impact or a great explosion. Perhaps this was a fragment of the
Ariguska meteorite. . . .
The mineral sample wasn’t the only mystery he had uncovered
in Luthor’s secure private ofﬁce, though. Bruce wondered what
kind of “property” Luthor was demanding the U.S. military
return to him? Why was he so interested in Area 51? Why had
unmarked LuthorCorp planes been chasing the UFO, according
to Superman’s statement, and what had they done to cause the
F-100D to crash?
Bruce was certain everything was connected.
He looked up to ﬁnd Alfred approaching with a tray bearing
dinner. He set it down on one of the laboratory tables and removed
the plate covering with a ﬂourish. “A fresh salad and pea soup,
sir.” The butler regarded the glowing emerald mineral next to all
of Bruce’s analytical notes. “I noticed you seem to be in a green
phase today.”

Chapter 29

N E LLIS AIR FORCE BASE ,
N EVADA

HE ENDLESSLY MONOTONOUS SCRUB DESERT OF SOUTH­

eern Nevada looked different from the endlessly monotonous
desert of Arizona . . . and yet the same. Clark drove the rental car
again for hours along the eerily deserted highway. “You’d almost
expect to see buzzards circling up there.”
With the highway map spread out on his knees, Jimmy looked
up to study the cloudless blue sky. “I’d rather see ﬂying saucers.
Then at least we’d get a story for Mr. White.”
They had picked up the highway map at a ﬁlling station when
they left Las Vegas that morning, heading north in the general
direction of Alamo and Ash Springs. When the map proved entirely
unhelpful in revealing the location of any secret experimental area,
the man pumping the gas had drawn a circle on it with a callused,
grease-stained ﬁnger.
“This is what you want, here—the Tikaboo Valley. That dotted
line is a dry lake bed, Groom Lake, but the government took the
name off all the maps. You won’t ﬁnd the roads marked either.”
He vaguely traced the spot with his ﬁnger again. “Just head out

168

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

that direction and you’ll ﬁnd what you want—or they’ll ﬁnd you.
They got orders to shoot to kill.”
“It’s all right,” Jimmy had said cheerfully. “We’ve got press
passes.”
Clark had folded and refolded the map, trying to make the
creases match. “Thank you very much, sir.”
Now the rental car rolled past ranchland fenced in with barbed
wire, where it seemed impossible that any livestock could possibly
survive. Jimmy swigged from the grape Nehi he had bought with
some of his slot machine winnings at the gas station. In a generous
mood with all of his nickels, he had bought Clark a bottle of soda
pop as well.
During the long ride, the young man regaled Clark with stories
of ﬂying saucer sightings and UFO encounters he’d read about.
Nine unusual objects had been seen ﬂying near Mount Rainier,
Washington, in June 1947, and less than two weeks later the famous
“crash” had occurred near Roswell, New Mexico, and all evidence
of the object had been whisked away by the U.S. military.
“That sounds a lot like what happened at Mercy Draw,” Clark
said.
Jimmy bobbed his head. “I wonder if the army has a secret
warehouse ﬁlled with downed alien craft.”
A year after the Roswell incident, a DC-3 commercial airliner
nearly struck a torpedo-shaped object; both witnesses were
veteran airmen who had served in World War II and were not
prone to hallucinations. Only a few months earlier, a Kentucky
Air National Guard pilot had crashed his P-51 Mustang while
pursuing a ﬂying saucer.
Sighting after sighting had generated a public craze and much
speculation about aliens. The Air Force had launched several
major investigations, the current and most ambitious being Pro­

ENEMIES & ALLIES

169

ject Blue Book. Their results, though, had never been released
to the public. Clark, of course, had done his homework, intrigued
by the possibility that he might not be the only extraterrestrial
visitor on Earth. So far, he had no concrete answers.
They took an unmarked road leading west from Crystal Springs,
though the map gave no hint of its destination. They rolled along
parallel to a drooping barbed-wire fence that bore unwelcoming
private property and no trespassing signs. Miles later, with
no apparent change in terrain, the ominous signs switched to pro­
perty of u.s. government, then warning: military installa­
tion or danger: live weapons range.
“We must be getting close, Mr. Kent.”
But they were out in the middle of nowhere, and Clark could
see no barracks, no Quonset huts, no installation of any kind. He
peered into the distance for a guarded gate, ofﬁce, or entrance
station, which would have been present at any normal military
installation. With his keen eyesight, he noted three Jeeps racing
along a dirt road that intersected the highway, kicking up plumes
of dust behind them.
“We’ve attracted some attention,” Clark said.
“Maybe we can ask them where to go.”
Another Jeep roared up on the blacktop road behind them,
proceeding much faster than the speed limit. Ahead, a ﬁfth vehicle
bore down directly toward them. Within minutes, they were
surrounded.
Clark dutifully used his turn signal and pulled off onto the dirt
shoulder. As the military Jeeps converged, he saw that each vehicle
carried at least two soldiers in full uniform, plus sidearms. Three
men even carried machine guns. They looked like they meant
business.
The military police were stone-faced and clean shaven, their

170

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

eyes hidden behind sunglasses. A no-nonsense corporal walked up
to them. “You are trespassing on U.S. government property. Turn
around and get out right now, or you’ll ﬁnd yourselves in a world
of trouble.”
Jimmy had pulled out his camera and pressed the button to
expose the lens. He waved his press card and nudged Clark to do
the same. “We’re from the Metropolis Daily Planet. We’re here to
do a story.”
“Not on this base, you aren’t. No press allowed.”
“There’s a base here?” Clark said. “I don’t see anything.”
“There’s no base.”
“But you just said there was a base.”
Two other soldiers closed in, hefting their riﬂes. The corporal
rested a hand on his sidearm. “I told you, sir—turn around.” He
pointed meaningfully at a metal sign dangling from a strand of
barbed wire: warning! beyond this point trespassers will be
met with lethal force!
Lois would never have allowed herself to be so quickly evicted
once she smelled a story. Clark pressed, “Could you please give
us the name of someone we could talk to? We’d like to arrange a
meeting—”
“No interviews.” The corporal was angry now. “Are you
deaf?”
Clark had never faced so many drawn weapons before, except
as Superman. Now even Jimmy was nervous. “Maybe, um, we
should do as they say, Mr. Kent.”
“Okay, we’re stymied.” Clark took off his hat and absently ran
the brim through his ﬁngers. Keeping his eye on the Jeeps that had
pulled up to block them, he shifted the car into reverse and backed
up slowly, then turned around.
Jimmy looked over his shoulder as they rolled back down the

ENEMIES & ALLIES

171

lonely highway in the direction they had come from. None of the
soldiers had so much as moved. “That’s the end of the story, I
guess, Mr. Kent. We’re never going to get inside that base.”
Clark nodded grimly. “These soldiers are just doing their jobs.
We have to respect that and leave them alone.”
Jimmy sagged into his seat. He packed his Graﬂex back up and
put it into its leather case.
Clark hid his smile, though, as the clutch of soldiers diminished
in his rearview mirror. With his super-vision he had scanned the
area, and he had seen enough. He was already making plans for
just how to get into Area 51—using his own means, later . . . after
dark.

Chapter 30

TH E DAILY PLAN ET

T ANY OTH ER TI M E, LOIS WOULD HAVE SNICKERED AT

Clark’s assignment to chase little green men, but she had
already taken a lot of ﬂak for believing Superman’s claim that he
wasn’t from Earth, and Lois did not like to be ridiculed. If Clark
did get deﬁnitive proof of a real alien spacecraft, then no one would
doubt Superman’s statement.
Besides, this particular UFO was much more interesting to her
because LuthorCorp planes had been chasing it. Since Clark was
on the scene in Podunk, Arizona, Lois decided to approach the
story from an entirely different angle.
And that angle had to be Lex Luthor.
After learning of Blanche Rosen’s tragic and way too convenient
death, Lois had gathered her scraps of evidence about what a snake
Luthor was, and she had no intention of stopping now. She needed
to do this for Blanche and for all those unfortunate employees who
had been ﬁred or had mysteriously died of “natural causes.” Those
men and women had just been doing their jobs, trying to make a
living.
At her desk, Lois withdrew into her thoughts. She glanced at

ENEMIES & ALLIES

173

the framed photo of herself and her kid sister, Lucy, standing next
to their father, the general. Lucy had always been Daddy’s little
girl, and her career as a stewardess was considered an “appropri­
ate” job for a young, attractive woman. But what about women
like Blanche Rosen?
Fighting back her anger, Lois walked into Perry White’s ofﬁce,
dropped a stack of her notes on his desk, and explained what she
had found. “I started digging like you told me to, Chief—and this
story goes far beyond Luthor simply ﬁring all his female employees
and some older, disposable men. Even I’m surprised at how deep
and how insidious this is. I turned over a rock and uncovered a
whole nest of squirming, slimy things.” She explained about her
source and how she had been brutally silenced. “Murdered, Chief.
No doubt about it.”
Perry looked down at the obituary. “Says here ‘hit and run.’ ”
“Murdered.” Lois showed him the death notices of all the
former LuthorCorp employees who had died in LuthorCorp­
funded medical centers without being allowed to speak a word
in public. “Poor people who were exposed to deadly levels of
radiation during the construction of an atomic power reactor on a
secret island base.”
“Says here ‘natural causes.’ ”
“Murdered.” She showed him her sketches and photographs of
Luthor’s base, which she had surreptitiously taken in his munitions
factory. “These plans are further proof. Luthor is setting up an
entire control center outside the boundaries of the United States.
Why would he do that if he’s conducting legitimate government
work?”
Perry looked skeptically at the blurry photo of the blueprints
from the wall of Luthor’s sealed factory ofﬁce. “I see a map that
doesn’t mean anything and sketches that you did yourself.”

174

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

“It’s proof!”
“Not proof that I can publish in the newspaper, Lois—and you
know it. Coincidences, yes. Suspicions, yes. But if I go ahead with
this story, Luthor’s attorneys will have a ﬁeld day with us in court.
Great Caesar’s ghost, I’m not saying I don’t believe you. I don’t
need to tell you your job. I’m saying that I can’t publish this exposé
until you have something concrete.”
Lois felt her face burning. “Then send me down there. I’ll
make my way to that island and come back with all the proof you
need.”
Perry put his cigar in his mouth but didn’t light it. “You want
the Daily Planet to send you on an all-expenses-paid Caribbean
vacation? I’ve already got Kent and Olsen out in Las Vegas chasing
little green men.”
“This could be the biggest story the Planet has ever run!”
He raised his hand when he could see she would continue to
protest. “Keep digging, Lois. Get me something tangible. Prove
me wrong.”
She headed toward the door, barely keeping her temper in
check. “I will, Chief!”

Chapter 31

LAS VEGAS STRIP

ORTUNATELY FOR CLARK, J I M MY OLSEN WAS A SOUN D

sleeper.
s
After the young photographer began to snore softly
in his bed, Clark left a note on Atomic Age Motel stationery stating
that he had gone for a walk, just in case Jimmy woke to ﬁnd him
gone.
In a blur, he donned his blue and red suit, slipped outside,
ducked behind the motel unseen, and took off. No ﬂashy public
show, no oohs or aahs. The cape hem ﬂuttered about him in an
uneven ripple, and gravity fell away. This was his time to ﬂy.
As he rose above the glittering expanse of the Las Vegas Strip,
Kal-El looked at the kaleidoscope of casinos and hotels. Despite
the late hour, countless people were gambling, attending shows,
losing fortunes, or making a small proﬁt, which only enticed them
to gamble more. From high above the tallest buildings, he could
hear the faint jingling of slot machines paying off, roulette wheels
spinning and clicking, chips clattering together, nightclub bands
playing, people talking and laughing, cars honking their horns.
And police sirens. Then ﬁre engines.
Though his curiosity about the ﬂying saucer tugged him toward

176

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Nellis Air Force Base, his sense of duty made him concentrate on
the emergency instead. He could not follow his own interests if
somebody was in trouble. He circled around and raced toward the
source of the sirens, sure that the Las Vegas police and ﬁreﬁghters
wouldn’t mind a little extra help.
In addition to the usual searchlights skating across the sky to
commemorate some new Las Vegas extravaganza, dazzling beams
painted the Champagne Tower of the Fabulous Flamingo, billed
as the world’s most luxurious hotel. Kal-El wondered if a ﬁre
had occurred inside, but he saw no smoke. The ﬂurry of activity
centered on one penthouse room, one open balcony—and one
man standing on the edge, threatening to jump.
Suddenly the emergency took on a different character. Kal-El
focused his super-vision until he could see the man, still dressed
in a gray business suit with a long, thin black tie that had been
loosened, his collar unbuttoned. His face was ﬂorid; tears streamed
down his cheeks. His expression ﬂickered between grief and terror.
He had taken off his shoes to leave his feet bare, perhaps for a
better grip on the ledge.
This wasn’t a ﬁre, a robbery, or an attempted assault. This man
wanted to take his own life.
“I’ve lost everything!” the man shouted in a rough voice. “I
can’t pay my markers. They’ll kill me anyway!”
Hotel patrons thrust their heads out of nearby windows,
beseeching the man not to jump. From inside the penthouse room,
Kal-El picked up the earnest voice of a manager. “We can sort this
out, sir. Come back inside. The casino will work out a payment
plan for now.”
Far down in the streets below, ﬁre trucks pulled up, sirens
wailing, lights ﬂashing. More police cars joined them. Firemen left
their trucks and pulled out a circular frame with a broad stretcher,

ENEMIES & ALLIES

177

which would never be able to catch a man after he fell thirty
stories.
From inside the penthouse, a burly security man whose body
did not seem designed for the tuxedo he wore stepped out onto the
balcony. “You don’t want to jump—you know you don’t. Come
off that ledge.” He abruptly extended a hand to grab the jumper
by force, but his move only startled the man. He sprang from the
ledge and dove out into the air, closing his eyes as if in prayer.
Absorbing everything in a second, Kal-El streaked toward the
Flamingo.
A chorus of gasps rang out, breaths drawn in unison. Crowds
on the streets below stared upward.
The falling man seemed to be imagining he was ﬂying. He
had his arms outstretched, his jacket ﬂuttering—in total silence,
apparently convinced he wanted to die.
But Kal-El actually could ﬂy. He swooped down, matched the
speed of the falling man, and caught him. “I’ve got you, sir,” he
said in a comforting voice. “You’re safe.” Smiling, he descended
toward the waiting crowds of wide-eyed onlookers, police, and
ﬁremen in front of the Fabulous Flamingo.
Kal-El couldn’t guess what psychological complexities had
driven the jumper to take such drastic measures. Gambling debts,
no matter how bad, did not seem to be reason enough to end one’s
life. Why would this person want to throw everything away?
The suicidal man began pounding on his shoulder, struggling to
break free, but Kal-El tightened his grip, careful not to let the man
slip out of his grasp before they landed on solid ground. “Please
don’t struggle.” His red boots touched down on the sidewalk as
applauding people backed out into a circle to give them room.
Kal-El spoke in a deep and reassuring voice, but he didn’t know if
the man could even hear him. “You’ll be all right now, sir. These

178

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

people will take care of you.” Two ﬁremen rushed forward to take
the sobbing jumper.
Kal-El felt a strange wrenching sensation in his chest. Even
superhuman strength and speed could not touch the panic and
despair over ﬁnances that had gripped this man. Now that he was
safely in the hands of the authorities, he would not be allowed to
hurt himself.
But was that enough?
Kal-El stood, hands on hips, his cape rippling behind him in a
night breeze. Ever since he had willingly donned the hero’s mantle,
he had been learning just how much he could do for the people of
Earth. He hadn’t revealed his real Kryptonian name to anyone,
but he was happy with what they chose to call him—the name
Lois Lane had coined. Superman. It had a nice ring to it.
Still, he couldn’t stay. Soon reporters would crowd around
and bombard him with questions. Kal-El had questions of his
own elsewhere, and he could not miss this opportunity. It was
his chance to learn if the U.S. military had found an alien
spacecraft . . . whether another ship from Krypton or from some
other world entirely. What if the crashed object contained another
young refugee from his destroyed planet? His father, Jor-El, could
not have been the only one to see the disaster coming.
Kal-El had to know.
Waving to the gathered awestruck spectators, he raised his
ﬁst again, looked up to the open slice of starry sky between the
Flamingo towers, and soared into the night.

Chapter 32

AREA 51

OR A MAN WITH BRUCE WAYN E’S CON N ECTIONS AN D

Batman’s technology, ﬁnding a secret facility inside the
B
Groom Lake restricted area proved to be no great challenge.
He had his own private Wayne Enterprises jet and a pilot’s
license to ﬂy it, and his plane had been modiﬁed to land on even
the most minimal airstrips. After dark, most of the rural landing
areas in the Nevada desert were shut down and unattended. A
small ranch strip west of Crystal Springs looked to be ideal for his
purposes.
Leaving his plane unattended on the empty airstrip, he donned
his mask and armor to better blend into the darkness. Bats like
swift, jagged shadows ﬂitted about in the clear, moonless night.
He crossed the many miles of painfully open terrain on a newly
designed high-powered motorcycle, which had been developed as
a military all-terrain prototype by Wayne Enterprises. The cycle’s
wide tires and rugged suspension were housed in black aerodynamic armor, and—most important out here—its engine was
virtually silent, thanks to a superior mufﬂed stealth mode. Like a
loping coyote, the cycle glided along the sand, scrub, and rocks.

180

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

He’d overcome the problems of distance and inaccessibility;
now he had to deal with security. Judging by Luthor’s insistent
memos, even the bald industrialist knew very little about the place.
Fortunately, the base’s primary line of defense was its secrecy and
miles of exposed, empty buffer zone. He needed to avoid all roads,
and he could use no lights.
The ﬁrst barrier was a simple barbed-wire fence strung with
warning signs: restricted area. access beyond this point
prohibited. The wires were easily cut, and after idling the cycle
through, he gripped the throttle with his dark glove and raced
toward his destination.
A mile farther, he encountered more daunting fences—barbed
wire and increasingly strenuous warnings: lethal force is
authorized beyond this point. The fence was electriﬁed with
enough voltage to give any intruder a severe jolt, but his insulated
gloves protected him. He cut the wire and made his way through.
The barrier line immediately beyond this fence carried a much
more powerful charge, deadly voltage. He unclipped leads from
his utility belt, attached them to the wires with alligator clips, and
grounded them, making the fence safe for him to get through.
As the cycle carried him onward with barely audible purring, he
used front-mounted metal detectors to scope out buried land mines
and other pitfalls. He activated the cycle’s “trail of bread crumbs”
system, which spat regularly spaced dots of pigment visible only in
infrared. He placed ﬁltered goggles over his mask and rode across
the now greenish-hued desert landscape.
Finally, he spied the diaphanous glow of a complex ahead,
nestled at the base of barren mountains. The Jeep roads met at
a cluster of standard military buildings, Quonset huts, long
rectangular barracks, hangars, warehouses, igloo-shaped storage
domes, a tank farm. Guard towers sported brilliant searchlights.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

181

Military police patrolled the inner perimeter, riﬂes shouldered,
while growling Jeeps circled the outer roads.
He ditched the cycle behind a pile of boulders, then activated
a sounder on his utility belt that would emit a locator ping so he
could ﬁnd the vehicle again. He made his way closer on foot.
Hidden by his dark cape, he moved forward in a low crouch
to take advantage of the minimal cover. He extended his palm
and, listening for feedback from the sensitive metal detector
in the gauntlet, avoided several buried booby traps. Following
established military procedure, the soldiers had placed land mines
on a precisely spaced grid that made them easy to get around.
He sat in perfect stillness for several long minutes, watching
carefully.
The base soldiers were alert, but not alert enough. They had
been drilled repeatedly—so frequently, in fact, that he could use
that to his advantage. Even a genuine breach of security would
seem to be just another exercise at ﬁrst. He was certain no intruder
had ever penetrated this deeply into the restricted area.
The main research hangar was unmistakable, and that was
where he had to go. He would need to use his grappling hook to get
over the barricade, and from there he’d resort to metal-eating acid,
diamond-edged cutters, even smoke bombs or tranquilizer darts
if the smoke alone didn’t create a sufﬁcient diversion. In his utility
belt he had everything he needed.
Piece of cake.

IT TOO K H I M FO RTY- F IVE M I N UTE S TO G ET I N S I D E TH E

secure hangar, ﬁfteen minutes longer than he had anticipated.
Now he had to move quickly. Judging by all the military security
in this forsaken place, the U.S. government considered the

182

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

mysterious object to be as important as Luthor seemed to think it
was.
All of the base research activities had shut down for the night,
and now the exotic object sat in the middle of the hangar under
security lights, surrounded by complex instruments; adjacent
tables were piled with notes and black and white photographs.
He stepped forward, feeling a clear sense of awe. Without a
doubt, the sleek, silvery vessel looked like an alien spacecraft, a
ﬂying saucer with aerodynamic lines and propulsion curves unlike
anything he had seen in his own research and development for the
aircraft industry.
As a rational man, he had never believed in stories of alien
visitors or Martians spying on Earth. As he studied the object
more carefully and began to guess exactly what it was, he found
himself even more surprised by the truth.
He hadn’t expected this at all.

Chapter 33

AREA 51

AL- E L FLEW OFF, LEAVI NG LAS VEGAS BE H I N D. H E WAS
A

glad to have saved a life, but he still felt unsettled and
uncertain about what lay in store for the poor man. The complexi­
ties of the human psyche, the twisted burdens that forced everyday
people to make extremely bad decisions—those were not problems
Kal-El could solve with a burst of super-speed or strength. He was
reminded of all those difﬁcult and disturbing letters written to
“Lorna for the Lovelorn.”
He ﬂew silently away from the neon glow and out across the
empty landscape. Radiant heat still wafted up from the desert
sands, and thermal currents swirled around him like invisible
smoke. Accelerating, he ﬂew northeast, keeping himself just under
Mach 1 so as not to create a prominent sonic boom. In minutes,
he had passed the hurdles that military security had thrown up
against him and Jimmy the previous day, when they’d approached
via more conventional means.
He found the large dry lake bed, its smooth alkaline surface
sparkling in the starlight; a military landing strip marred the
otherwise pristine-looking ﬂat. Long, straight roads cut across

184

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

the desert, running from the Tikaboo Valley to the east and over
the mountains and mesas from Yucca Flat and the atomic testing
grounds. All of the roads converged like a targeting cross on the
secret installation.
With his sharp vision, Kal-El spotted the central research
hangar amid the barracks, warehouses, storage tanks, and blocky
buildings. Decreasing speed, he landed gently atop the corrugated
roof, dodging searchlights from the guard tower.
Kal-El was not accustomed to lurking in shadows like some
prowler, but this mission was a personal one. He didn’t want to
be seen. Though it made him uneasy, he would have to bend the
rules. The demanding pull to learn who he was, to see if he was
truly alone on Earth, trumped his other concerns.
As quietly as he could, causing as little damage as possible,
Kal-El popped the rivets on a sheet of the research hangar’s roof.
He pried the zinc-coated steel upward, opening a way for him
to get inside. He scanned the skeleton crew of base security, and
when he was satisﬁed that he had tripped no alarms, he dropped
down inside the hangar. With barely a whisper of noise, he settled
onto the swept concrete ﬂoor and looked around.
The cavernous bay was dim and quiet, lit only by a few emergen­
cy lights around the edges and a set of bright utility spotlights in
the center. His blue eyes immediately locked onto the object he
sought: a silver spaceship.
Kal-El wished he knew more about Kryptonian science, more
about the small craft that Jor-El had built to send him away
moments before their planet exploded. Up in his Fortress of
Solitude, Kal-El still had the crystalline data-storage units along
with recorded messages that his parents had placed in his ship, but
even those were not enough to answer all his burning questions.
The ﬂying saucer on display was of a completely different

ENEMIES & ALLIES

185

design, a technology that had not originated on Krypton. Had
another alien race created it? The vessel was much too small to
carry a human-sized adult. Could it have been designed to hold a
baby, like the ship that had saved him from his doomed planet? Or
was this craft simply used by a more diminutive species?
If the alien occupant had survived the crash in Arizona, the
soldiers and scientists in Area 51 would have taken him or her
captive. Maybe the precious passenger was even now in a military
holding area on the base.
Taking a step forward, Kal-El scanned the craft with his X-ray
vision to penetrate its inner workings—and to his surprise he
found no passenger compartment. No room, in fact, for any living
creature. This strange vessel was nothing more than a case to hold
exotic propulsion systems and automated controls. The whole
machine was a drone of some kind. A scout ship from another
world?
“It’s a LuthorCorp prototype.” The deep voice came out of the
shadows behind him. “As you well know.”
Kal-El spun, saw the dark-suited ﬁgure, the black cape, mask,
and cowl. Batman.
Batman stepped into the glow of the utility lights. “Luthor
sent you to get the craft back for him, didn’t he? His other efforts
failed.”
At ﬁrst Kal-El didn’t understand what the other man was
implying. He scanned with his X-ray vision to determine if Batman
carried a piece of the devastatingly powerful green mineral. He saw
numerous tools, cables, vials, darts, and other devices he could not
identify but no sign of the debilitating emerald rock.
Kal-El countered, “It’s more likely that you came to steal the
ship—just like you stole from Luthor before.” He realized that
several pieces of the analytical gear connected to the strange object

186

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

had come from Batman’s belt rather than the Area 51 scientiﬁc
teams.
Batman clearly took offense. “I’m not a common thief.”
They faced off, tense, ready for battle. At any other time, Kal-El
would have assumed that his powers could subdue any opponent,
but the green rock Batman had carried . . . what else did he have
up his sleeve?
“Then what were you doing to the craft?” Kal-El persisted.
“Trying to sabotage it?”
Batman pressed with his own questions. “What does Luthor
have over you, Superman? Why do you do his dirty work?”
Kal-El drew an exasperated breath. “I don’t work for Luthor!”
“The evidence suggests otherwise.” Batman’s voice was brittle.
“You were there to protect Luthor’s mansion. Now you’ve breached
military security to get his precious test craft back.”
“I don’t work for Luthor!” Kal-El raised his voice, not
accustomed to having his word doubted by anyone—especially
by a shadowy cat burglar in a dark mask. “Haven’t you read the
newspapers? Luthor claims that I helped you escape, that we’re
partners in crime.” The very idea offended him.
“It wouldn’t be the ﬁrst time someone’s given a false story to the
press,” Batman answered coolly. “Luthor would do anything to
retrieve this prototype. And here you are.”
“I came seeking answers. I intend no harm.” Kal-El squared his
shoulders, keeping himself between Batman and the silvery craft.
It was time to turn the tables, keep his opponent off balance. “And
I’m not the only one who broke into a high-security government
installation.”
After a long, tense pause, Batman added, “I’m here for answers,
too.” He took a step closer, not intimidated by Superman or his
reputation. “Maybe you should ask yourself what Lex Luthor is

ENEMIES & ALLIES

187

doing with a prototype spaceship. Look for yourself; study the
design.” He held up a scanner in one dark-gloved hand. “The
propulsion system, the metal-fabrication technique—they’re
identical to notes and blueprints contained in secret LuthorCorp
documents.”
Batman walked past him and applied a sort of electronic
stethoscope to the skin of the “alien spaceship,” then attached
another set of leads to create a sonic-echo map of the sealed interior,
verifying what Kal-El could see with his X-ray vision. Now that he
knew what to look for, he did detect the hints of machining and
subtle design commonalities that could have come from a cuttingedge arms manufacturer.
And that would explain why unmarked LuthorCorp planes
had tried to stop the Air Force jets from intercepting the UFO,
why they had been willing to use some kind of energy scrambler to
make the F-100Ds malfunction when the pursuit got too close.
Even though it wasn’t the answer Kal-El wanted to hear,
Batman’s assessment was correct. This was not an extraterres­
trial vessel. This craft had been constructed on Earth, in secret. A
LuthorCorp prototype.
He slowly came to an uncomfortable conclusion. Perhaps
Batman hadn’t just been burglarizing Lex Luthor’s mansion.
Maybe he’d been uncovering information for his own reasons, just
as Kal-El had come here to do.
Suddenly sirens shattered the peaceful night, cutting through
the tension. Rotating magenta lights ﬂashed on inside the hangar,
and a klaxon blared. A strained voice bellowed from loudspeak­
ers in the ceiling, calling for a full-ﬂedged response to an internal
security breach.
“We can’t be seen here,” Batman said. “Neither of us.”
Kal-El glanced upward. Someone might have noticed the open

188

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

sheet on the hangar roof, or some sign of Batman’s break-in . . . a
hole in a fence or a cut lock.
Kal-El turned to launch himself toward the ceiling. Though he
had meant no harm, he knew his presence would raise too many
questions. He could haul Batman out of here just as he had carried
him away from Luthor’s mansion—and they could continue this
conversation elsewhere.
But Batman had vanished without a sound. The shadowy ﬁgure
was simply gone, along with his equipment.
Kal-El shot a ﬁnal glance at the fake spacecraft, thinking of
all his lost hopes, then ﬂew through the hole in the corrugated
roof. He paused just long enough to bend the metal sheet back
into place and weld it securely with a quick burst of his heat vision
before soaring off into the night, just as the Area 51 military police
surrounded the hangar.
They would ﬁnd nothing inside.

Chapter 34

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

WEEK AFTER G EN ERAL CERI DOV RETURN ED TO SI BERIA, ALL
W

of Luthor’s systems were in place, all components
assembled to his exacting personal speciﬁcations. The array of
energy-beam transmitters stood ready, their dishes and antennae
pointed toward the Caribbean sky, startlingly modern next to the
abandoned Spanish fort.
Lex Luthor was about to change the world.
Inside the computer-ﬁlled control room, large screens displayed
images of important cities, calm cities, soon to be ﬁlled with
terriﬁed citizens wailing for rescue. Soviet nuclear missiles would
shortly be on their way to Metropolis, and Luthor alone would
save the human race. He had everything ﬁrmly in hand.
Wearing hooded cleansuits, his technicians stood around the
humming computer banks, while others used compasses and
grease pencils to plot trajectories on glass maps. The radar screens
remained blank for now, but that would all change as soon as
General Ceridov initiated the launch from silos in the USSR.
Though Luthor had little need for a bodyguard on his own
island, Bertram stood at his side nevertheless. “We will push both

190

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

superpowers to the brink, Bertram. The world’s greatest leaders
will hide under their beds. They’ll pray, they’ll whimper, and
when they see that only I can possibly save them, I’ll have them in
the palm of my hand.”
Bertram rarely made comments and never asked questions.
Luthor had no evidence that the man was particularly intelligent,
yet he earned his master’s respect simply because he didn’t talk all
the time or make stupid rejoinders. If only more men could be so
wise. . . .
At his command desk, Luthor picked up a red phone, listened to
clicks and static as he was connected by a secure transatlantic cable
(which LuthorCorp had privately laid). His call passed through
the Soviet network, bypassed the usual monitoring substations
and listening devices, and after an interminable wait, was ﬁnally
connected with Ceridov.
“We are prepared and waiting, General. Have you taken care of
all the details on your end?”
The other man’s voice was scratchy from the distance, but his
words were clear enough even through the popping static. “I am
ready, comrade Luthor. Generals Dubrov and Endovik are like
rabid dogs anxious to be loosed. They have already been to see
the premier twice, demanding permission to launch a preemptive
strike. I have a way to send a counterfeit message to them, and they
will believe they have the necessary permission. I am conﬁdent
they will not hesitate, nor will they doubt what they are doing.”
“And your name is completely absent from all records?”
“I am a black-star KGB general! My name never appears on any
records.”
Soon, though, Ceridov would control the entire Soviet military.
In their preliminary discussions, he and Luthor had proposed

ENEMIES & ALLIES

191

dividing the world in half, each with his own to control, but
the KGB general probably dreamed of expanding his sphere of
inﬂuence deeper into Southeast Asia, China, and more of Europe.
Luthor was certain his counterpart would never be completely
satisﬁed with half the world.
And neither would he. In fact, he was already making plans to
deal with that very problem. First, though, the next step. “Your
missiles are reliable?”
The general’s voice exuded a gruff pride. “Our R-7 rocket
successfully placed Sputnik into orbit, which is more than your
American space program could manage! We have loaded three
R-7s with nuclear warheads. They will devastate Metropolis—un­
less your weapons stop them. You are positive you can stop these
missiles? Much as I hate you capitalists, I do not truly intend to
destroy America. Too many parts of it will be useful.”
Luthor didn’t have to consider his answer. “I designed the entire
system personally, and I supervised the installation of the Wayne
Enterprises components. There will be no errors.”
He hung up the red phone and turned to face the screens again,
silently waiting.

LE S S TH A N A N H O U R LATE R, S EVE RA L O F H I S TYP I CA LLY

quiet technicians gasped when sweeping arcs on the radar scopes
revealed a trio of bogeys: the missiles launched from the Soviet
Union. Without warning, the Russian R-7 rockets cruised toward
America on a polar trajectory that would bring them down over the
Distant Early Warning line along the edge of the Arctic Circle.
Luthor smiled, knowing that red phones would be jangling
on the desks of the world’s leaders. The U.S. military must have

192

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

been scrambling to launch a counterattack with ﬁghter jets and
bombers, which could do nothing against these intercontinental
missiles.
To prevent a full-scale war, the Soviet premier would insist,
quite stridently, that the launch was “accidental.” People might
even believe his claims, because right now the premier himself was
giving an important speech at the United Nations in Metropolis:
ground zero for all three nuclear missiles. No one could evacuate
in time.
With each sweep of the radar, the traces showed the inbound
warheads getting closer. . . .

Chapter 35

M ETROPOLIS

I NCE H E COULD NOT REVEAL WHAT H E HAD DISCOVERED

inside Area 51, Clark’s trip had not yielded much of a story.
After he and Jimmy returned to Metropolis, Clark had tried to
cobble together a background piece using the old rancher’s tale,
as well as anecdotes of previous UFO sightings and Project Blue
Book, but Perry ﬁled Clark’s draft article directly in the wastebas­
ket, saying, “If there’s no little green men, there’s no story, Kent.”
Instead he dispatched Clark and Jimmy to cover that week’s
UN General Assembly meeting. “The Soviet premier is scheduled
to give another one of his blowhard speeches, and there’s some
funeral for the king of a country I’ve never heard of. Squeeze
something interesting out of it. Nothing much else going on in the
world today.”
“It’s the United Nations, Mr. White. It’s got to be interesting.”
For Clark, the UN was a symbol of hope that all nations could ﬁnd
common ground and cooperate, much as he imagined the lands
and peoples of Krypton had done.
When he found himself staring up at the tall UN building,
Clark realized that in his relatively short time in Metropolis, he

194

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

had never actually gone inside. He and Jimmy ﬂashed their press
passes and hurried to the hushed observation gallery. Clark took
out his notebook, sure that he was about to see a compelling
example of diplomacy in action.
Instead, he found that the routine activities of diplomats were
neither particularly exciting nor newsworthy. The ambassa­
dors were mostly sedate old men barely interested in their own
goings-on. The speakers droned on in a babel of languages while
interpreters translated in real time; the spectacle played largely to
an audience of empty chairs.
The opening session consisted of a forty-ﬁve-minute parade of
diplomats expressing their condolences that the king of Timacu
had died (at the age of eighty-seven, and after fourteen wives).
Each member nation expressed its ofﬁcial sorrow before the next
ambassador expressed an even more extravagant amount of grief,
and so on, until it seemed that the whole world considered the king
of Timacu to have been a statesman of such profound inﬂuence
that civilization itself was unlikely to continue without him. Clark
decided to search the Daily Planet’s archives to ﬁnd out what the
king of Timacu had actually done during his reign.
Jimmy took several uninspired photographs of the sparsely
populated rows of seated men. Clark leaned over and whispered in
his ear. “This is slower than the town hall meetings in Smallville.”
Presently the General Assembly came to life when the bombastic
Soviet premier took the podium and began his speech by shouting.
The blustery head of the Communist Party attempted to change
the opinions of his rival diplomats through sheer vehemence
rather than reﬁned oratorical skills and convincing rhetoric. To
emphasize a point, the premier actually removed a shoe and began
hammering the podium before him, vowing to bury any other
nation that did not agree with his ideology.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

195

Frowning, Clark took notes. “He’s not winning any friends,
that’s for sure.”
Back in Kansas, he and his father had often listened to radio
news broadcasts together. Though Jonathan Kent hadn’t taken
a lot of interest in world politics, he certainly hadn’t trusted the
Communists. “Son, I hope I’ve raised you to admire our core values.
America’s not perfect, far from it, but even with our faults, this is
the best darned country in the world. Don’t ever stop believing in
truth, justice, and the American way.”
“I won’t, Pa,” Clark had promised.
And he never had.
The Soviet premier had just reached the crescendo of his speech
when blaring air-raid sirens drowned out his sound and fury.
Uniformed UN security guards rushed in, calling for an immediate
evacuation of the building.

INSIDE PERRY WH ITE’S OFFICE, LOIS LAN E LOCKED H ER ARMS

across her chest. “I can catch the next ﬂight to Havana, hire a boat,
and go ﬁnd that island of Luthor’s. Clark and Jimmy’s trip was a
bust. Now give me a chance.”
He shook his head, holding the cigar in his right hand. “Don’t
remind me how much money I just spent on a wild goose chase
after ﬂying saucers.”
“You have to go where the story takes you,” Lois insisted. “You
taught me that yourself.”
“Go ﬁnd a big story right here in Metropolis, preferably one
that doesn’t require an expense account. Something might just fall
in your lap.”
Scowling, she was about to make a ﬂippant comment when
Perry’s radio blasted the piercing emergency broadcast signal.

196

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Out in the bullpen, the other reporters ﬂocked toward the
shortwave.
“—emergency bulletin. The Soviets have just launched three
nuclear missiles toward the United States of America. Soviet
ofﬁcials at ﬁrst insisted this was an accidental launch, but now
they are silent. The missiles are on their way. Likely targets are
Metropolis and Washington, D.C. Proceed immediately to your
nearest civil defense shelter. This is not a drill.”
“There’s a fallout shelter in the basement—” someone began,
and in shock, people began to run for the door, leaving their
personal items behind.
“Great Caesar’s ghost!” Perry said. “Lois, there’s your story—if
anybody survives to read it.”

JI M MY WAS SO ASTON ISH ED THAT H E N EARLY DROPPED H IS

camera. “What do we do now, Mr. Kent?”
The UN security guards urgently ushered the diplomats out of
the General Assembly hall down to the civil defense shelter. The
corridors of the UN were sheer pandemonium, overlain with a
tapestry of languages.
“Get to the shelter, Jimmy—quick.” Already Clark’s mind
was racing ahead to how he could slip away. Ambassadors of
free countries and dictatorships alike elbowed each other aside,
crowding into stairwells, rushing downward alongside custodi­
ans, secretaries, and cafeteria workers. Clark urged Jimmy into
the throng, then managed to lose his friend in the jostling, frantic
crowd.
He ducked into an empty ofﬁce, glad for the confusion. If Soviet
missiles were inbound, he didn’t have much time. But if anyone
could stop them, he could.

Chapter 36

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

S H E WATCH ED TH E M ISSI LE TRACES ON TH E RADAR SCREEN

come over the North Pole, Luthor’s smile broadened.
Closer . . . closer . . .
It wouldn’t do to take care of them too quickly, too easily. He
had to let the rockets cross into American airspace, at least. Unless
the world’s leaders were absolutely convinced they were about to
die, they wouldn’t show enough gratitude. First, they had to bite
their nails, fall to their knees sobbing, make promises to God or
confessions to loved ones (which they would regret later). Luthor
was glad to be far away on his little island, where he didn’t have to
hear all that sniveling.
On the large polar-projection map mounted to the control
center wall, a cluster of blinking dots marked the three missiles as
they crossed the DEW line, headed down over northern Canada
and the mid-Canada warning line, then crossed the Pinetree Line
at the ﬁftieth parallel. The graceful arcs looked so beautiful as the
R-7 rockets pushed relentlessly toward the United States, toward
Metropolis.
For years, U.S. rocketry scientists led by Wernher von Braun

198

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

had been developing and perfecting such weapons, but they had
never managed to test a long-range warhead-carrying missile. The
American Atlas-A rocket was not yet ready for launch, but Luthor
was both surprised and unsettled to see how well Soviet technol­
ogy functioned.
First Sputnik, now this. The United States had certainly fallen
behind in the space race.
But here was Luthor’s perfect window of opportunity. His
death-ray transmitters were aligned and powered up. The wall
screens displayed shaded zones of “guaranteed kill” for the beams,
and the ﬁrst missile had almost come into range. His targeting
computers whirred and clicked, lights blinked, and magnetic tape
wheels spun.
Not trusting such an important step to mere minions, he
personally aligned the targeting vectors, then counted down the
seconds to when he would avert a nuclear holocaust.
His energy-beam dishes, pointed to the sky, would project
lightning bolts superior to any Zeus had ever thrown. Luthor
activated the systems, and the control bank’s indicator lights
glowed green. Now to save the world, just in the nick of time.
He turned the operation key and, with a thin smile, hit the large
ﬁring button.
Nothing happened.
His smile faltered. He reset the system and punched the ﬁring
button again. The beam generators failed to shoot out powerful
blasts of energy. The newly installed components simply froze.
The Wayne Enterprises technology refused to work!
The missiles kept coming.
Once the detonations occurred in Metropolis, the United States
would mount a nuclear launch of its own, using squadrons of longrange bombers on desperate missions carrying hydrogen bombs.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

199

By then, it would all be much too late, completely out of control.
The whole planet would be swallowed up in a nuclear holocaust.
At his side, the normally silent Bertram said simply, “Do you
have a backup plan, sir?”
Luthor hammered his ﬁst impotently on the ﬁring button. “No,
I don’t have a backup plan! When the ﬁrst plan is perfect, who
needs a backup?”
Bertram did not state the obvious ﬂaw in that reasoning.
Suddenly the radar screen showed another blip, a small object
racing at supersonic speed on a direct intercept path with the
missiles.

FASTE R TH A N A B U LLET, H I G H E R TH A N A J ET, KA L- E L F LEW

for his life—for everyone’s lives. Even the rareﬁed air created
enough drag to slow him, and the heat of his passage surrounded
him with a faint, warm glow.
With hyperacute hearing, he could detect the constant rumble
of rocket engines. The missiles with their deadly payloads reached
apogee and now plunged like high-tech javelins toward their
programmed target.
But Kal-El was America’s own super-weapon.
He slowed enough so that he could intercept the ﬁ rst missile
without annihilating its nose on impact, which would have
scattered the radioactive payload across the sky. Exerting himself
against the R-7 rocket’s momentum, he pushed the nose cone,
tilting the missile upward, altering its trajectory. Kal-El pushed
against gravity, against the very air, and ﬁnally the missile ﬂew
toward space. The Soviet R-7 had neither the power nor the fuel to
reach escape velocity, so Kal-El gave it an extra shove.
The missile climbed higher and higher, beyond even Sputnik’s

200

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

orbit. Eventually it would explode in empty space, where it would
cause no damage.
With no time to rest or celebrate this triumph, Kal-El streaked
back down toward the remaining two missiles.
Now that he knew how to divert them, he easily damaged the
rocket engines with his heat vision, sent the missiles sputtering,
and then intercepted their long cylindrical bodies one at a time.
As he bore the second R-7 out of Earth’s atmosphere on his
shoulders like Atlas and heaved it into space, Kal-El was reminded
of how he had carried the sinking Star City Queen to safety in
Metropolis Bay. This time, though, he was saving all of Metropo­
lis, perhaps the whole world.
After he hurled the third and last nuclear missile away to where
it could cause no damage, he let himself drift in the sky, looking
down at the beautiful world below—the coastlines, the clouds, the
geometric patterns of the cities, roads, and croplands.
His world . . . safe.

Chapter 37

TH E WH ITE HOUSE ,
WASH INGTON , D.C .

T ANY OTH ER TI M E, LOIS WOULD HAVE ROLLED H ER EYES

if asked to report on an awards ceremony, even a presiden­
tial presentation, but since Superman was involved, she deﬁnitely
wanted to cover the story. He had, after all, prevented an all-out
atomic war.
All of the aspersions Lex Luthor had cast on Superman were
instantly forgotten (not that the reporters had dug up any dirt on
him anyway). Lois wished she could have seen Luthor’s face, but
the bald industrialist hadn’t appeared in public for weeks. Probably
sulking, she thought.
With the missiles miraculously diverted and destroyed, the
people of Metropolis had celebrated in the streets, throwing
confetti and cheering. Taxi drivers honked their horns. Restaurant
owners gave out free food. Flower sellers threw blossoms up in the
air. Old women and curmudgeonly men hugged each other. Even
the Soviet premier was said to have collapsed into a chair, weeping
with relief.
Judging by the number of reporters packed into the press corral
on the White House lawn, Lois wasn’t the only one who recognized

202

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

the signiﬁcance of the story. For the ofﬁcial occasion, she wore a
formal lavender dress and new gloves, and she was determined to
portray Superman exactly the way he deserved: as a hero.
Superman stood there, handsome and muscular but clearly
out of his element before the excited crowd. She thought it was
charming. His bright blue and red outﬁt did not show a smudge,
despite the fact he had recently wrestled with three Soviet nuclear
missiles. Even the black curl on his brow was perfectly in place.
But though he could bend steel in his bare hands and stop a bullet
with his chest, he seemed endearingly . . . shy.
Lois thought about how he had so easily swept her up in his
strong arms as her car plunged off the Twelfth Street Bridge, saving
her—if she could have, she would have found a way to save him
now. However, accepting the adulation of an appreciative nation
was an ordeal Superman would just have to endure. . . .
Though he was the president of the United States, Dwight Eisen­
hower looked very small in his gray suit next to Superman. Eisen­
hower was himself a hero, having led armies in World War II, and
had been reelected by a landslide along with his running mate
Richard M. Nixon. Now, though, even the president looked intimidated in the presence of Superman.
To resounding applause, Eisenhower extended his hand, and
Superman vigorously pumped it. The president tried to cover his
ﬂinch, obviously concerned that the other man might crush his
hand, but the hero was perfectly restrained. A hundred ﬂashbulbs
went off to capture the moment.
Eisenhower stepped up to the podium, from which sprouted a
bouquet of large microphones. “Today, Superman, America gives
you our sincerest gratitude. As president, I want to thank you from
the bottom of my heart, and also from the heart of every U.S.
citizen, and every citizen of the world. You saved us all.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

203

Lois was a bit starry-eyed herself, but that had more to do with
Superman than the presidential honor he was about to receive. She
found herself moved by his humility and sincerity; Lois realized
she was even blushing, and she quickly lifted a white-gloved hand
to cover her cheek.
Eisenhower continued. “Because of clashing political ideologies,
the human race has been pushed to the brink of extinction. Such a
thing must never happen again.”
Lois had heard the Communist leader speak virtually the same
words after he had emerged from the UN fallout shelter, pale and
shaking. Once the crisis had passed, his rhetoric was less vitriolic.
He protested that the launch of the nuclear missiles had been
neither intentional nor authorized. Why would he do such a thing,
he demanded, when he himself was at ground zero at the time?
Two traitorous rogue generals had been identiﬁed and branded
as criminals—Endovik and Dubrov. Both men, having disobeyed
direct orders, had been removed from their positions and summar­
ily executed. The premier insisted that there was no need for
continued international tensions. He seemed to think the world
should just forget about the whole affair. Lois didn’t believe it for
an instant, nor did she entirely swallow his explanation.
Continuing the ceremony, President Eisenhower opened a
velvet-lined wooden box and withdrew a ﬁnely worked medal
suspended from a red, white, and blue ribbon. “For all you have
done, Superman, this is the highest accolade our country can
bestow—the Presidential Medal of Freedom.”
Superman’s chest swelled with pride. He raised his square chin
and met the president’s gaze with his clear blue eyes. “I accept it
gladly, Mr. President.”
Eisenhower reached forward with the medal, fumbled with the
pin, and attempted to attach it to Superman’s chest. He frowned.

204

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

In an awkward moment, he tried again, to no avail. The pin could
not penetrate the tough blue fabric.
Many more camera bulbs ﬂashed. The onlookers waited
anxiously.
Finally, Eisenhower took a step back, nonplussed. The pin was
bent.
With self-effacing humor, Superman extended a hand. “Why
don’t I just hold that, Mr. President?”
Eisenhower quickly handed it to him and returned to the
microphone, eager to move on. “Superman, we are proud to have
you as one of our foremost citizens. You are the defender of truth,
justice, and the American way.”
Though her applause was mufﬂed by the formal white gloves,
Lois clapped more vigorously than her fellow reporters. She felt
inspired, possibly more from her own heart than from the actual
speech. She even had tears in her eyes. If only her father could see
her now—tough little Lois turning into a girly, emotional mess!
From the podium, Superman caught her stare and returned
Lois’s smile, blushing a bit himself. For a long moment, he didn’t
seem to be seeing any other face than hers.

Chapter 38

WAYN E E NTE RPRISE S

N TH E MONTHS AFTER TH E DISASTROUS SOVI ET M ISSI LE

launch, the U.S. military-industrial complex went into high
gear, devoting resources, manpower, manufacturing capabilities,
and vast sums of money to the nation’s defense. Though President
Eisenhower and the Soviet premier publicly reafﬁ rmed their
mutual commitment to peace, no one believed that the Cold War
had thawed.
Since the unofﬁcial shakeup of its board of directors, Wayne
Enterprises had quietly become a new company, entering a
veritable renaissance. Accompanied by a very pleased-looking
Richard Drayling, who had been reinstated as a board member,
Bruce Wayne toured the expanded production line at a Wayne
Enterprises aircraft assembly plant.
With Alfred acting as go-between again, Bruce had invited
Drayling to the manor for a private luncheon and a heart-to­
heart conversation, during which he showed the older man the
incriminating ﬁles he was holding over the heads of the other nine
directors. He also explained how he had hamstrung the guilty
men, how he was using them to get back at Luthor, and how he

206

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

had effectively removed them from any real power in Wayne Enterprises. Drayling was quite gratiﬁed at how Bruce had handled the
situation, and the old man now appeared to be much younger than
his years. “You have more of your father in you than I thought,
Mr. Wayne,” he said. “Perhaps I misjudged you.”
By now, several former directors had been reassigned to
probationary positions, where Bruce knew they could cause no
further harm; the others held jobs that carried no responsibili­
ties at all. LuthorCorp would get nothing more from them. The
new board members—drawn from the most successful project
managers in each research division—were entirely loyal to Bruce’s
vision for the company, now that he had begun acting like a real
administrator.
Many eyebrows had been raised at Bruce’s seemingly abrupt
transition from lightweight playboy to responsible businessman,
and some people had expressed open skepticism about his abilities
in the corporate world. Analysts, however, made the assumption
(which Bruce did not correct) that he simply surrounded himself
with “good people.”
Now the fabrication lines had begun producing a new series
of state-of-the-art ﬁghter jets for the USAF. These exotic designs
had been in development at Wayne Enterprises for more than a
year, but Bruce had accelerated the production timeline. The ﬁrst
deliveries were well ahead of schedule.
Surrounded by the clamor of the assembly line, the rolling belts,
clanging tools, and hammering rivets, the two men strolled along
on their inspection tour. Bruce’s expensive business suit seemed
incongruous with the bright yellow hard hat he wore. Smiling,
he greeted supervisors and line foremen, then shook the hands
of several workers who had been busily welding fuselage skins
together.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

207

Bruce raised his voice to the jumpsuited work crews. “Things
have changed around here. I’ve been taking a more direct role in
this company.”
Drayling nodded, adding his support. “And I intend to be seeing
you all more often, in person.”
Thanks to several major new defense contracts, the price of
Wayne Enterprises stock had soared, improving the proﬁtabil­
ity of his company. Again and again, Wayne Enterprises success­
fully outbid LuthorCorp for new government contracts, and Bruce
knew the real reason. Without his spies copying the best Wayne
Enterprises work, Luthor no longer had the edge he’d once taken
for granted.
In the last two months, given full creative freedom, Bruce’s
research teams had developed amazing designs, innovative
weapons, and vehicles that were not just reﬁnements of tried-and­
true existing technology but genuinely new approaches. Every
breakthrough, every report, every prototype was channeled
directly through him.
Naturally, he made a point of keeping the most daring advances
for his “personal testing.”

I NSI DE TH E CAVE, BRUCE DI DN’T M I N D GETTI NG H IS HAN DS

dirty. Engine grease covered his knuckles, darkened his ﬁngernails.
He slid beneath the black automobile, inspecting the axles, the
transmission. Its lines were predatory, its paint coat polished to
such a high gleam that it looked like a clear midnight sky.
Straightening, Alfred raised his welding helmet and extinguished
the blowtorch. “I neglected to install the minibar and magazine
rack, sir, but you’ll ﬁnd everything else quite in order.”
Lying on his back, Bruce rolled out from beneath the chassis,

208

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

wiping his hands on a rag. He hauled himself to his feet. “And the
entire body is bulletproof?”
“Doubly armored, sir. Would you like me to take a few potshots
in order to demonstrate?”
“We’ll test it soon enough, Alfred. And the windshield glass?”
“Triple-sandwiched transparent polymer, along with a strong,
virtually invisible wire grid to help maintain integrity. This is the
best vehicle that money can buy—as you well know.”
Bruce raised the hood and inspected the high-powered engine,
which made the largest American V8 look like a windup toy by
comparison. A rocket nozzle above the rear exhaust ports could
provide emergency thrust.
He had made most of the modiﬁcations himself, diverting
R&D developments from Wayne Enterprises before they could
be released to government contractors. Naturally, such extraor­
dinary breakthroughs had to be demonstrated in the ﬁeld, and he
looked forward to doing the testing himself.
Though the car’s design was functional, it also displayed a
ﬂair for the dramatic—swooping ﬁns, armored tires, gadgets to
respond to any conceivable situation . . . something James Bond
would have envied. Anyone who glanced at the vehicle would
immediately know that it belonged to the mysterious Batman.
However, Bruce still found it maddening that he could not
reproduce Superman’s powers. Their encounters at the Luthor
mansion and in the Area 51 hangar had only heightened his interest.
He knew how challenging it had been to penetrate the incredible
security at Groom Lake, but Superman had gotten in without even
breaking a sweat. And later the other man had ﬂown high enough
and fast enough to stop all three Soviet missiles, hurling them
away from Earth. That was no parlor trick, and it could not be

ENEMIES & ALLIES

209

explained by the technology Luthor had stolen to design his bulky
battlesuits.
Even so, this new rocket-powered car was quite impressive.
Opening the door of the vehicle, Bruce slid into the biodynami­
cally designed seat. Alfred, with his perennial dry wit, had taped a
note to the front control panel: batmobile.
“Stand clear, Alfred. I’m going to ﬁre her up. Are the tires secure
on the rollers?”
“Indeed they are, sir. I wouldn’t want your ﬁrst test drive to
terminate prematurely against the cave wall.”
Alfred primly inserted earplugs and stood against the rock wall,
waiting as Bruce started the ignition process—atomic batteries to
power, turbines to speed. The engine purred, hummed, then roared
to full power. And he hadn’t even engaged the rocket booster yet.
The vehicle shuddered, tires screaming on the rollers like
fractious thoroughbreds in the starting gate. The dashboard gauges
inched toward red ﬁelds as he increased power. Bruce ran diagnos­
tics that continually monitored the vehicle’s systems. Thus far he
was very pleased. Batmobile indeed!
When he ﬁnished his tests, Bruce climbed reluctantly out of
the black vehicle. A smile showed beneath Alfred’s pencil-thin
mustache as he removed his earplugs. “It seems adequate, Master
Bruce. The Wayne Enterprises scientists have produced another
miracle.”
Bruce drew a deep breath and let it out slowly. In spite of the
car’s armor, engine power, built-in weaponry, and evasive devices,
Superman trumped all of it. “Yes, miracles, Alfred . . . but they’re
not yet miraculous enough.”

Chapter 39

LUTHORCORP

N S I DE H I S CORPORATE H EADQUARTE RS I N M ETROPOLI S,

Lex Luthor’s ofﬁce was a well-defended island in a sea of
covertly armed receptionists whose primary job was to prevent
him from being interrupted: At any moment, Luthor’s great mind
might be on the verge of an important breakthrough.
He sat in intense silence, studying the plans for the production
model of his advanced armored battlesuit. Enhanced shoulder
and neck protection, impenetrable casing over vulnerable areas,
a jetpack for short ﬂights, magnetic boots, built-in projectile
weapons, protective gauntlets. The wearer of such a suit would
become the world’s most powerful soldier . . . perhaps even
powerful enough to defeat Superman.
Luthor had always been annoyed by the grandstanding hero.
That blue suit and red cape—where had he gotten such an
outlandish costume? And since he had helped the cowled burglar
to escape from his mansion, Superman was clearly more than an
attention-seeking gadﬂy. Granted, after the incomprehensible
failure of Luthor’s energy-beam defense system, he admitted that a
superpowerful alien freak might have his uses. Even so, Superman

ENEMIES & ALLIES

211

would have been much more tolerable if he’d been controlled by
LuthorCorp.
Fortunately, because his death-beam system had been a care­
fully kept secret on his island, nobody was aware that the energy
rays had failed at the most crucial moment. Luthor’s disgrace, his
shame, his error was entirely a private matter. But that didn’t make
it any less maddening.
After the debacle, he had received a cryptic telegram from
behind the Iron Curtain—a message from General Ceridov
informing him that the military traitors Endovik and Dubrov had
not, in fact, been executed but, better still, had been sent to the
Ariguska gulag. Ceridov seemed to believe that the stunt with
Superman was one of Luthor’s ploys.
Good; let him keep his delusions, Luthor thought.
The KGB general had kept his ﬁngerprints off the entire
incident, as had Luthor. Even so, Luthor was more than annoyed
by Superman’s continued intervention. Yes, he had saved the world,
which almost—almost—balanced out the fact that he had made a
fool out of Lex Luthor. Nobody made a fool out of Lex Luthor.
As a result, he had decided to investigate the mystery of
Superman with even greater vigor. How could the brute be stopped
if he happened to get out of control? Luthor didn’t like any aspect
of his plans to be out of control. Superman had to be taken out of
the picture, or at least thoroughly leashed.
An hour earlier, he had received a formal letter from the
secretary of defense, regretfully turning down Luthor’s appeal to
submit new bids for several contracts that had been awarded to
Wayne Enterprises. Just yesterday, a major bid for helicopters had
been awarded to Northrop Aircraft. Queen Industries had just
won out on the contract for the new Arrow short-range missile.
LuthorCorp’s medical division had lost a lucrative contract for a

212

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

radiation treatment to be used in the case of heavy fallout exposures;
Tyler Pharmaceuticals had come up with an equivalent—and
cheaper—system.
Wayne Enterprises was, however, his only true competi­
tor. Luthor now realized he’d made a mistake—a mistake!—
in underestimating Bruce Wayne, believing him to be an insipid
hedonistic playboy, all money and no brains. Since Luthor’s
insiders at Wayne Enterprises had been so useful for so long, he
hadn’t worried about the handsome goof-off. Now, astonish­
ingly, Wayne actually seemed to know what he was doing, and his
paid-off board members had been rendered impotent. Obviously
Wayne knew, or at least suspected, their treachery. And none of
them had bothered to inform him! Idiots.
When the intercom on his desk buzzed, he stabbed at it irritably.
“What?”
“A man to see you, Mr. Luthor. He insists you’ll want to talk
with him, though he’s not on the calendar.”
“Who is it? Senator McCarthy will be here soon.”
“His last name is Buchheim. He claims you knew him from
Wayne Enterprises.”
Luthor stiffened. “Send him in—and don’t let anyone else see
him. Is Bertram here?”
“I’ll call for him, Mr. Luthor.”
Larry Buchheim walked in, looking sheepish, red-eyed, broken.
Luthor had always considered the man weak. Anyone who left
incriminating evidence lying around was a sloppy fool, beneath
contempt—except when he could be put to good use. Unfortu­
nately, this man’s usefulness had ended the moment that Bruce
Wayne had transferred him out of active management.
Buchheim approached his desk, hat in hand, squeezing the brim
nervously; his suit was rumpled. Luthor had heard that the man’s

ENEMIES & ALLIES

213

wife had left him—a fact that should have given the idiot more
time to concentrate on the job at hand, become a useful member
of society.
Buchheim stood in front of the single chair across from the desk,
careful not to take a seat without being invited. “I have informa­
tion for you, Mr. Luthor. Good information.”
“That’ll be a refreshing change. Your last offerings proved
useless.”
“It wasn’t my fault. We were ordered to do it, all of us. Wayne
knows about our connections with you. He uncovered the dirt you
have on each of us.”
Since Luthor had already suspected this, he was unimpressed
by Buchheim’s news. “How did he do that?”
“He must have hired the world’s greatest detective. He had
photos, documents, records of my bank account. He knows
everything, Mr. Luthor.”
“Poor you.” His thoughts raced ahead to determine how he
could remove all evidence from his end.
“Some of the others are bound to be coming to you as well, but
I wanted to get here ﬁrst. He’s going to dismiss us all—I know it.
I need a job at LuthorCorp. You owe it to me, after what I did for
you all those years.”
“I owe you?” Luthor actually barked a laugh, unable to believe
this man’s gall. “I seem to recall that you were paid—well paid, in
fact, for technology that proved faulty!”
“That was Wayne’s doing, too, sir. Once he discovered our
connection to LuthorCorp, he ordered us to continue providing
components and blueprints to you, but I’ve since learned that he
altered them somehow, modiﬁed the designs in subtle ways. The
pieces we supplied, Mr. Luthor, weren’t supposed to work. He
sabotaged them, just to spite you.”

214

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Buchheim reached inside his suit jacket and pulled out a folded
piece of paper. He leaned forward to place a small sketch on
Luthor’s desk. The drawing showed the diodes and transistors that
had been cleverly, but improperly, connected in the control circuits
that Luthor had co-opted for his energy-beam system. Without a
careful and meticulous inspection, no one would ever have noticed
the ﬂaw.
The last piece fell into place in Luthor’s mind. The components
he had so carefully obtained from Wayne Enterprises and installed
in his ﬂawless energy-beam system were duds, designed to fail?
He had used technology stolen from Wayne Enterprises so he
could put the system online faster, test it sooner, pit it against the
Soviet missiles. There had been no fault in his design—no error.
Luthor’s only real mistake had been in trusting the competence of
others.
“Buchheim, do you have any idea what you’ve done?”
“That’s why I came here. I know what Wayne Enterprises is
working on now, and I can help you develop it before they do. New
technology!”
“New technology . . . I’m a fan of new technology, Mr. Buchheim.
Give me something new over something old any day. That’s one
major difference between myself and Bruce Wayne: He surrounds
himself with relics from fallen empires, museum-quality garbage.
I, on the other hand, see how things can be improved, and I ﬁgure
out how to proﬁt from that.” Luthor opened a desk drawer and
reached inside. “However, sometimes the old ways are reliable and
effective. You just can’t improve on certain ideas.”
He withdrew a Luger P08 pistol, for which he had paid a great
deal. The gun had supposedly been carried by Dr. Mengele himself,
and Luthor’s labs had authenticated one partial ﬁngerprint.
“This type of pistol has been in service for decades. The

ENEMIES & ALLIES

215

Germans began using it at the turn of the century.” He pointed it
directly at Buchheim’s chest and ﬁred without another word. The
bullet ripped through the man’s sternum, knocking him backward
into the chair. He slumped like a scarecrow in the seat.
The gunshot was loud, but the ofﬁce was soundproofed. This
was by no means the ﬁrst time Luthor had needed to keep his
activities here absolutely private. The former Wayne Enterprises
employee twitched and bled, then lay still. Luthor waved away the
bitter smell of cordite about him. He hit the intercom again, much
more relaxed now. “Is Bertram here yet?”
“Yes, sir, he’s just arrived.”
“Send him in.”
When the burly bodyguard stepped through the door, he
regarded the body in the seat without comment.
“Clean up the mess before Senator McCarthy arrives for our
luncheon. And bring in a new chair. That one is stained.”
Bertram grabbed the dead man’s arms and dragged him away.
Already on to other business of the day, Luthor took a sheet of
paper from his desk blotter and put aside the battlesuit plans. With
neat, precise handwriting, he jotted down the names of the other
eight directors who had been under his thumb.
When Bertram ﬁnished the cleaning chores, Luthor handed him
the paper. “These men are liabilities. Take care of them. I want it
done quickly.”
“Yes, sir. Quickly.”
Luthor raised a ﬁnger. “Quietly, if possible. But if not . . . well,
quickly will be good enough.”

H E POU RE D SCOTC H ES FOR BOTH H I M SE LF AN D JOSE PH

McCarthy while they waited for lunch to be served. The senator

216

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

from Wisconsin, ﬁrebrand of the House Un-American Activities
Commission, settled himself comfortably in a brand-new chair
across from the desk.
The meek and silent kitchen staff delivered a tray for each man:
thick rare steaks, baked potatoes, and an iceberg lettuce salad
smothered with thousand island dressing. As he cut into his own
ﬁllet, Luthor enjoyed the smooth glide of the steak knife’s serrated
edge through the tender ﬂesh. The bloody juices oozed out with an
appetizing aroma. “Good American heartland beef, Senator.”
The senator also attacked the meal. His round eyes were intense,
his face set in a perpetual scowl that made him appear as though
he ate only mustard and pickles. After the recent missile launch,
McCarthy had gone on the warpath against the evil Communists
with renewed fervor. In years past, the senator had been a great
ally in helping to promote the Cold War tensions that led to the
arms buildup. “Let’s talk business while we dine, Mr. Luthor. I’m
due back on Capitol Hill later today for more HUAC hearings.”
“We’re both busy men, Senator. We can both accomplish a
great deal.”
McCarthy crunched into his salad, wiping a smear of dressing
from the corner of his mouth. “And there’s still much to do. It
wasn’t so long ago, Mr. Luthor, that you yourself made me see
the danger posed by the Communist menace. I only hope we’ve
responded in time and with enough vehemence.” He launched into
his typical diatribe against the Commies, as if he were sitting in
front of a TV camera instead of in a private meeting.
Luthor grew bored with the man’s limited scope of thinking
and brought him up short with a single comment. “Senator, there’s
something even worse than Communists.”
McCarthy blinked at the astonishing comment, a bite of steak
poised in front of his mouth.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

217

Now that he had his guest’s undivided attention, Luthor laid
the groundwork for the next step in his plan. After being terriﬁed
by the near-holocaust, all of America was starry-eyed over that
fool Superman, and even McCarthy didn’t see the ﬂaw in their
misplaced faith. Not yet. Luthor would lead him down the next
path.
The mutual fear that he and General Ceridov had managed
to engender between the U.S. and USSR was a resounding and
lucrative success, and it had led him to consider larger possibilities.
Luthor did not think small and did not like to share—not with
Ceridov, not with anyone. Therefore, he had to create a titanic
enemy that would dwarf even the Soviet Union.
“Communists may be opposed to all that we fundamentally
hold dear, Senator. They enslave their own people. They threaten
the American way. They want to deny us life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness. However, while we disagree on basic ideals,
even Communists are still human. Aliens, on the other hand, are a
far more dangerous menace.”
“Aliens!” McCarthy laughed and took another drink of his
Scotch. “You can’t be serious, Luthor.”
“Deadly serious. An alien already walks among us wearing a
blue suit and bright red cape, pretending to do good deeds and
lulling us into a false sense of security.”
“You’re referring to Superman?” McCarthy chuckled again.
“But he’s a hero. He saved America.”
“But for what purpose? Who knows where he’s really from
or what he wants? He told Lois Lane that he comes from a dead
planet called Krypton. Krypton? It sounds made up. Is it beyond
Mars? Past Alpha Centauri? In the Andromeda Galaxy?
“He won’t reveal his true name. How long has he lived among
us? Does he pay taxes? Is he even an American citizen, or is he

218

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

here illegally? Can we really take him at face value? Is that how
the House Un-American Activities Commission treats the hidden
Communists among us? Do you presume they are ﬁne human
beings who can’t mean us harm?”
McCarthy’s thick brows drew together. “I’ve never considered
that. We don’t actually have an immigration policy for . . . extrater­
restrial visitors. Even so, you can’t deny that Superman’s done
great work.”
“He took care of those Russian missiles too easily, if you ask
me, Senator. And the whole launch scenario—two Soviet generals
disobeying orders, both men now conveniently executed? Don’t
you think that sounds suspicious?”
“But the Soviet premier was in Metropolis at the time. He
would have died in the blast. He couldn’t have known anything
about it.”
“Unless he knew there was no real threat after all. Can we be
sure the entire event wasn’t some put-up job staged by Superman,
or maybe one of his alien comrades? Think about it! How do we
know there were even warheads on those missiles at all? He could
be a Communist agent, living among us in plain sight. Maybe the
Soviet Union is breeding ‘supermen’ of their own.”
McCarthy gasped at the idea.
Luthor continued. “Even worse, maybe Superman has his
own plans and means to pit us against the Russians. After we’ve
nearly annihilated each other, then he and his alien conquerors
can simply come in to pick up the pieces. What if there’s an entire
invasion coming?” He pushed aside his plate and leaned close. The
other man now appeared very concerned by these new and deeply
disturbing ideas. With his paranoid nature, McCarthy seemed to
believe that everything made perfect sense.
“Senator, you’ve seen Superman’s powers yourself. What if he

ENEMIES & ALLIES

219

decides to turn against us? Then where will we be?” He sat back
and started to eat his salad. “I promise you, when the aliens do
come—and I’m convinced they will—we’d better be ready for
them.”
Luthor measured his satisfaction by the level of alarm that
showed on Joseph McCarthy’s ashen face.

Chapter 40

ABOVE TH E EARTH

RESI DENT EISEN HOWER HAD ENTRUSTED H I M WITH TH E

protection of America, and Kal-El took his job seriously. He
p
needed to do more. Clark Kent asked for a few days off from the
Daily Planet, ostensibly to visit his mother in Kansas. But he had
other plans.
Stopping in Smallville before he got down to his real work, he
handed the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Martha Kent for
safekeeping. She had tears in her eyes. “I wish your father could
have been alive to see this. Oh, I was so proud when I watched
you on TV, though the reception was a little spotty. What was the
president like in person?”
Martha had baked a cherry pie this time, her best ever, and he
chatted with her as he tucked away a second piece along with a tall
glass of milk. “I’m going to need the energy, Ma, since I’ve got a lot
of work ahead of me.”
Then—as Kal-El instead of Clark Kent—he sprang into the
sky, became part of the wind, and soared above the Earth to
undertake a thorough surveillance behind the Iron Curtain. He
ﬂew across Europe to East Germany, then continued north and

ENEMIES & ALLIES

221

east toward Leningrad, passing over restricted Soviet airspace. He
crisscrossed the sky, not caring who saw his red and blue blur. In
fact, he wanted to let the Communists know he was keeping an eye
on them with his super-vision.
He studied the activities of the Soviet military, noting the
movement of their troops, ﬂying over the missile silos, all prominently marked with red stars. With Sputnik circling Earth, Kal-El
was certain their scientists were already working on a much more
sophisticated satellite that would carry high-resolution cameras to
photograph secret installations like Area 51. Fortunately, the U.S.
also had new jet aircraft in development, including high-altitude
spy planes. But no camera—no matter how sophisticated—could
match Kal-El’s vision. It was his duty to keep an eye on whatever
mischief the enemy might be planning.
As he raced over a Soviet industrial city adjacent to a military
base, he saw the open scars of mines, smelters, smokestacks
belching black clouds into the sky. A squadron of MiG-19 ﬁghters
chased after him, their engines hurling the aircraft forward at
incredible speeds, breaking the sound barrier, pursuing him at
Mach 1.2. But he was too fast for them. Kal-El laughed as he
streaked ahead across the steppes, leaving them far behind.
Finally, when he reached the Siberian wilderness, he discovered
one isolated complex that worried him greatly. Hundreds of acres
of thick forest had been blown down, knocked ﬂat as though a
titanic shock wave had spread out in a circle like ripples in a pond.
The only thing he could imagine capable of unleashing so much
destruction was a hydrogen bomb.
Naturally, the Soviets would test their most powerful nuclear
weapons in isolated Siberia, while the U.S. detonated their bombs
in the empty Nevada desert or on vacant South Paciﬁc atolls.
Focusing his vision, he saw a large circular crater surrounded

222

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

by fences, barracks buildings, a camp, even the containment
building and cooling tower of a small nuclear reactor. People were
tiny moving dots, and he discerned armed guards watching groups
of enslaved workers. One of the infamous Soviet gulags! The labor
crews had turned the crater into some kind of quarry, removing
residue from the explosion or impact, excavating . . . what? A
large metal dome covered the bottom of the quarry, its thick plates
reﬂecting the hazy sunlight, hiding the real secret from prying
eyes.
Suspecting sinister activities, Kal-El squinted his eyes to use
his penetrating X-ray vision, but his glance reﬂected back. He
could not see through the metal, no matter how hard he pushed.
The entire dome must be lined with lead, he thought. Radiation
shielding? For the Soviets to go to such great lengths to hide their
activities, he had no doubt that the dome must contain something
threatening.
He needed to ﬁnd out what it was.
Kal-El swooped down to land on top of the dome that covered
the bottom of the pit. The gulag guards spied him immediately,
and shots rang out from their AK-47s. Several shots struck Kal-El
in the back and shoulder, but he brushed them aside as though
they were gnats. Bullets ricocheted, leaving silver impact stars
on the metallic dome. He knifed his hand into the hemispheri­
cal shell, broke the seam of the metal plates, ripped the sheeting,
and cracked open the dome like an Easter egg to expose what was
inside.
Suddenly an emerald glow bathed his face, a sickly luminescence
that seeped upward like a plague. Excavated and exposed at the
base of the crater lay a jagged boulder of green mineral half-buried
in the dirt. A strange form of radiation streamed upward.
Back at Luthor’s mansion, a much smaller fragment of this green

ENEMIES & ALLIES

223

rock had been enough to bring him to his knees. What lay beneath
him now was thousands of times larger and more powerful.
Kal-El tried to cling to the edge of the dome, but his muscles
had turned to water. His vision swam before him, then went
black. With limp hands, he tried to keep his balance, tried to crawl
away, but he slipped into the gap that he himself had made in the
lead-lined dome. He couldn’t breathe, couldn’t think.
Totally drained, he slid down through the hole.
The Soviet guards continued to shoot, but he no longer cared.
Unconscious, Kal-El fell to the bottom of the meteorite quarry, but
he felt nothing when he struck the ground.

Chapter 41

WAYN E MANOR

HILE CLARK KENT WAS AWAY IN KANSAS, LOIS WENT TO

Gotham City to interview Bruce Wayne. One question
G
was foremost in her mind: Would Bruce help her dig up dirt on
Lex Luthor, or was the playboy millionaire just as corrupt and
narcissistic as his fellow industrialist? She intended to hit him with
some tough questions.
Bruce received her graciously in the imposing manor house.
He offered her a choice of beverages, suggesting trendy new
cocktails, the names of which he must surely have made up himself;
he was already sipping a martini-like drink he called a Vesper.
When she merely asked for coffee, the attendant butler seemed
at ﬁrst surprised, then pleased. “As you wish, Miss Lane.” Before
long, he returned carrying a heavy silver coffee service that wafted
a rich aroma. The coffee was so full-bodied she could almost
believe Alfred had rushed down to Colombia himself, picked the
beans, roasted them, and hurried back in time to make her this
pot. It was the sort of thing Bruce Wayne was expected to do for
his guests.
In the meantime, the millionaire suavely entertained her, not

ENEMIES & ALLIES

225

the least embarrassed when she rebuffed his charm and asked to
get down to business. Lois wasn’t impressed by wealth or the airs
of the rich and powerful. This man might fancy himself to be like
James Bond from those books he read, but she could tell it was all
an act. He wasn’t a real hero, like Superman.
“Mr. Wayne, I have been researching a story on LuthorCorp
and its CEO, and I’m convinced something shifty is going on. Lex
Luthor’s got a lot of disgruntled employees and a lot of question­
able business dealings.”
He raised his dark eyebrows at her candor. “Disgruntled
employees aren’t the most reliable of sources, Miss Lane.”
“My source was murdered shortly after she spoke with me.
That tells me that Luthor must not have wanted her talking.”
“Wouldn’t it have made more sense if he’d silenced her before
she spilled the beans?” He took another sip of his drink. “You’ll
need solid proof if you’re going to accuse Lex Luthor.”
“That’s where you can help me.” She took a long sip of coffee,
which tasted as delicious as it smelled.
“Believe me, since Lex Luthor is my primary rival, if dirt were
to be found, I would already have it.”
“And would you give it to me for my story?”
He just looked at her.
She pressed on. “In recent years, Luthor secured far more than
his share of lucrative defense contracts. But you just turned the
tables on him, didn’t you? Luthor can’t be terribly pleased with
Wayne Enterprises these days.”
“The contract-bidding business is a competition among giants
of industry. Surely you don’t mean to imply that Wayne Enterprises was underhanded in getting those contracts?” He displayed
a hint of a wry smile, and for that she liked him a little better.
“I think it’s more likely that LuthorCorp used dirty tricks to

226

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

win the earlier bids. It’s Luthor I’m interested in, Mr. Wayne, but
let’s look at your own company. You appear to be taking much
more personal responsibility recently for the day-to-day affairs of
Wayne Enterprises. What’s changed?”
“My father built this company from the ground up. When I
discovered that some of my directors didn’t quite share the same
vision as he had, it was necessary to make a few changes to the
organizational chart.” He casually drained his martini glass, got
up, and poured himself a second drink from a silver shaker.
“That’s a quite a lot of housecleaning. Those men were en­
rusted to run Wayne Enterprises for years while you were out
sowing your wild oats.”
Pacing, he gave her another mysterious smile, which raised all
sorts of questions in Lois’s mind. She wasn’t sure she wanted to
know what this dashing young man had been up to during the
years he’d been gone from Gotham City.
She continued, holding up her reporter’s notepad and scribbling
shorthand with her metal pen. Now to get to the meat of the story.
“Four of your former board members have been found dead, and
the other ﬁve men have disappeared. Rather suspicious, wouldn’t
you say? The readers of the Daily Planet want to know your
thoughts on this. Any comment?”
Showing great consternation, Bruce took a seat in a club
chair and set his martini glass aside, no longer interested in the
drink. “All right, Miss Lane, I’ll give you a juicy story for your
paper. As it turns out, I discovered that most of my board of
directors had been bribed, blackmailed, or otherwise coerced—
by Lex Luthor. Over the years, they’ve been conducting corporate
espionage, providing LuthorCorp with unfair advantages on the
technological front, slipping him details about contract bids we
were about to submit.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

227

“Once I caught them red-handed, I had to replace them with
men I trusted.” He regarded her intently. “And as soon as Luthor
no longer had his spies at Wayne Enterprises, he began losing
contracts. We won because we’re a better company, Miss Lane,
with better people. And we produce a better product. On a fair
playing ﬁeld, Wayne Enterprises not only competes, we win.”
Amazed that he’d revealed so much to her, Lois was writing as
fast as she could. “Haven’t you just admitted a personal motive for
murder? People could assume this was a revenge killing. And the
ﬁve men still missing—”
“On the contrary; I had already taken care of the problem, and
I am shocked and outraged by these deaths. When I transferred
those men, my actions were entirely aboveboard, and I had them
where I could prevent them from doing any further damage to my
company. I had nothing further to gain by their deaths. I can only
hope the missing ones are safe and unharmed. Maybe they’ve gone
into hiding for their own safety?”
Bruce did not seem unduly alarmed. “I should point out that I’ve
already turned over my evidence of their malfeasance to Captain
James Gordon at the Gotham City Police Department. You are wel­
come to interview Captain Gordon as well. I have nothing to hide.”
Lois wasn’t sure she believed the glib statement. “I’ll check it
out. Thank you.”
He looked closely at her. “You might ask yourself whether
Luthor didn’t have more to gain by keeping those men silent.
Extortion is a serious crime. Falling victim to it is not. If one of
those men had pointed ﬁngers back at LuthorCorp . . .”
The butler appeared so silently that he startled Lois. He made
the quietest throat-clearing sound, a polite interruption, but Bruce
reacted as though a ﬁre alarm had gone off. “Yes, Alfred, what
is it?”

228

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

“A rather dramatic story on the television set, Master Bruce.”
The butler looked dutifully over to where a round-tubed set was
built into the wood-paneled wall. He ﬂicked a switch, turned a
knob, and stepped back as the tubes began to hum and warm up.
“Miss Lane will ﬁnd it of interest as well.”
Bruce turned to the gray screen, and Lois waited impatiently for
an image to appear out of the shadows of the cathode ray tubes.
Of course, Bruce Wayne had one of the new color televisions—
rich boys and their extravagances. She had seen a color TV only
once before; considering how expensive they were, she doubted
the gadget would ever catch on.
Finally the image sharpened, and she saw a gruff Russian
spokesman wearing a fur-lined uniform. The picture was grainy
and the color shifted as though the red, green, and blue hues were
not adjusted properly. The man spoke in Russian, raising a ﬁst.
His face was red with anger.
The disembodied voice of a translator came over the track.
“. . . for all the world to see the illegal activities of the United States
of America. We have captured a blatant American spy. We have
footage of this man as he ﬂew over restricted Soviet airspace, as he
made a threatening approach to Leningrad and then attempted to
attack our defensive bases.”
Lois gasped when the camera shifted to show a battered
dark-haired man being dragged forward. In spite of the TV set’s
poorly adjusted color, there was no mistaking the blue uniform,
the red cape, or the bold yellow S emblazoned on his chest.
“Now all the countries of the world can see the illegal aggression
of the United States. This prisoner will be dealt with by Soviet
justice. We have captured your Superman—and, frankly, we are
not impressed.”
Superman could barely stand, shackled by wrist and ankle

ENEMIES & ALLIES

229

manacles. More lengths of thick chains were draped over his
shoulders. The Man of Steel looked on the verge of collapse. His
face was grayish, weary, completely defeated.
Lois was stunned and sickened to see him like that, and her
heart began pounding. Her mind raced, and she was desperate to
think of some way to help. Her knuckles were white as she clutched
her notepad. It took her a moment to realize that Bruce Wayne was
staring just as intently, just as full of disbelief.
A news commentator broke in, Edward R. Murrow himself.
“The White House has issued an immediate statement. President
Eisenhower denies that Superman was on any ofﬁcial mission for
the U.S. government. Whether diplomatic efforts will free this
greatest American hero, or whether he will be left in Communist
clutches, remains to be seen. Stay tuned to this channel for breaking
news.”
A test pattern brieﬂy came onto the screen; then the original
footage of a chained Superman being dragged before the cameras
was repeated. Lois turned away, tears stinging her eyes.
Bruce said crisply, “That will do, Alfred. Turn it off.”
Looking extremely agitated, he couldn’t seem to get Lois out of
Wayne Manor quickly enough. She was only too happy to oblige.
“Thanks for the interview, Mr. Wayne. I . . . I have to be going,
anyway.” She rushed out faster than Alfred could show her the
door.

Chapter 42

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

FFTER TH E HAPLESS OAF BUCH H EI M HAD REVEALED WHY

the death ray failed to ﬁre, Luthor immediately returned
to the Caribbean island base. His technicians had studied the
malfunctioning systems, but since those men did not possess his
genius, they couldn’t see or ﬁx such an esoteric problem. Minions
could be counted on only to a certain extent, after all. Luthor
would repair the damage personally and get the beams working
again.
Redesigning the Wayne Enterprises components took only an
hour, and he easily completed the work during the ﬂight in his
private jet from Metropolis to the island. He gave the hand-drawn
blueprints to the technicians, and they modiﬁed the devices
as instructed, then tested them to verify that each component
performed to its proper speciﬁcations.
Now it was time for another test ﬁring, and this one would
nourish the seeds of paranoia he had planted in Senator
McCarthy’s mind. Even General Ceridov wouldn’t know what
was happening.
After giving instructions to his control-room operators, Luthor

ENEMIES & ALLIES

231

stood outside in the tropical sunshine next to the gridwork towers,
his back to the hodgepodge of modern buildings and ancient
fort structures. The swiveling dish generators and antenna beam
projectors pointed toward the sky at a new, and unseen, target in
space.
As the moment approached, he felt the thrumming energy,
sensed the crackle of static in the air. He imagined the power
levels rising inside the island’s reactor, ramping up to peak energy
output. Hurled toward the sky, that destructive power would carve
a tunnel through the atmosphere all the way to orbit, toward one
tiny blip no larger than a basketball with long antennae.
He hit the transmit button on his Handie-Talkie and said,
“Commence ﬁring.” He shaded his brow and watched, squinting
his eyes in the bright sun.
When the projectors discharged, the gout of energy sounded like
a bull elephant stampeding into the air. Serenely passing overhead,
Sputnik continued alone in orbit—until Luthor’s beam vaporized
the satellite in an instant. Its monotonous bleeping fell silent.
Neither Soviets nor Americans could have seen exactly what
happened, but they would soon note that the signal had abruptly
vanished. Now that the suggestion had been planted in his mind,
McCarthy would do the rest of the work for him. Sputnik must
have been destroyed by aliens!
Satisﬁed that his energy weapons did function as expected,
Luthor was ready to ratchet the world’s fears to a fever pitch. The
Cold War was no longer the only threat that mankind faced. Yes,
this was a very good day.

I N S I D E TH E CO NTRO L C E NTE R, H I S TE C H N I C I A N S C H E E R E D

with wild abandon—a refreshing change from their previous

232

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

test, after which they’d all believed civilization itself was going
to end.
The red telephone on his desk rang like an alarm bell. Only
Ceridov could reach him here, and Luthor was surprised the KGB
general would respond so quickly. How could he already know
Sputnik had been destroyed? How had he put the pieces together
and known to call here? But Luthor couldn’t imagine any other
reason why the Soviet ofﬁcer would contact him now. Neverthe­
less, still pleased with himself, he picked up the receiver with a
smile.
Instead of bellowing in anger, though, Ceridov sounded
immensely smug—an unexpected turn. “Ah, comrade Luthor!
You are a difﬁcult man to track down.”
“Intentionally so.”
“But you will be glad I found you. I have obtained a ﬁne
specimen that will interest you. I can solve our mutual problem.
He has been, how do you call it, quite a ‘pain in the shoulder’ for
us both.”
“What are you talking about?” Luthor was in no mood for
riddles during what should have been his moment of triumph.
“Are you unable to receive television broadcasts on your island?
Can you not listen to the radio news?”
Luthor snapped his ﬁngers for one of the techs to turn on a large
wall screen, adjusting the channel to pick up a television broadcast
originating from Miami. Within moments, he was viewing the
footage of Superman beaten and in chains.
Astounded, Luthor stared at the laughably impotent super hero.
Ceridov had captured Superman! To analyze, even dissect the
self-proclaimed alien—here was a chance Luthor could not afford
to pass up. “What have you found out so far? Does he wear a jetpack
beneath his cape? Is his suit made of some impenetrable material?”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

233

“He carries no obvious technological enhancements in his
uniform or on his person. Your ‘hero’ is as weak as a kitten.” The
general snorted. “I used to drown useless kittens when I was a
boy.”
“Well, don’t drown this one until I’ve had a chance to put my
medical researchers on the problem.” Luthor couldn’t control the
eagerness in his voice.
“Our Soviet eugenics program can learn much from studying
him, too. However, because you are my comrade and partner, we
can perhaps share this information—for a price.”
“Money is no object if you give me access to Superman.”
“Oh, not money, comrade. Now that I have seen your island, I
want a small nuclear reactor like your own.”
Luthor frowned. “You have your own reactor in Ariguska.”
“Soviet scientists claim this modiﬁed model is the best we can
produce. Yours is better. With efﬁcient atomic power, I can run my
entire gulag without constant delays and equipment failures. After
you send your men to build me new reactor, I will let you interro­
gate and torment Superman.”
Luthor didn’t have to think about his answer. “I agree to the
terms.” When he hung up the red phone, he couldn’t stop smiling.
Yes indeed, this was a very good day.

Chapter 43

TH E CAVE

VEN WITH TH E ADDITIONAL LIGHTS AN D CATHODE-RAY

tubes, shadows always lingered in the Cave. Bruce hunched
over the monitor screens, watching several news reports at the
same time. All of them replayed the same footage of Superman,
barely able to stand, weighted down by chains, his Communist
captors pushing him along like a whipped dog.
He muttered to himself, “He’s really gotten himself into a mess,
hasn’t he?”
Alfred had unrolled charts on the large map table so that Bruce
could try to pinpoint the source of the damning Soviet news
broadcast. “I am familiar with that preoccupied look on your face,
Master Bruce. Superman needs your help.”
Bruce glanced at another screen. President Eisenhower had
called an immediate news conference, demanding that the USSR
release their captive American citizen . . . but no one could actually
prove Superman was an American citizen, since he claimed to be
an alien from a planet called Krypton.
“I haven’t decided whether or not to rescue him.” His voice was
distant.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

235

The butler was surprised. “What are your concerns about him,
sir?”
Bruce looked up. “I’m not sure I know where his loyalties lie.
At ﬁrst I thought Superman worked for LuthorCorp, but I can’t
convince myself of that. Even the circumstantial evidence I’ve seen
is contradictory. I don’t know why he was in the Area Fifty-one
hangar. He may just be an amateur doing these heroics for his own
reasons, saving people because it makes him feel good.”
Alfred made a noncommittal sound. “Hmm, an amateur
vigilante—that reminds me of someone else I know.”
“I know why I do it, Alfred. I made a promise on the grave of
my parents that I would rid this city of the evil that took their lives.
It’s personal for me.”
“Then perhaps you should ask him the next time you see him,
sir—if there is a next time.” The butler turned his attention back
to a monitor screen.
Bruce had chosen to ﬁght crime on a personal level, secretly and
in the dark, not grandstanding as Superman did. He had vowed to
save people by squashing the petty criminals who caused real harm,
like termites chewing away at the foundation of a stable society.
When he learned they were in danger, he had even quietly
protected the remaining members of his board of directors, those
men who had been threatened and blackmailed into cooperating
with Luthor. He had suspected—correctly—that Luthor would
try to eliminate them after they no longer proved to be useful. But
Bruce did not want to have any part—however tangential—in their
deaths. The ﬁve surviving members who had “vanished” were,
in fact, hiding under assumed identities, all arranged by Bruce
himself. He had saved them from Luthor’s assassins, whether or
not they deserved that mercy. And he would ﬁnd some way to
make Luthor pay for the others.

236

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

His own parents had been killed by a small-time thief, one
weak and desperate man who, for whatever reason, felt entitled to
take someone else’s money rather than earn his own. That thief,
that gunman, that murderer had left a six-year-old orphan there
in the alley.
Superman, though, rescued sinking passenger ships, prevented
aircraft from crashing, saved dozens of people at a time from
burning buildings . . . even prevented an all-out nuclear war. Those
Soviet missiles would have killed millions of parents, not just two
in an alley behind a theater in Park Row. Perhaps, Bruce thought,
he should look through both ends of the telescope to see the
micro- and the macrocosm.
Superman had shown his potential, his dedication. He could
certainly be an ally in the war against crime. But how did he do the
things he did? One way to ﬁnd out.
Bruce squared his shoulders. “Obviously I have to rescue him,
Alfred. Is the plane ready?”
Unrufﬂed, the butler walked to an expanded grotto and, with
a melodramatic ﬂourish, yanked off the tarp that covered a sleek,
angular object crouched in its parking circle like a black-armored
pterodactyl. “All fueled up and ready to go. Fluids topped off,
engines calibrated.” The butler smiled. “I managed to take care of
that before bringing you your dinner last night.”
“That was a good dinner, Alfred. Please give my compliments
to the kitchen staff.”
The batlike plane was an exceptional thing, breathtaking
in its modern conﬁguration, unlike any other aircraft that had
ever ﬂown. The texture of its hull would confuse standard radar
tracers, making the fast-ﬂying plane seem to be a cloud, a ﬂock
of birds, or some other atmospheric disturbance. This design was
so cutting-edge that nobody at Wayne Enterprises guessed it had

ENEMIES & ALLIES

237

ever gone beyond the concept stage. This aircraft was far more
advanced than even the new-design jets now rolling off the Wayne
Enterprises production lines.
Alfred raised the tinted glass canopy. “Very spacious, Master
Bruce. You will be able to accommodate a certain passenger.”
“He should be able to ﬂy himself—he’s done it enough times.”
“Judging by the images on the television, sir, he doesn’t seem
capable of walking across the street.”
“Good point, Alfred. Is the cycle loaded aboard?”
“I wouldn’t let you leave home without it, sir. I had hoped
you would take the Batplane out on at least one test ﬂight before
putting it into service.”
“‘Batplane’?”
The butler simply raised his eyebrows.
Bruce climbed into the cockpit. “This is the test ﬂight.”
Alfred walked around the dark aircraft, performing a preﬂight
inspection. “I presume you’ll also be requiring your suit? It’s freshly
cleaned, pressed, and on board.”
Bruce could never tell when the acerbic butler was truly joking.
He ﬂicked on the control switches, warming up the systems.
“One last thing, Master Bruce. Now that Superman is in chains
and on the other side of the world, do you intend to become the
country’s new hero?”
Bruce frowned. “No, Alfred. If I wanted the spotlight, I’d wear
a bright blue and red outﬁt. That’s not my style.”

Chapter 44

ARIGUSK A GU LAG

EAK. KAL-EL HAD N EVER FELT SO WEAK, SO CLOSE TO

death, or so confused about what was happening to him.
Gravity itself seemed to drag him down. Every breath required a
laborious effort. He thought he might be dying.
Chained to the steep rock wall near the bottom of the Siberian
quarry, he hung like a rag doll in the late afternoon shadows.
The smashed-open lead dome no longer hid the central meteorite
mass, and the green light emanating from the mineral debris at
the crater’s base offered no warmth whatsoever. It felt like acid
on his skin. The sunlight was only a watery yellow glow through
unyielding high gray clouds. He was so cold. Constant shivers
racked his body.
General Ceridov stood before Kal-El, black obsidian stars
prominent on his epaulets, his knuckles braced on his hips. His
grin displayed square teeth stained by the expensive American
cigarettes he bought on the black market. “American news media
has made a hero out of you, but I see another propagandist lie. I
am so disappointed—you are no Superman!” He slapped Kal-El

ENEMIES & ALLIES

239

with a vicious blow that knocked his head to the side. A trickle of
blood ran from his lip.
Blood! He had never bled before.
Around him in the quarry, the pathetic gulag prisoners slaved
away with pickaxes, shovels, and metal carts, chipping fragments
of the green mineral from the main mass. The unprotected gulag
workers ﬁlled metal carts that were emptied into a storehouse of
meteor fragments. For what purpose? Kal-El pitied them, even in
the face of his own disaster.
The eerie emerald radiation continued to debilitate him. General
Ceridov seemed to have ﬁgured out that Kal-El could not recover
so long as he remained here in the quarry. He strained against the
chains but could barely pull them taut, let alone rip the bolts from
the stone wall.
The KGB general punched Kal-El in the stomach with the force
of a cannonball. “Great American icon! My weakest slave here
could beat you to a pulp.”
Ceridov strode along the gravel path to where two gaunt
workers huddled in tattered Soviet military uniforms. Still playing
the bully, he grabbed them both by their collars, one in each hand,
and yanked them to their feet. “Do you see these men, Superman?
These are great military leaders of Soviet Union: generals Endovik
and Dubrov. They are the ones who launched missiles at your
country, and now they pay the price for it.”
The two beaten men glowered at Ceridov, but having been
directly exposed to the intense meteorite radiation for many
weeks, they both looked withered, their skin bruised, their bones
beginning to warp and twist. As he tormented them, a ﬂash of
green light shone in their eyes, which drew a puzzled frown from
Ceridov. The fallen generals looked as sick as Kal-El felt, yet he

240

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

saw something else at work here, an alteration of their body’s
chemistry even worse than what was happening to him.
Though he knew what Endovik and Dubrov had done, Kal-El
would have broken his chains and protected the two pathetic men.
This was truly inhuman treatment. At the moment, though, he
could hardly lift his head. He couldn’t even save himself.
As guards came forward to whip the two scapegoats, one of
the defeated generals, Endovik, collapsed to the rocky ground,
writhing. Veins stood out in his arms and neck—veins that pulsed
a decidedly greenish hue. His companion, Dubrov, whose face also
twisted and contorted with the pain of transformation, began to
snarl, ﬂexing his ﬁ ngers.
Ceridov shouted in alarm, obviously trying to cover his fear
with a veneer of anger. “Guards! Drag them to the holding bunker.
Lock them up with the rest of the monsters.”
Swiping a hand over his oiled reddish hair, Ceridov turned back
to Kal-El, struggling to regain his composure. “I expected those
men to last longer before succumbing to the contamination, but
the concentration is very powerful here. Perhaps it will happen to
you, too.”
As the struggling, writhing prisoners were hauled off, Kal-El
watched them, unable to comprehend what was happening.
“Once transformation begins, they survive for only a few days,”
Ceridov assured him. “After we isolate the factors that make them
into such brutes, we can adapt that knowledge to our own eugenics
program. Soon we will have Soviet Superman.”
Ceridov hefted a chunk of the glowing green mineral and
waved it in front of Kal-El’s face. The green light burned him, and
the rough surface of the quarry wall at his back seemed to bite
through his cape, his uniform, into his skin.
“I do not know why meteorite takes away your powers.” The

ENEMIES & ALLIES

241

general frowned at the mineral specimen in his palm. “Your
countryman Lex Luthor has medical research laboratories and
scientists eager to dissect you—but only when I am ﬁ nished.”
Holding the emerald rock, he swung his ﬁst, smashing Kal-El on
the chin with it. “And I am nowhere close to ﬁnished.”

Chapter 45

TH E DAILY PLAN ET

O I S HAD A PE RSONAL STAKE I N PROTECTI NG SU PE RMAN .

After all, he had saved her, and she owed him. No, there
was more to it than that, she realized, more than simply canceling
debts and evening the score. As much as she had been ﬁghting the
idea, Lois realized she loved Superman. Though they had met only
a few times in person, it was enough for her to know how she felt.
Really felt.
And now . . . if only she could ﬁgure out how to help him.
While the world listened to the provocative accusations made by
the Soviet premier, Lois concentrated on the idea that Lex Luthor
had always carried a personal grudge against Superman, and she
had uncovered hints of the man’s secret trips to the USSR. To her,
there were many nagging, unexplained questions about the launch
of the Soviet missiles, not to mention Luthor’s covert Caribbean
island base.
No doubt in her mind. She was convinced that Luthor had
something to do with the crisis.
Since she couldn’t go to Siberia, she decided to approach the
problem in a roundabout way that no other reporter was investi­

ENEMIES & ALLIES

243

gating: the LuthorCorp angle again. Maybe she could pull a few
surprises out of her hat. Maybe she could help Superman after
all.
She was willing to bet her career on it. She couldn’t think of
anything more important. And there was no time to waste.
Nevertheless, Perry didn’t want to hear her theory. “Everyone’s
chasing that story, Lois—which is exactly why I’m giving you a
different assignment.”
“Chief, Superman is my story! I did the ﬁrst interview. I
should be—”
“While the whole world was in a panic about Superman,
something blasted Sputnik out of orbit. No earthbound technol­
ogy could have accomplished that: The Soviets wouldn’t know
how to do it, and the U.S. doesn’t have a weapon with that range.
Normally the Russians would have blamed Superman . . . but
thanks to them, he’s got a perfect alibi. I want you to ﬁnd out what
did it.”
“Why not send Clark? When will he be back from visiting his
mother?”
“Kent hasn’t checked in for days, which is yet another worry. I
need someone on this story now, Lois.” He cut her off before she
could suggest another reporter. “Since the attack on the satellite,
Senator McCarthy is raving about the alien menace more than
ever. Now, I’m no fan of McCarthy.” Perry looked as though he
wanted to spit. “However, if we’re being watched by aliens—
Martians or Venusians or whatever creatures come out of those
pulps Olsen reads—what would be a better target than our ﬁrst
orbiting satellite? We can’t bury this story, Lois.”
Lois automatically assumed Luthor was involved with the
destruction of Sputnik, too. There was little he wouldn’t do
to achieve his aims, but even he couldn’t blast a satellite out of

244

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

orbit . . . could he? She feigned interest in the hopes that she could
use this assignment to get to Superman in some way. “So that’s my
angle, Chief?”
“The Daily Planet is sending you down to Redstone Arsenal in
Huntsville, Alabama. I’ve arranged for you to have direct access to
our rocket boys. I want an interview and a feature on von Braun
himself. Get them to show you around. Wear a short skirt if you
have to, show a little leg.”
Scowling, Lois leaned across Perry’s desk and thrust a ﬁnger in
his face. “I don’t need pointers from you on how to get a story. Any
pointers.”
Perry toyed with the chewed end of his cigar, twirling it in his
ﬁngertips. “No, you don’t, but I do need to keep you on track about
which story you’re covering. Have von Braun speculate on what
could possibly have blown up Sputnik. Cover America’s efforts
to build a Redstone version of those R-7 missiles the Commies
launched against us. We’re Americans, and we have American
know-how. We built the atomic bomb—we can do anything.
When are we going to have the capability to launch a compara­
ble strike against the USSR? Get down to Metropolis airport
and board the next ﬂight to Huntsville, or wherever the closest
airport is. I’m sure you can talk somebody into putting you on a
plane.”
Lois was about to rebel against Perry’s unexpected fervor, but
another plan was already forming in her mind. “Fine. I’m on it,
Chief.”
Interviewing Wernher von Braun sounded like an interest­
ing assignment; however, there were so many other important
things to deal with. Superman captured and held prisoner by the
Communists, the loss of Sputnik, Senator McCarthy’s railing

ENEMIES & ALLIES

245

about an alien threat. . . . And Lex Luthor had a secret island base.
How could he not be at the bottom of it all?
At last she had the opportunity to sneak off to the Caribbean,
make a little side trip from Huntsville to Havana. Like the good
reporter she was, Lois Lane would ﬁnd her story—and rescue the
man she loved.

Chapter 46

SIBE RIA

H E BATP LA N E SCYTH E D TH RO U G H TH E N I G HT S KY,

th
theoretically
undetectable by Soviet radar. The glowing red
lights of multiple gauges illuminated the cockpit, his dark suit, and
his reinforced cowl.
Heading north at top speed but mindful of the fuel reserves,
he crossed over Canada and Greenland, and took a short polar
arc before dropping down into Siberia. He was conﬁdent of his
destination.
The only time he had glimpsed weakness in Superman was on
the shore across the lake from Luthor’s mansion, when the Man
of Steel had been exposed to the glowing green mineral. Luthor
had obviously been running tests on the sample, intrigued by its
properties and potential. The meteorite display had been labeled
“Ariguska.”
In the USSR.
In Siberia.
That had to be where the Soviets were holding Superman.
He threw the plane into a steep dive, streaking barely above
the tops of the dense Siberian forest. It was vastly different from

ENEMIES & ALLIES

247

his little Wayne Enterprises private jet. He was sure he hadn’t
been detected, and he doubted anyone in the Ariguska gulag
would be watching for a solo raider to free their captive. Due to
the complicated politics, even the U.S. Special Forces would never
have received such swift orders to mount a rescue mission.
He, on the other hand, was just one person with one goal. And
a great arsenal of weapons and technology. He could make his
own decisions and do what large governments couldn’t, in much
the same way as he tackled criminals the Gotham City Police
Department couldn’t catch by conventional means.
When the Batplane’s navigation systems informed him that he
was within a few miles of his destination, he began to search for a
place to land. He found a clear ridgetop and circled to survey the
area with the craft’s nose-cone spotlights.
With takeoff-and-landing technology that was similar—but
generations superior—to what was used on an aircraft carrier,
without the capture tether, the sleek plane needed very little cleared
area on which to set down. As he approached Ariguska, the forested
lands gave way to desolation. Whole swaths of primeval forest had
been ﬂattened by the impact decades ago, and the regrowth was
comprised of stunted and unnatural foliage. Interesting.
He returned to the ridgetop for his ﬁnal approach, deployed
the engine scoops, and blasted with reverse jets and undercar­
riage thrusters. The Batplane slewed on the loose rocks, tore up
fallen and bent tree trunks, and ﬁnally skidded to a stop. A perfect
landing, except for a few scratches and scrapes on the fuselage.
Flipping toggles on the control panel, he raised the canopy and
extended a ramp from the undercarriage to deploy his motorcycle,
which was all fueled up and ready to go.
He climbed onto the cycle, started the engine, and put it into
silent stealth mode. Forgoing headlights, he powered up the night

248

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

scope and raced off down the ridge, dodging downed trees and
rough terrain. His dark cape ﬂapped behind him in the wind.
As Batman, he used his cape for protection, disguise, and operatic
intimidation. Superman, on the other hand, wore his bright red
cape for . . . what? Just to show off? Color coordination?
The cycle’s thick tires grabbed the barren ground, making
maneuvering easy and acceleration smooth as he dodged dirty
patches of snow. He saw only shadows as he raced along, keeping
his head down and protected by the windscreen. He didn’t have
far to go.
The forest encircling the camp and the crater was more than
just stunted; it was mutated, horriﬁc. The trees were appallingly
twisted and distorted, their monstrous branches knotted and
gnarled like some alien plant creature from a sci-ﬁ pulp magazine
cover. The pines themselves seemed to be screaming in agony,
branches extended like clawing ﬁngers, roots anchored in soil
ﬁlled with poisonous residue that had seeped into the ground.
But he wasn’t afraid of trees. The Soviet guards would give
him enough trouble. Olive-uniformed men walked brisk patrols
around the camp perimeter in the cold night. Their heads were
covered with fur ushankas, and they rested Kalashnikovs on the
shoulders of their thick jackets.
As he approached, slinking forward in the darkness, he pulled
out two of the small drug-tipped Bat-shuriken. His aim had to be
perfect, since he saw only a small area of exposed skin that could
be nicked by the sharp points. The tiny ﬁnger-sized throwing bat
sliced through the air and struck the ﬁrst guard at the base of his
jaw. He cursed, slapping at his neck, no doubt complaining about
Siberian blackﬂies that could attack even in the cold of night. The
other guard chuckled—as a second shuriken whizzed past his
face. The ﬁrst guard crumpled from the paralytic-anesthetic, and

ENEMIES & ALLIES

249

his comrade ran toward him, shouting. Two more throwing bats
scythed the air, and one struck home. Shortly, the second guard
sprawled unconscious on the cold ground as well.
He dragged the two limp forms away from the searchlight beams
and relieved the unconscious men of their riﬂes and holstered
pistols, tossing the guns far into the twisted forest. He trussed and
gagged the men, then moved on.
The large work camp had ranks of barracks, a headquarters
building, and a concrete containment dome over a nuclear power
reactor, from which white coolant steam rose. Harsh lights shone
down, giving him few shadows for cover.
He took a mental inventory of his useful devices, which would
have made even James Bond proud. Moving cautiously, he slipped
around the site, peering into buildings to search for Superman. He
saw brutishly secure, thick-walled blockhouses with no windows
and heavily armored doors. Angry growls and pounding sounds
came from inside, and he noticed that even the armed guards
avoided those buildings. In the prisoners’ quarters he found
only stacked bunks that harbored gaunt workers asleep from exhaustion. The soldiers’ barracks were marginally more humane.
He didn’t see Superman anywhere.
The quarry itself was well lit with bright ﬂoodlights. Down in
the pit he spotted a small work crew toiling around the perimeter
of a half-dismantled dome, barely able to lift their heavy picks
and shovels. Only a few guards watched over them. At ﬁrst, it was
hard to understand why the Soviets would man a round-the-clock
excavation effort, but then it became clear that these particular
prisoners were being punished, forced to give up sleep, probably
forced to work until they dropped dead.
Scattered at the bottom of the crater lay chunks of the glowing
green rock—the same substance that had weakened Superman.

250

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

The dome must have been put in place to block the green radiation,
but now it was smashed.
Then he spotted the telltale blue and red costume, Superman
chained to the quarry wall like Prometheus, exposed to the
emerald glow. The conclusion was obvious: If the glowing mineral
deprived Superman of his powers, then holding him down in the
quarry was a perfect way to keep him incapacitated . . . maybe
even kill him.
Fortunately, Batman did not have the same vulnerabilities.
Staying low, he raced along the shadowed paths, descending into
the steep-walled pit. He switchbacked his way down the quarry
ledges, but there was altogether too much light for his comfort.
He slid down a steep gravel chute, making more noise than he
intended, and emerged with his suit covered with dust. He abruptly
ducked his cowled head as a bright spotlight glided over him, but
the darkness and dirt gave him enough cover. He had to stun two
more guards before he reached the bottom, where Superman was
chained.
Along the way, he primed and dropped a handful of tiny ﬂash
mines, small concussive devices that he could activate to confuse
pursuit. Though he hoped for the best, he didn’t expect to just
stroll out of here.
Finally, he reached Superman, who looked weary unto death.
“Wake up. Time to get out of here.”
Superman lifted his head heavily. The blue eyes soon focused,
and instant realization sprang into them. “What are you doing
here?” he said in a small, weak voice.
“What’s the matter—not used to having someone rescue you?”
He unsnapped one of the containers in his utility belt. “I’ve decided
to take a chance that you really are playing for the right team.”
He didn’t have time to break the chains or pick the locks, so

ENEMIES & ALLIES

251

he used a tiny insulated bottle, applied a line of potent ﬂuid more
devastating than hydroﬂuoric acid. Smoking and sizzling, the
metal acid burned through the manacles—and Superman was
free. He collapsed, slumping against the dark ﬁgure.
Draping one of Superman’s limp, blue-clad arms over his
shoulder, he propped up the other man and propelled them
both along as best he could. They had to keep out of sight of the
guards.
The downtrodden night crew of gulag slaves noticed them ﬁrst.
They let out wild cries, pointing, shouting incoherently. “They
want us to rescue them as well,” Superman said, still groggy.
Alerted by the shouting prisoners, the guards sounded the
alarm. Seeing the two costumed ﬁgures, they opened ﬁre. The
commotion drew the attention of the sentries in the towers, and
bright searchlights immediately swung down, freezing the two
men in a blinding glare.

Chapter 47

ARIGUSK A GU LAG

HOUGH FREED FROM TH E CHAI NS AN D SHACKLES, KAL-EL

st felt a crushing weight dragging him down. He could barely
sstill
stand, let alone ﬂy. And now the Soviet guards were shooting at
them.
As he staggered along, his cape dragging behind him like a wet
rag, Kal-El had to lean on Batman just to keep himself upright and
moving. His vision, which should have been able to project heat
beams or penetrating X-rays, now left him with only a blur.
Guards rushed out of the barracks, hastily grabbing their
Kalashnikovs. Deafening sirens pounded his skull. Batman ducked
from a renewed spray of gunﬁre and pulled Kal-El into the meager
shelter of some large rocks that had slid down the quarry bank.
Bullets stitched the ground around them, pockmarking the wide
gravel path. Several ricocheted loudly from the boulders.
“I hope . . . you’ve got a better plan than this,” Kal-El managed
to croak.
“I’ll improvise.” Batman grabbed at his utility belt and hurled a
handful of small spheres that exploded on impact, releasing clouds

ENEMIES & ALLIES

253

of noxious purple smoke. The Soviet soldiers opened ﬁre, and
bullets punched through the curling wisps of gas.
“Get away from . . . green rock,” Kal-El said. “If my strength
returns, I can help.”
“I wasn’t counting on your powers. I’ve got it under control.”
From the quarry’s edge, another group of riﬂemen shot down at
them. Kal-El tried to shelter his unexpected rescuer with his own
body, but now that he was without his powers, he didn’t know if
he was bulletproof. Nevertheless, his uniform was made of fabric
from Krypton; perhaps that would be good enough. He felt—yes,
felt!—three shots hit him in the back. It was as though he’d been
punched hard, but the bullets didn’t penetrate the suit or his skin.
Bullets also struck Batman, and though he staggered from the
impacts, his suit seemed nearly as impervious as Kal-El’s. “We
need to get out of this camp,” Batman said.
The guards assigned to the work crew in the crater turned
to help their fellow soldiers above. The hollow-eyed prisoners,
already poisoned from exposure to meteorite radiation, knew
they had no chance of survival. Condemned to work themselves to
death, with nothing to lose, and seeing Superman and Batman as
their only chance, they attacked the surprised guards with pickaxes
and shovels. One guard went down as a shovel blade split his head
open, his ushanka tumbling onto the cold, muddy ground. His
riﬂe discharged, and the bullet spanged off a boulder.
A pickax struck a uniformed man in the chest, and the maddened
workers managed to murder a third guard before a hail of bullets
cut them down.
It was all over in a few seconds, before Batman could make a
move to save them. Kal-El’s heart ached as he said, “They were
dead . . . when they got here.”

254

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Batman pulled him along toward the top of the quarry. “And
it’s my job to make sure you’re not. I have a way out.”
When they encountered more guards at the edge of the pit,
Batman detonated his ﬂash mines, and bursts of blinding light
sent the Soviets reeling. Extending one gauntlet, Batman activated
a nozzle, and a thin, high-pressure stream of instant-set epoxy
squirted out, splattering the guards and their guns, tangling them
in a sticky, rubbery mass, like a silkworm’s cocoon.
During this brief reprieve, he dragged Kal-El past the struggling
guards tangled in the epoxy web. “Now all we have to do is get
past the rest of the camp’s defenses, and we’re home free.”

TH E ALARMS BROUG HT G EN ERAL CERI DOV OUT FROM H IS

warm quarters. As he ran outside, still pulling on his fur coat and
shielding his eyes against the glare of spotlights, he saw not only
the red and blue ﬁgure of Superman but another man in a more
sinister outﬁt helping to rescue him. The dark-cowled man looked
like a devil—no, a bat. He kept pulling strange things from his
belt, throwing-darts, incapacitating gas bombs, small explosives.
Two super heroes? Where do the Americans get them? he
wondered.
He heard gunﬁre, saw the searchlights, but somehow the two
ridiculously costumed men evaded capture, always one step ahead
of the gulag guards. Superman was still barely able to stand, but
since his weakness was brought on by the green meteorite, Ceridov
supposed the effects would likely diminish as the two got farther
away from the quarry. He ﬁgured he had only a limited time to
stop them from getting away.
The Soviet Union had its own supermen . . . less reﬁned, perhaps,
but almost certainly more powerful. As the two escaping ﬁgures

ENEMIES & ALLIES

255

raced toward the stunted forest, the general smashed open the
locks of the thick-walled blockhouse. Inside, the restless monsters
continued to rumble and pound. As soon as the locks fell away, the
heavy doors exploded outward, and Ceridov sprang back, calling
his own guards to stand close, riﬂes aimed and ready.
Endovik and Dubrov—or rather, what they had become—
were the ﬁrst to emerge. Their bodies were swollen, muscles not
so much bulging as bloated, visible beneath their torn garments.
Cords of sinew twisted at their necks. Tufts of spiky hair as sharp
as porcupine quills protruded from random spots on their bodies.
Their lips were curled back in a rictus of constant agony, and their
eyes glowed an emerald green.
Only ﬁve of the mutated creatures remained alive. Three more
had been torn to bloody pulp within the bunker, but nobody had
dared to go in and clean up the cells. The maddened mutants had
fed upon the ﬂesh of their dead comrades, and the stench was
appalling. The ﬁve creatures lunged out into the open, coiled
with pent-up energy as though their blood had become boiling
nitroglycerin. The ﬁve glared at Ceridov, but he saw a dim remnant
of intelligence and awareness on their faces.
He raised his voice. “I know your minds are still there—I
know you can understand me!” He could not let them doubt the
bald-faced lie he was about to tell them. “I have the cure you need.
I have the antidote to the meteorite radiation—but ﬁrst you must
earn it!”
The furious creatures ﬂexed their arms, simmering, staring.
Ceridov could not give them time to think. He pointed toward the
two costumed ﬁgures disappearing into the forest. “Them—cap­
ture them! Bring them back here, and then you shall be free!”
With uncontrollable bloodlust, the mutated creatures raced
into the night.

Chapter 48

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

ERNHER VON BRAUN WOULD HAVE PROVIDED AN INTER­

eesting interview, and under other circumstances, Lois
might have been eager to press the former Nazi scientist about the
American rocketry program and the mysterious destruction of
Sputnik. But she had to do something to save Superman, whether
or not Perry White approved. That was her top priority.
She would not stand by and let her beloved hero hang in
chains, crippled and paralyzed, while diplomats and ambassadors
squabbled. She knew what a great man he was, with such a large
heart and all the devotion any woman could ask for. She could not
just leave him to rot in a Communist prison camp.
Over the past several months, she’d built up quite a case against
Lex Luthor, but she’d been unable to grab the brass ring of “proof”
that Perry White demanded. She knew Luthor hated Superman
because the hero had upstaged him at every turn, and Luthor was
enough of a genius that he could have set this up. It reeked of him,
all of it.
Lois was a good enough reporter that she intended to catch
Luthor in the act.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

257

Rather than going to Huntsville to talk with the rocket scien­
tists, she took a connecting ﬂight to Miami, then another to
Havana. Cuba was ﬁlled with enough unrest to inspire a dozen
newspaper stories—Batista battling Castro’s rebels in the jungles,
and all those pasty-white Russian visitors who clearly weren’t
there to soak up the Caribbean sun—but Lois was ﬁxated on a
tiny island that appeared on no map. She was going to catch
Luthor and get him to tell her where Superman was being held.
Then she would help rescue Superman, even if it killed her, though
she hoped it wouldn’t come to that.
She went down to the docks in Havana Bay and talked to the
ﬁshermen using broken Spanish and a pocket dictionary. She
looked for a volunteer to take her to a place she had sketched in her
notebook, a close approximation of what she remembered seeing
in Luthor’s headquarters and the somewhat blurry photo she had
taken of the map.
The grizzled men spoke in a mixture of Spanish and English.
Some thought they recognized her sketch as Crab Key, but
others denied it. Three of the men clearly knew the place she was
talking about, but they were frightened. They shook their heads.
“The dragon lives there,” one man insisted in broken English.
“We have seen smoke from his lair and ﬁre shooting into the
sky.”
Lois smiled. “Yes, that sounds exactly like the place.”
She had to bribe and ﬂirt and beg, but she ﬁnally found a cocky
young Cuban man who agreed to take her out there. He remained
shirtless, possibly for Lois’s beneﬁt, but she was focused only on
ﬁnding Luthor’s hideout so that she could help Superman.
They left the dock at sunset with beautiful romantic splashes
of color across the western horizon. Lois remained at the bow,
listening to the hum of the engine and the slosh of the waves as the

258

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

young man steered his boat out to sea in the deepening darkness. It
was the only way they could arrive unseen.
She wore deck shoes, khaki trousers, and a short-sleeved blouse.
She had her own camera, a model much smaller than Jimmy
Olsen’s, but it would be enough to get pictures, to get proof.
Since it would take hours to reach the small island, she forced
herself to catch a nap on the way. When her young captain ﬁnally
shook her awake, Lois glanced at her watch—4:00 a.m., an hour
before dawn. She had to get ashore and situated for cautious
surveillance. Also, her boat captain friend needed time to get far
enough away that Luthor’s observers wouldn’t spot him.
He had turned off the engines, and the boat made no noise as it
approached. The island was a silhouette outlined by stars and the
Milky Way, but it also shone with constellations of its own—indus­
trial towers, brightly lit buildings, and factory structures built up
in the hulking ruins of an old Spanish fort. She turned to the young
ﬁsherman. “Meet me here this time tomorrow for the other half of
your money. Comprende?”
“Sí, señorita.” He smiled at her, but she couldn’t be sure how
much enthusiasm he really had about coming back. Though he’d
been blustering and conﬁdent when setting out from Havana, he
seemed much more anxious now as they drew closer.
She stepped off the boat and waded the rest of the way to the
beach as quietly as she could. When a jet of ﬂame belched up from
one of the industrial centers—perhaps exhaust gas burning off or
a rocket test ﬁring—the young man turned the boat around and,
keeping the engine at low power, crept out to deeper water beyond
the cove, then sped away. The foaming, glistening wake settled
quickly.
Lois splashed onto the sand, where she found shelter in a cluster
of leaning palm trees at the edge of the beach. She kept to the cover

ENEMIES & ALLIES

259

of the trees as she approached the complex. Dawn had begun to
brighten the sky.
After sunrise, when she saw the secret base that Luthor had
built, Lois allowed her curiosity to get the best of her. She snapped
photographs of the ruined old fort connected to the modern
control building. Most curious was a set of giant towers topped
with suspicious-looking dish-projectors pointed toward the sky,
rocket launchpads, industrial hangars, a sprawling construction
yard along the coast, a shipbuilding dry dock. Though many of the
high-tech installations bafﬂed her, she took photographs anyway.
She could not determine just what the bald genius was up to.
Did Luthor think he was in a spy novel or something?
Suddenly Lois heard a hissing hum and a strange throbbing
noise, and several large shadows fell upon her. Three ﬂying men
loomed overhead: guards wearing thick green armored suits, like
the shells of iridescent beetles. A large crest or collar protected
their heads, and they had absurdly thick gauntlets and boots made
of an unknown purple metal; jetpacks kept the men suspended in
the air.
She recognized the square head and blond crew cut of Lex
Luthor’s ever-present bodyguard Bertram. Lenses telescoped out
of the smooth purple gauntlets, and thin heat beams strafed the
ground at her feet, turning the sand into a line of smoking glass.
Bertram’s voice boomed from a speaker set in the armored
breastplate. “Surrender, or we’ll tear you to pieces.” He moved
forward, intimidating. “You don’t belong here.”
“A little full of yourself, aren’t you?” Lois said ﬂippantly. “I was
just looking for a nice beach for sunbathing.”
Maneuvering with the backpack jets, spreading the thick purple
boots in an imposing stance, Bertram landed in front of her. His
two cohorts dropped on either side of her, hemming her in. She was

260

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

tempted to take a photograph but decided it would just provoke
them.
She swallowed hard but tried to remain aloof. Lois was very
annoyed to have been caught so quickly, and she didn’t want to
show any weakness in front of these goons. “I’d like to see your
boss—I’ve got another interview request.”
Bertram clomped forward, seized her camera, crushed it into a
handful of jagged fragments, and unspooled the exposed ﬁ lm. He
placed his hands under her armpits with powered metal gloves and
roughly picked her up off the ground. “Believe me, we’ll take you
right to Mr. Luthor.”
Together, the three guards accelerated into the air with their
jetpacks. As she dangled uncomfortably in Bertram’s grasp, Lois
suppressed a grimace of pain and decided that she much preferred
to ﬂy with Superman, cradled safely in his arms.

Chapter 49

ARIGUSK A GU LAG

H E TWI STE D FOREST OUTS I DE TH E G U LAG PROVI DE D

plenty of places to hide as they made their way back to the
p
Batplane.
Dragging Superman in a ﬁreman’s carry away from the gulag’s
perimeter fences, Batman plunged into the sharp-edged shadows,
seeking refuge among the twisted trunks and black branches. The
searchlights couldn’t ﬁnd them here.
Darkness, shadows, and fear had always been his advantages.
Now he had to call upon his skills more than ever.
Gunshots and sirens rang out behind them. He had hoped some
of Superman’s strength would return as they put more distance
between themselves and the quarry, but the meteorite’s taint also
permeated the forest. Now it seemed to ooze up from the ground
wherever they stepped.
Get to the cycle . . . to the plane—away from here and out of
Siberia.
“How much farther?” Superman sounded a little stronger. “We
aren’t going to . . . walk home?”
“Leave it to me. I have it all planned.”

262

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

“You . . . said that before.”
“I meant it.”
Taking advantage of the tumult they had left behind, the rest
of the sleeping gulag prisoners seized their chance to break out
of their barracks and run loose, tearing down fences. All those
diversions would keep the guards busy, but the casualties would
be horriﬁc. Given all the gunﬁre behind them, dozens, if not
hundreds, of slaves must already have been dead.
More worrisome, though, were the crashing, ferocious noises
that came from the stunted forest behind them. Something else
was pursuing them, something large. Something hunting them.
Superman raised his head and forced himself to stand on his
own. “I’ll try to walk.”
“Right now we need to run.”
They both saw movement between the skeletal branches—huge
forms, each one swollen to twice the size of an average man, with
pulsing veins standing out against translucent skin. These twisted
beings might once have been gulag slaves . . . humans succumbing
to prolonged exposure to meteorite radiation. Seeing their targets,
the beasts lunged forward.
Time to ﬁght. He wasn’t sure he had enough large-scale and
small-scale weapons, diversions, and tricks left in his utility belt.
He would have to be resourceful. As always.
Three of the ﬁve horriﬁc mutants wore grayish gulag outﬁts;
the other two clung to tattered Soviet military uniforms. One
of the mutant ofﬁcers, like a territorial animal howling in rage,
grasped the twisted trunk of the nearest withered pine, snapping
it in two; the broken tree’s sap bled green.
“Keep . . . running,” Superman said.
Focus on the mission. Escape. No need to battle these
monsters.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

263

Batman snatched a ﬂash grenade from his utility built and
threw it toward the ﬁve beast-men. He shielded his eyes with a
dark gauntlet, and a supernova-bright ﬂash seared the night air.
In the dancing afterimage, the trees looked like a Gothic woodcut
of horrors. Unnatural knots and burls in the trunks looked like
screaming faces. The branches thrashed and writhed in agony, as
if burned by the ﬂash.
He and Superman kept running, picking up speed. The mutants
followed.
It seemed unlikely that the tools and weapons remaining in his
utility belt could take care of these beasts. He had a new grappling
hook, a large Batarang, and seven of the tiny Bat-shuriken, though
considering the mass and bulk of the monsters, he doubted the
paralytic sedative would be strong enough. There were several
more items, but he would have to improvise. He might need to use
everything in their effort to get away. Withdrawing elastic wires
and tiny weighted bolos, he quickly devised trip cords between
trees. One of the lumbering beast-men smashed into them, tangled
himself, and uprooted a tree, unable to snap the high-tensile­
strength cord.
Growing gradually stronger, Superman pushed himself
forward, sweat running down his brow. Another chemical grenade
dispersed burning pepper smoke that curled outward to sting their
pursuers’ eyes.
Guessing that they must be close, Batman activated a gauntlet
switch—a remote operation system that could summon the cycle.
Out there, the engine would be turning over, powering up, the
guidance system homing in on his signal.
But the creatures were upon them now. He and Superman
would have to ﬁght them hand-to-hand.
The two former Soviet ofﬁcers were the ﬁrst to attack. Super­

264

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

man pounded his ﬁsts against the monsters, but their bodies were
impregnated with the very contamination that had weakened
him in the ﬁrst place, rendering his blows ineffectual. With one
desperate punch, he drew blood—emerald blood—the exposure
to which nearly drove him to his knees.
But he wasn’t the only one who could ﬁght. Batman called upon
jujitsu, tae kwon do, karate, and techniques from a dozen other
schools of combat so obscure that few Westerners had ever heard
of them. He struck and struck again, hand blows, full kicks, ﬂying
body slams.
These monsters, not trained in subtlety, relied on sheer brute
force. A hammer-blow to his cowl sent him reeling, and he could
barely see straight. Despite the armor and bulletproof ﬁbers of
his suit, he felt his ribs crack when one of their opponents landed
another locomotive punch. He staggered backward.
From a packet inside his left armored glove he released a cloud
of potent anesthetic mist . . . which did nothing more than surprise
his attacker.
He spun about on a boot toe and went after the nearest monster
with a leaping kick, driving a hard heel into its jaw and causing it to
stagger back. His reinforced gauntlets added power to each punch
as he struck and struck once more. He easily ducked a sluggish
roundhouse punch, then pounded the beast’s hairy solar plexus.
His skills were the only close-range weapons he had left. His full
attack was barely enough to make the monsters pause.
But a pause was all he needed.
The automated cycle roared in from among the trees, following
the locator device in his armor. Calling to Superman, he dove for
the cycle and threw himself on top of it. “Here! Behind me!”
The barely stunned mutant creatures loped toward them, but
Batman had the controls now and could see through the night

ENEMIES & ALLIES

265

scope. After Superman collapsed onto the cycle behind him, he
accelerated hard, increasing his available engine power by switch­
ing off the stealth mode. They roared away, the heightened sound
of the engine louder than the mutants as they rapidly left the
creatures behind.

Chapter 50

ARIGUSK A GU LAG

FFTER RETRI EVI NG H IS WH I P, G EN ERAL CERI DOV STOOD

surveying the massacre. The fences were torn down, and
the prisoners had run amok. Seventeen of his incompetent guards
were dead—killed not by Superman or that other costumed
intruder but by the pathetic gulag slaves themselves! He would not
be reporting that detail to Moscow.
In frustration, Ceridov cracked his whip in the air, but not
many prisoners remained alive for him to strike. Under the harsh
searchlights, the general did not like what he saw. He had a lot of
cleaning up to do, and he would need to request an entirely new
complement of political prisoners from Party headquarters. Much
had to be accounted for.
And unless he recaptured Superman, he would never convince
Lex Luthor to provide a superior power reactor to replace the
faulty one that had served the Ariguska gulag for years.
When the ﬁve lumbering mutants returned empty-handed
but still demanded the mythical cure he had promised, that was
the last straw. Though their bodies were enlarged and their
muscles had grown into lumpish tumors, their brains seemed to

ENEMIES & ALLIES

267

have atrophied. The disgraced Soviet generals glowered at him;
the three former gulag slaves, now stronger than motorized con­
struction machines, carried a confused violence about them.
Apparently in some dim corner of their primitive brains, they
expected that Ceridov would still take care of them.
Seeing the monsters approach, Ceridov called for his surviving
guards to stand with him, holding their Kalashnikovs ready. The
mutants might have been stupid and ugly, but he doubted they
would try anything. “I told you to capture two people! Where are
they?”
The ﬁve creatures clenched their ﬁsts and stirred, looking
uneasily at the armed guards. An unmistakable glint of vicious
hunger shone from behind their eerily green eyes.
Ceridov doubted they’d be articulate enough to explain what
had happened, but he didn’t want to hear their excuses anyway.
He lashed out with his whip, speciﬁcally targeting Endovik. The
whip’s end sliced a deep cut that oozed green blood.
The second lash failed to touch any skin. Endovik caught
the end of the whip in his massive ﬁst and yanked so hard that
he nearly dislocated Ceridov’s shoulder. The monster seized the
braided whip in both hands and shredded it. Dubrov lunged, and
the other mutants roared as they attacked.
The gulag guards had already seen many of their comrades
slain by rebellious prisoners, and they did not hesitate to open ﬁre
now, peppering the mutants with bullets. But the ﬁve creatures
brushed the gunﬁre aside as though the bullets were no more than
biting blackﬂies.
Leaving the guards, Ceridov ran. He blocked out the screaming
and yelling behind him, as well as the sickening ripping sounds
that followed.
He ran into his headquarters building and threw the wooden

268

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

door shut, slamming the bolts home. Inside the fenced and iso­
lated gulag, he had never needed a particularly sturdy lock, but
within moments the creatures began pounding on not only the
door but the thick log walls themselves. The tongue-and-groove
paneling with its unsettling wood-grain patterns rattled loose
from the walls.
The door splintered and ﬂew inward like a hailstorm of
kindling. One of the thick walls was literally torn apart as huge
hands ripped the logs away. Part of the building collapsed, crushing
the potbellied stove in the corner.
Ceridov dove for the lone window on the opposite side as the
mutants pushed in after him. Tarred rags had been stuffed around
the sill to prevent drafts. Now the general used his broad shoulder
to smash the glass. The window was barely large enough for him
to squeeze through, but he did, and he fell onto the dirt and a patch
of hard snow outside.
Behind him, a roaring Dubrov jammed his massive head and
shoulder through the window, but his body was too large to ﬁt.
Jagged shards of glass tore his ﬂesh as he squirmed, ﬁnally splinter­
ing the logs and smashing the window opening wider.
Ceridov was already running across the compound. The
soldiers’ barracks and the prisoners’ quarters were even ﬂimsier
constructions than his headquarters, offering no viable shelter.
The reactor control room and the containment building, on the
other hand . . . he would ﬁnd shelter there. Those were the sturdiest
structures in the gulag.
When he heard the growling snarls behind him—and no further
gunshots because all the guards were dead—Ceridov put on
additional speed. His right arm was numb from when the monster
had torn the whip out of his hand, and he couldn’t tell if any bones
were broken. At the moment, shock and adrenaline kept him from

ENEMIES & ALLIES

269

feeling pain. He ﬂung open the steel door of the reactor building
and slammed it behind him. He hoped the lock would hold.
The control room held a set of gray metal stations, each with
a cathode-ray tube displaying black and white images from the
adjacent reactor room. A constellation of dials, gauges, and black
Bakelite knobs covered the walls. The needles showed that the
reactor was operating at maximum level, but so far nothing had
edged into the red.
The Soviets had once been so proud of this program. In June
1954, the “Peaceful Atom” facility in Omsk had been the world’s
ﬁrst nuclear plant to generate electricity—another example of
Soviet technological superiority. Many more of the graphitemoderated power reactors had been built across the Soviet Union.
This one was much smaller, an experimental design that not only
powered the gulag but provided many radioactive isotopes for
Soviet nuclear research.
Now he hoped it would offer him the protection he needed.
The blows against the steel door were like artillery shells ﬁred
from a destroyer. The massively overgrown ﬁsts continued to
pound, and the door started to buckle.
Ceridov began to wonder whether the control room might be a
trap rather than a shelter. He had no way out other than through
the large bulkhead door into the reactor chamber itself. And with
the reactor running so high, the radiation levels inside would be
lethal.
Bolts popped from the steel door’s hinges, and a huge bluntﬁngered hand pushed its way through, bending the door further.
At the control bank, he tried to shut down the reactor but
quickly realized that it would take too long. The fuel rods were
all in place. It was a water-cooled reactor, ﬁlled with boiling
liquid that pumped out high-pressure steam. Graphite moderators

270

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

surrounded the rods, and thick, hot pipes circulated the steam
through turbines. Even the heavy lead shielding would not be
sufﬁcient to protect him.
With sick fatalism, Ceridov decided that the mutants would be
more immediately lethal than the radiation. He ran to the hatch
and activated the emergency releases. His throat was dry. He was
panting too hard to think. Fortunately, the gulag’s engineers had
not bothered to install safety systems or protective interlocks.
The monsters smashed through the main door just as Ceridov
opened the bulkhead. Shoulder to massive shoulder, Endovik and
Dubrov charged into the control room, their bestial lips drawn
back to expose teeth ready to rip out Ceridov’s throat. Very little
remained of their once proudly worn military uniforms.
Ceridov stumbled into the reactor chamber and swung the
heavy bulkhead door shut behind him. Barely a second after the
deep clang, he heard the creatures pounding at the thick barrier.
The air inside the reactor chamber had a sizzling humidity
ﬁlled with crackling steam. Ceridov staggered backward, trying
desperately to recall if there was a second exit. He knew the
radiation was all around him, ripping into his cells, poisoning
him. But if he could move quickly enough . . .
With a concerted effort, the mutated creatures tore the bulkhead
door off its hinges and hurled it into the reactor chamber. The
thick metal rectangle smashed into the nest of coolant pipes,
shattering them. Geysers of steam erupted from pipe breaches,
and reactor ﬂuid levels began to drop as boiling water rushed out
of the containment vessel.
Dubrov and Endovik reveled in the chaos, splashing through
the water that swirled furiously around their ankles, not even
feeling the heat. The mutated gulag slaves threw themselves into
the destruction with primeval relish.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

271

Automatic warning alarms began to sound, along with evacu­
ation sirens. In the control room, all the gauges must have been
well into the red, but the ﬁve mutants didn’t seem to care. They
knocked loose pressure control wheels, smashed lights, waded
forward into the thickening radioactive steam.
“Cer-i-dovvvvv!” one of the disgraced generals yelled.
Fleeing deeper into the deadly maze, the Soviet general burned
his hand on a hot metal surface. Inside the containment tubes,
coolant fuel bubbled and churned until the transparent observation
windows blew out, spraying contaminated water everywhere.
A lattice of pipes was uprooted and thrown aside, and Endovik
stood there, his glowing green eyes rolling and crazed. Seeing his
prey, he yowled, and the other mutants came running. Their skin
seemed to be rotting now, burned and scabbed, beginning to fall
off.
General Ceridov scrambled for a way to get back out. The
monsters had torn off the vault door. If he could just retreat outside,
he could run past the fences, hide in the twisted forest.
Bathed in radiation, he knew he was already dead, being cooked
from the inside out. But letting these mutants tear him limb from
limb seemed the worst possible way to die.
Ceridov could barely see through the steam and ﬂashing red
lights as the monsters advanced toward him. Dubrov approached
from the other side.
Spitting curses and shouting, Ceridov ran toward them. Dubrov
and Endovik, grinning horribly, closed in to intercept him.

Chapter 51

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

H E CARI BBEAN H U M I DITY MADE LUTHOR’S I SLAN D H EAD ­

quarters a sweltering hot box, but Lois had plenty of other
reasons to sweat.
When the battlesuited henchmen dragged her into the control
center, Lex Luthor was staring at a wall full of screens like a
businessman analyzing the stock market. Projected images showed
the Kremlin, Big Ben and the Houses of Parliament in London, the
Eiffel Tower in Paris, the United Nations headquarters in Metrop­
olis. He had his eye on the whole world.
Luthor frowned at the interruption. “What have you found
now, Bertram?”
Lois pulled her arm free. The armored gauntlets were powerful
enough to crush granite, but they weren’t particularly nimble. She
shook herself and stood deﬁantly. “So, is this a new subsidiary of
LuthorCorp? I must have missed the ribbon-cutting ceremony.”
Luthor’s face darkened. “You like to trespass, don’t you, Miss
Lane? Unfortunately, this is a bit more serious than your transgres­
sion at my munitions factory. You really must learn to respect
personal boundaries.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

273

“I don’t respect you, if that’s what you mean. The whole world
has seen Superman in chains, but what they don’t know is how
you orchestrated it. He’s a hero. He’s saved countless lives.” Sure
enough, mentioning Superman was like jabbing Luthor with a
cattle prod. She could see it in his reaction. A thought occurred to
her, and she smiled. “You’re jealous of him, aren’t you?”
He chuckled. “Jealousy is an emotion for children, or at least
for those who have no self-conﬁdence. Why on earth would I be
jealous now that Superman has gotten himself caught?”
“Are you denying your involvement?”
Luthor’s smile was bland. “Of course not. I just wanted to know
how you made the connection.”
“I’m not going to make it easier for you to cover your tracks.”
She crossed her arms and fell stubbornly silent.
Luthor shook his head with irritated disgust. “Superman,
Superman; he’s like a movie star for young girls to swoon over—
James Dean, Jeffrey Hunter, Marlon Brando. It’s . . . undigniﬁed.
All ﬂash and no substance. People forget who’s really helped them
the most.” His voice had begun to rise, but he controlled himself
again by taking two deep, calming breaths. “Trust me, Miss Lane,
I haven’t even gotten started with Superman, but I am pleased that
General Ceridov has removed this pest.”
“Ceridov? How do you spell that, so I can get his name correct
in my article?”
Luthor met her gaze with his cold, soulless eyes. “There won’t
be any story about that freak Superman.”
“Freak? Says a man as bald as a cue ball!”
Bertram stiffened in the armored suit that made him look like
some absurd beetle. He clearly wanted to defend his boss’s honor,
but Luthor was quite capable of watching out for himself. “Now
that Superman has been incapacitated by exposure to the green

274

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

mineral, we can study him. Dissection should prove that he is in
fact an alien, different from anyone else on Earth.”
Alarmed, Lois said, “He already admitted that—and he’s come
to help us. The world needs Superman.”
“Can’t you see it’s a trick? How can an investigative reporter be
so gullible?” He made a sound of disgust. “Maybe being a woman
makes it impossible for you to be objective. Wake up, Miss Lane!
Don’t just take him at face value—no one rescues people and saves
the world as a hobby! It’s inconceivable.”
“Not to someone with a soul,” Lois quipped. “Is unconditional
compassion such a foreign concept to you?”
He looked as if he had taken a large bite out of a particularly
sour pickle. “He is powerful, and he is mysterious, and that makes
him dangerous.”
“You’re far more dangerous than he is, Lex Luthor. And far less
human.”
Luthor suddenly realized something. “You really care about
him, don’t you, Miss Lane? Like a little lovesick schoolgirl.” His
expression took on a more calculating look. She refused to answer,
which was itself an answer.
Luthor continued, “We have an arrangement, Ceridov and I.
Soon Superman will be turned over to my researchers. Think of
the medical and pharmaceutical breakthroughs I could discover
by peeling him apart—not to mention the wealth it’ll bring in.”
Lois was outraged. “Didn’t he more than prove his worth by
saving our country from the Soviet missile launch?”
“You can’t count on Superman, Miss Lane. How can the United
States place itself in his debt? It would be the greatest folly to
rely on a man who might change his mind on a whim. LuthorCorp, on the other hand, is creating reliable technology that
won’t be swayed by emotions. You’ve seen these new battlesuits—

ENEMIES & ALLIES

275

powerful defenses that can be used by anyone duly placed in
command.”
“Someone like yourself?” Lois said.
Luthor shrugged. “There are more pressing threats than you
realize, Miss Lane. Your own newspaper has failed to report on the
most important danger to the people of Earth. The Communists
are a red herring, as you will soon see. I intend to prove to the
world that I am their real protector, not Superman.”
Lois glanced at the stony-faced Bertram, then back to Luthor.
“What could possibly be a bigger threat than the Communists
in the middle of the Cold War? They’ve already launched three
nuclear missiles at us!”
“Such a disappointing lack of imagination.” Luthor regarded
his ﬁngertips, then turned to his bodyguard. “Bertram, keep Miss
Lane in one of our guest cells for the time being. It would be easier,
and certainly more efﬁcient, if we simply disposed of her, but I don’t
waste any possible resource. Superman has already demonstrated
an affection for her, and she obviously loves him. Once General
Ceridov sends his prisoner here, perhaps Miss Lane’s presence will
convince him not to resist our investigations.”
“I won’t do it, Luthor. I refuse to cooperate!”
“Why, Miss Lane, who said your cooperation was required?”
As the battlesuited guards grabbed a shouting Lois and dragged
her out of the control room, Luthor folded his hands and turned
to stare at the screens. “With Superman out of the picture, it’s the
perfect time for my next little surprise.”

Chapter 52

SIBE RIA

H E BLAC K CYC LE RAC E D AC ROSS TH E U N EVE N TE RRAI N

like a predator giving chase. Kal-El slumped on the back, still
li
wondering about the mysterious yet strangely honorable Batman.
What sort of true hero hid his features behind a dark cowl? And
yet, of all the citizens in the USA, only Batman had taken direct
action, had risked his own life to save him from General Ceridov
and the deadly meteorite radiation.
As they put more distance between themselves and the quarry,
Kal-El felt his crippling weakness begin to subside. The invisible
chains that dragged him down were dissolving, and with each
breath he felt more of his strength return. His vision became
sharper. Closer to normal.
Batman guided the cycle expertly through the dark forest, seeing
his way with an infrared night-vision visor. He passed through the
last of the stunted trees, then out to an open, windswept ridgetop
where a dark plane waited like a massive metal condor, ready to
take them to safety. Kal-El had never seen such an exotic aircraft
design, and he wondered whether Batman himself might have

ENEMIES & ALLIES

277

access to certain alien technology. Kryptonian, perhaps? Maybe
he was even an alien himself . . . but that was too much to hope
for.
Batman stopped the cycle and remotely opened the plane’s
canopy. “It’ll be crowded, but there’s room inside for two. You’re
not in any shape to ﬂy yet, and I’ve got to get you out of here.”
As Kal-El climbed into the sleek aircraft, Batman stowed the
cycle in the fuselage undercarriage, then swung into the cockpit.
Sealing the canopy, he activated the controls, and the engines
roared to life, causing the whole plane to throb. “We’ll be gone
before the Soviets know what hit them.”
With a burst from the vertical launch boosters, the plane lifted
straight into the air, then leaped forward with a screaming thrust
of afterburners, climbing steeply.
Pushed deep into his seat by the acceleration, Kal-El looked
down as the plane soared into the night, away from the gulag.
There was no way he could have saved all those helpless political
prisoners thrown into the camp by the Communist government.
He vowed to come back—
Then a blinding ﬂash occurred, followed by a searing, rolling
shock wave that carried a burst of light, radiation, and heat toward
them. A nuclear ﬂash. He strained to see through the dancing
black spots in his vision.
Batman clenched his gauntleted hands around the controls,
holding the plane against the sudden buffeting of turbulence.
Dials and gauges spun, blinking in the blackness. The sleek plane
shuddered as it tried to outrace the shock front that tossed them
about. Batman took the plane into a near vertical climb, not
leveling off until they had ﬁnally escaped the spreading storm.
Kal-El focused again, concentrating as he pushed his eyesight,

278

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

discerning more details through the blazing aftermath. “It’s gone.
The quarry, the gulag, the barracks buildings. Everything, wiped
out.”
“Including the meteor.”
“Including any prisoners that were left alive,” Kal-El said
sadly.
“There was nothing we could have done.” They ﬂew onward in
silence, both lost in thought. Kal-El knew the other man was right,
but he was simply not accustomed to failure, to being so helpless.
Though the debilitating weakness was dissipating, Kal-El
could still feel his vulnerability, his weakness, and he needed to
heal as much as he needed to understand what had happened to
him. He didn’t wish to return to Metropolis until his powers were
restored, not until he had a better grasp of this strange material
that had crippled him. Luthor had possessed one sample of the
green Ariguska mineral; how many more hunks of the glowing
rock were out there for evil-hearted men to use against him?
“Let me guide you,” Kal-El said. “There’s a special place up in
the arctic. We can stop there to rest.”
Batman turned, his dark cowl making him look inhuman in the
red lights from the cockpit displays. “You have a secret base?”
“A fortress . . . my Fortress of Solitude. I usually ﬂy there on my
own, but I will show it to you. I . . . trust you.”
“Now you’ve piqued my curiosity.”
The black plane soared into the uncharted polar wilderness,
cruising over white wastelands of unconquered terrain and twisting
frozen rivers. Kal-El was uneasy, yet he had made up his mind.
This was a private place where he could ponder his Kryptonian
heritage, where he could contemplate both his existence and his
destiny. He had never taken anyone here before.
But he sensed something different about Batman. He had an

ENEMIES & ALLIES

279

unusual philosophy about ﬁghting crime, to be sure, as well as a
certain darkness to his personality, and perhaps he held even more
secrets than Kal-El himself. But behind the steely resolve was also
a kind of altruism.
Maybe they both fought on the same side after all.
Dawn had painted eerie blood-orange light across the rough
ice ﬁelds by the time Kal-El guided them to the isolated range of
glacier-covered mountains. Even from a great distance, he spotted
the latticework of interlaced white crystal shafts. The gigantic
angled spires formed an incredible alien palace at the base of a
sheer icy cliff.
As new daylight reﬂected through the crystal faces, Batman
found a place to land on the broad ice ﬁeld. The plane dropped
on its vertical thrusters, surrounded by spiraling whirls of ice and
snow kicked up by the engine blasts. Batman had proven himself a
man of few words, but he was utterly silent now. Kal-El pretended
not to notice that he marked the plane’s position on his cockpit
log.
When they emerged, the air was intensely cold. Kal-El was
impervious to temperature, but he could see that Batman, even
with his incredible suit and imaginative devices, was still just a
man. Kal-El would take him inside the shelter quickly.
But Batman stood with his dark boots planted, his cape rippling
around him in the arctic wind. He did not seem to be in any hurry
as he stared at the amazing facade of the Fortress of Solitude. “I
am not a person easily impressed, Superman. But this will do it.”

Chapter 53

TH E FORTRE SS OF
SOLITU DE

UT IN TH E ARCTIC WI LDERN ESS, WH ERE NO SPY PLAN ES

or prying eyes would ﬁnd it, Superman had erected a
structure that surpassed anything millionaire playboy Bruce
Wayne had ever seen: an incomparably alien cathedral built from
clear crystal shards and white pillars.
Though the polar air seemed cold enough to break stone, the
glowing light emanating from the fortress’s crystals made the inte­
rior crackle with life and heat. In the center of the primary chamber,
where the prismatic spires focused the wan sunlight, Superman
seemed to be in his element, drawing power from the sun itself.
“This is what remains of my home planet, Krypton,” he said.
“This is how I learned what little I know of my origin, my past,
and my real parents.”
Behind his cowl, Batman frowned. How could any person not
be skeptical about comments like that? “I read Lois Lane’s
interview with you in the Daily Planet. I know what you claimed
to be. I just . . . never believed it.”
Yet as he stared about him, how could he doubt the evidence of
his own eyes? Even the brightest minds at Wayne Enterprises were

ENEMIES & ALLIES

281

not capable of building something like this fortress. Lex Luthor,
on his best day, could not have conceived it.
Superman touched a green crystal. A misty cloud of turbulent
air formed in the vaulted chamber, and the image of a white-haired
head appeared within it. A somber yet noble visage spoke in an
incomprehensible language.
“That’s my father, Jor-El. He predicted the end of our planet,
warned the Kryptonian Council, but my father—Krypton’s greatest
scientist—was defeated by politics, incompetence, and compla­
cency. A dictator named Zod was his downfall, but the people of
Krypton were responsible for the end of their own world.”
He touched another crystal, an amber one this time. A beautiful
woman appeared, and Superman gazed at her wistfully. “My
mother, Lara. I was just a baby when they placed me in a small
ship and launched me into space, daring to believe that I might
reach Earth and ﬁnd a home here. As far as I know, I am the last
survivor of Krypton.”
A child all alone . . .
A memory shuddered through him: How could the reﬂection
of blue steel be so bright in such a dim alley? “He just wants the
pearls, Martha. Just the pearls.”
Another set of lost parents, blood in an alley.
Surely that single gunshot must have been as loud as a whole
planet exploding. . . .
In other crystal-lined alcoves, humming mirrors vibrated and
displayed scenes from an amazing planet: racing chariots drawn
by ugly iguana-like creatures, volcanoes spewing red lava tinged
with green, incredible tidal waves, a magniﬁcent city protected by
a shimmering dome.
Superman’s voice was barely audible. “My real name—my
Kryptonian name—is Kal-El.”

282

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Shunting aside the memory of Thomas and Martha Wayne,
locking those images away for safekeeping, Batman considered
his questions, put the pieces together. “So when you were an
infant, your ship landed here on Earth . . . somewhere in America?
Where—and more important, when?”
Kal-El hesitated. “You want me to tell you everything? Are you
willing to give up your own secrets, Batman?”
He bent his cowled head down, focused on the problem. “I’m
trying to add up the time frame. The Ariguska meteor impact
occurred in June 1938, and it just so happens that you are incredibly
vulnerable to that green meteorite material. If my guess is correct,
your spaceship landed on Earth at approximately the same time.”
Superman pondered this. “Yes . . . yes, it did. Are you suggest­
ing that the Ariguska meteor, and those green rocks, are radioac­
tive fragments of Krypton?”
“It’s a possibility.”
Superman looked both intrigued and disturbed by the revelation. “But why would a rock from my home planet have such a pro­
found effect on me? Why—and how—could it drain my power?”
“I didn’t say I could offer an explanation, just a clue.” Shaking
his cowled head, he said, “It is impossible for me to believe, yet
impossible to deny. You aren’t from Earth. You are an alien. Have
you heard Senator McCarthy’s accusations?”
“I’m here to help,” Superman insisted. “The United States is my
country, my home. Being an adopted son does not make me any
less loyal. I will defend our way of life and protect people from
man-made dangers and natural disasters alike. I use my strength
and skills to beneﬁt mankind.” He looked up. “As you seem to do,
Batman. I was suspicious of you at ﬁrst, because of your tactics,
but I now believe you do ﬁght on the side of the law.”
“I ﬁght on the side of justice,” he corrected. “Justice and the law

ENEMIES & ALLIES

283

are not always the same. I do what is necessary to prevent crime, to
stop criminals, to save the innocent.”
Superman seemed troubled. “But without the law we have no
civilization, and without civilization there is anarchy. People can’t
just write their own laws according to how they feel.”
Superman’s naiveté and seemingly unquestioning adherence to
the law began to rankle. “Zero tolerance is a hallmark of people
who refuse to think. When you’re dealing with human psychol­
ogy, the answers aren’t always black and white . . . Kal-El.” The
name felt strange as he said it. “Isn’t there a difference between a
psychopath who steals purely out of greed and a desperate father
who steals a loaf of bread for his family?”
Superman frowned. “That would depend on if the father hurt or
killed someone. Does it give any consolation to a grieving widow
that the murderer had a ‘good reason’ for committing his crime?”
Batman wrestled with the question in his own mind, remember­
ing one desperate thief with a gun hiding in the alley by Park Row.
Had that man been desperate for money to feed his family, or
maybe to buy medicine for a sick baby? Doubtful. But even if the
mugger had had understandable motives, that would not bring
Thomas and Martha Wayne back from the dead.
The ﬁngers of a black gauntlet clenched, forming a ﬁst, but he
forced himself to relax. “I watched President Eisenhower give you
the Medal of Freedom. I know that was a great moment for you, but
leaders aren’t perfect. Political power and wealth can corrupt any
man, no matter where he’s born. A man like Lex Luthor can steal
more money with the stroke of a pen than a hundred petty criminals
can with their guns.” He looked up at Superman. “Which is more
important—stopping a small-time thief or battling corrupt leaders?”
Superman answered with remarkable ease. “The world looks
to us as heroes. We have to do both.”

Chapter 54

M ETROPOLIS

I M MY OLSEN DI DN’T KNOW WHAT TO DO, AN D H E HAD

nobody to talk to.
Clark Kent had chosen a particularly bad time for an extended
visit to his hometown back in Kansas. Lois Lane had ﬂown off
to interview Wernher von Braun and his team of rocket scientists
(though Mr. White was furious that she hadn’t called to check in).
The other reporters in the Planet’s bullpen were in a feeding frenzy
with so many major stories to choose from.
But Jimmy was most worried about Superman. Tensions
remained high between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, and no new
footage had been shown of the captive hero in more than a day. He
was afraid something even worse had happened to Superman. He
had looked sick, defeated. . . . Jimmy had never felt so upset and
helpless. He didn’t think the situation could get any worse.
Until a huge alien battleship appeared in the skies above
Metropolis.
He bounded down the stairs rather than wait for the slow
elevator. Thirty ﬂoors. He was out of breath by the time he reached

ENEMIES & ALLIES

285

street level and pushed through the revolving doors to join the
astounded throng. He stared up into the sky, transﬁxed, his mouth
open in shock.
A black shadow crossed over the street, like the edge of an
eclipse. The interstellar engines did not so much hum as growl as
the craft cruised overhead.
The angular battleship was studded with sharp spikes and
gun barrels; jagged, unearthly lettering marked its hull plates in
garish copper red. Arcs of blue-white electricity sparked from
the spearlike prongs, traveling upward like a Jacob’s ladder from
Dr. Frankenstein’s laboratory. Balls of static lightning bounced off
the polished hull, shattering windows on the highest skyscrapers
of Metropolis, blowing out power lines.
Jimmy stared. “Oh, my gosh!” Then he remembered his camera.
He adjusted the focusing bed, pointed the lens upward, and took
photograph after photograph until he ran out of ﬁlm.
Police cars with wailing sirens wound their way through the
stalled trafﬁc. One squad car smashed the bumper of a Chevrolet
and kept driving along; nobody seemed to notice, because both
the policeman and the Chevy’s driver were too busy staring into
the sky.
Overhead, like sentries taking position, four more incredi­
ble alien craft joined the primary battleship, looming above the
Metropolis skyline.
Jimmy had seen enough movies to know exactly what was
happening. This was a full-scale invasion—from Mars, or maybe
even someplace worse! He had always known ﬂying saucers were
real! Despite his disappointments at Mercy Draw and Area 51,
Jimmy had remained convinced that visitors were coming to
Earth. Maybe they had been here all along in human disguise,

286

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

gathering information, spying, like in Invasion of the Body
Snatchers.
When the alien commander transmitted his message, however,
these extraterrestrial visitors did not remotely resemble human
beings. Nor did they come in peace.
The space invaders had found a way to break into all television
and radio signals. People gathered around a display model of a
new color television in an appliance store to watch, shudder­
ing in horror. Car radios all boomed the same message on every
channel.
The alien leader’s face was a mass of rotting tentacles that
surrounded a clacking beak. It looked even worse than the master
Martian in Invaders from Mars, more hideous than the creature
in It Conquered the World, more disgusting than the mutant in
This Island Earth. In fact, this guy would have given nightmares to
The Thing. It had a single glowing gelatinous eye in the middle of
its warty forehead, baleful and eerily reminiscent of the haunting
orb in It Came from Outer Space.
Jimmy realized that he watched far too many sci-ﬁ movies.
The inhuman commander’s demand was implacable and
terrifying. “The planet you call Earth is now under our dominion.
Surrender, or be destroyed.”
The alien voice bubbled and gurgled as though its vocal cords
were composed entirely of phlegm. “We have monitored your radio
broadcasts in order to learn your language. We have no interest
in dialogue—you will hear only our demands. All inhabitants
of Earth are now our slaves. Cooperate, and we may allow some
of you to live. Your females may be useful for breeding purposes,
since our males ﬁnd them pleasing.” The alien paused ominously.
“If we do not receive your unconditional surrender within one
hour, we will level your cities, one by one.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

287

Jimmy heard terriﬁed wails from the listeners; some people had
actually fainted on the street. Staring at the immensely powerful
ships overhead and their crackling weapons, he guessed that all
governments would be helpless. He swallowed hard.
With Superman captured, who could possibly save Earth now?

Chapter 55

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

HIS WAS H IS MOM ENT OF G LORY.

Luthor sat in a swiveling executive chair inside the broadcast
chamber on his island. Due to shielding and scrambling, no one
would be able to pinpoint the origin of his signal. He smiled, drew
a deep breath, and felt his chest swell with conﬁdence. Yes, this
time it would be Lex Luthor to the rescue. All humanity would
cheer him. Finally, they would see who was truly important and
who wasn’t.
Before giving the go-ahead, he studied himself in a hand mirror,
not to primp and preen but to practice his expressions. He intended
to show conﬁdence and righteous indignation, the better to focus
the anger that every human would be feeling. Anger and revenge
had always been easy for him. Empathy, however, was a lot harder
to manage.
His private makeup specialist spent a great deal of time applying
pancake and special creams, using ﬁne brushes to highlight his
strong, stern features (and also to keep his bald pate from glisten­
ing under the spotlight). The cameras could not capture so much
as a hint of perspiration on his brow.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

289

He swiveled the chair, placed his elbows on the mahogany
desktop, and folded his hands together. Indeed, he looked very
presidential, although his aspirations went well beyond that. A
large microphone stood directly in front of him; he gazed sternly
into the camera lens and said, “Begin the broadcast.” The red light
glowed atop the camera. He began speaking.
“Fellow citizens of Earth, this is Lex Luthor. I am broadcast­
ing from an undisclosed location so that I can complete my vital
task without interruption from these . . . horriﬁc alien invaders.”
He had already installed the systems he needed and planted the
appropriate equipment. His broadcast, like that of the bogus alien
commander’s, would appear on every television channel, every
radio station.
“Many of you know my achievements. I am a man who does
what is necessary, and I must do so again. President Eisenhower—
do not fear, sir. America is safe. The world is safe.” He leaned
closer. “LuthorCorp is on your side.”
He made his eyes blaze, intensiﬁed his expression, and raised
his voice. “Know this, alien commander: The human race will
never bow to invaders! Earth is our planet, and we are its proud
people—free people who will never be your slaves. You will wish
you had never come here!”
He had assumed Eisenhower would stall for time or, worse,
make a pathetic call to Superman for help, even though he was
still being held prisoner in the Ariguska gulag. General Ceridov
had been silent since the previous day, but the KGB general had no
further part in Luthor’s plan anyway. The American president was
equally irrelevant. Lex Luthor would preempt everything else.
The loathsome alien commander responded to the bold challenge with outrage, tentacles thrashing around its face. The single
eye pulsated. Static discharge prongs on the invading battleships

290

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

crackled, preparing to unleash bursts of intense disintegrator
beams.
Luthor continued his ﬁery speech. “Behold what LuthorCorp
can do—what a human genius can do.” He raised a ﬁst and called
to his technicians, who were out of camera range. “Open ﬁre!”
The giant alien craft loomed over Metropolis, where one of
the tallest buildings was the main headquarters of LuthorCorp.
Now rooftop panels slid aside, and towering dish transmitters
rose up on hydraulic platforms—directed-energy cannons of the
same type that should have vaporized the Soviet missiles, that had
destroyed Sputnik once the sabotaged components were repaired.
Their generators had already built up a full charge.
Before the alien commander could ﬁre, Luthor’s directed-energy
projectors targeted the primary battleship. Lancing rays blasted
the huge interstellar engines, ripped a gaping wound along the
armored hull, and blackened the bizarre alien inscriptions. Several
explosions occurred on board. The invaders’ static weapons did
not discharge but instead pulsed backward into the interior of the
battleship and blew up the alien bridge.
Secondary explosions ripped sequentially through the interior.
Concussions blew out bulkheads and spewed white-hot ﬂame
through the split hull. Like a wounded animal, the invaders’
command ship lumbered across the sky, trailing plumes of black
smoke as it tried to ﬂee. Reeling out of control, the vessel roared
over Metropolis, sinking lower and lower.
It traveled just far enough to clear the center of the city. With a
ﬁnal gasp, it plunged with an enormous splash into the bay. Before
the wreck had settled into the shallow water, before the ﬁrst round
of cheering from the humans on the street subsided, the battleship
self-destructed in a white-hot ﬂash that blew all components to
pieces. Windows in warehouse buildings shattered for many

ENEMIES & ALLIES

291

blocks along the bayside, and a pillar of ﬁre and steam shot high
into the air.
Luthor didn’t think President Eisenhower would complain
about what he had done.
But the rest of the ships wouldn’t be quite so easy. After all,
Luthor couldn’t let this invasion look like a simple problem. The
giant alien ships, obviously vengeful now, swooped down upon
the city.

Chapter 56

M ETROPOLIS

H E AI R I N H IS LUNGS FELT BRACI NG AS H E STREAKED ALONG

at top speed, and Kal-El’s muscles sang with renewed energy.
Now that his powers had returned, his vision was ﬁlled with details
seen across the entire spectrum in an intensity that made the whole
world seem new.
He was Kal-El. He was Superman.
And he was back.
Racing behind him like a night-camouﬂaged predator, the
Batplane nearly kept up with him. Kal-El slowed just enough so that
the two could ﬂy in parallel. The dark aircraft’s powerful engines,
no longer silenced, roared like Soviet R-7 rockets. Metropolis lay
just ahead.
Superman listened in on the radio band, picking up panicked
transmissions from around the world; Batman had his own
receivers inside the cockpit. Both men were suddenly aware of the
astonishing alien invasion ﬂeet that had appeared over Metropo­
lis. With Earth threatened by giant interstellar battleships,
Kal-El’s inclination was to charge in and rescue humanity from
the fearsome extraterrestrial enemies.

ENEMIES & ALLIES

293

Batman, though, wanted to understand the threat ﬁrst. He
opened the frequency that connected him to Superman, who
wore a compact listening device Batman had produced from his
remarkable utility belt. “I’ve seen your fortress, Kal-El, and I
am convinced that you aren’t from Earth . . . but forgive me if
I remain skeptical about this alien invasion. Something isn’t
right. . . .”
They shot forward and got a look at the gigantic alien battleships
that hovered over the city, preparing to ﬁre their exotic weapons.
The largest ship had just crashed and exploded in Metropolis Bay,
but the remainder of the invasion ﬂeet had powered up ominous
weapons to commence their retaliatory attack.
A crackling discharge spat out of the pronged weapons and
blew the roof off a skyscraper, showering rubble down on the
people below. A ﬂaming ovoid cannon set a second tall building
on ﬁre, blasting out windows and ﬁlling the interior ofﬁces with
a poisonous black smoke. As the ﬁrst three ships continued to
strike, another group of ﬁve huge ﬂying saucers arrived to join the
remaining invader, strengthening the attacking force.
Streaking closer, Kal-El focused his intense gaze into the
infrared band, and heat beams lashed out, straﬁng the underbelly
of the lowest-ﬂying alien craft. Immediately adjacent to him, the
Batplane launched a brace of small rockets that streaked in and
exploded, knocking out the weapons clusters on the jagged noses
of two other alien craft.
“They’re not as powerful as they appear to be,” Batman said.
When the ﬁrst incapacitated great ship began to plummet
toward the crowded buildings, Kal-El saw that he had to catch the
monstrosity before it caused more casualties. As he dove in to grab
the reeling, out-of-control vessel, Kal-El focused his penetrating
vision, shifted to the X-ray band of the spectrum, and peered inside

294

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

the gigantic craft to see how many weapons the ships carried, how
many alien crew members were aboard.
To his surprise, the extraterrestrial battleship was completely
empty—nothing more than an exotically decorated metallic shell,
borne on a sophisticated propulsion system.
A larger-scale version of the LuthorCorp prototype he had seen
in Area 51.
“They’re not real!” Kal-El shouted at Batman. “There are no
aliens aboard!”
“I thought that might be the case,” Batman replied. “These
aren’t spacecraft. They’re props, empty constructs.”
Kal-El felt anger surge within him, mixed with confusion.
“This is a scam—Lex Luthor’s scam?” He caught the hollow ship,
hefted it like an empty wrapper, then hurled the hulk far out into
the swampy and uninhabited barrens outside the city, where it
couldn’t cause any damage.
“But why?” Kal-El shouted. “What could Luthor possibly
want?”
“It’s a ploy to create fear. And fear creates lucrative defense
contracts. Senator McCarthy has been raising the spectre of an
alien attack, and now Luthor’s built these ridiculous artiﬁcial
ships to create a planet-wide panic.”
Kal-El understood all too clearly. “He’ll demand new weapons
to be used against the imminent threat, and he’ll promise to save
us all—for a price. You were right about him.”
“You just aren’t cynical enough, my friend. I’ll break into the
broadcasts just like Luthor did and send a signal to inform the
world of what’s actually happening. This alien danger is not real.
None of it is.”
A greater anger built within Kal-El. He had struggled against
the public’s unreasonable fear of his own alien heritage. He had

ENEMIES & ALLIES

295

been accused of having a secret and sinister agenda. But alien
visitors weren’t the real evil here. Lex Luthor was.
And now that Luthor’s involvement was exposed, he wondered
what the man would do next.
Arms extended, ﬂying swift and hard like a living projectile,
Kal-El punched his way through the hull of another alien ship.
Inside the core framework, he grasped a structural girder and
ascended high into the sky.
Glad to ﬁnd a satisfying outlet for his anger, he drove the
fake alien ship as far and as fast as he could. Within seconds he
had reached the edge of the atmosphere, and, pushing with all
his strength, he shoved the false invader out into space to drift
harmlessly . . . where it belonged.

Chapter 57

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

N TH E SECRET ISLAN D BASE, LUTHOR HAD SEEN FIT TO

create a secure holding cell inside the tower of the old
Spanish fort connected to his headquarters. The stone-walled
chamber had a thick double-locked door and bars on a window
that overlooked the ocean.
However, since the cell appeared to be rarely—if ever—used,
Lois hoped to ﬁnd a way out. Luthor’s arrogance was his greatest
vulnerability, and he wouldn’t dream that a woman could outwit
him.
Moments after Luthor’s guards had locked the study door, a
noise and a loud eruption of water came from the edge of the island,
but tall palm trees blocked her view of the source. From the small
cell window, she was astonished to see an enormous alien-looking
battleship rise from the construction yards on the far side of the
island. Another ship rose, then another, then their engines ﬂared
with a dazzling array of bright lights. The “alien invasion ﬂeet”
accelerated across the ocean. Within minutes, another group of
ships streaked off to follow the ﬁrst.
Knowing Jimmy Olsen’s interest in ﬂying saucers, Lois was

ENEMIES & ALLIES

297

sure the young photographer would fall for the deception, hook,
line, and sinker. So would most of the people of the world. But the
“spaceships” were decoys. Lex Luthor was nothing more than a
con man with expensive toys.
She had to tell the world about it before the great leaders were
duped into accepting whatever terms Luthor imposed. She also
had to help Superman.
She needed to get out. Now.
But Luthor was never going to let Lois out of this alive; she could
see that. Worse, he intended to use her as bait, forcing Superman
to submit to all the tests he wanted to perform. And Lois knew the
big handsome guy would do practically anything to save her. He
was predictable like that. She could not let him sacriﬁce himself
for her.
As if she needed more incentive to get out of here . . .
She pounded on the thick door, but no sound carried through,
and apparently no guards waited outside. Luthor probably didn’t
have henchmen to spare at the moment, since he was too busy
planning world domination. Even so, she could see no way to pick
the heavy locks or pry loose the old iron hinges. She was stuck.
It was going to have to be the window. The bars were slightly
above her eye level, but the mortar looked old and crumbling.
Maybe she could tug and twist them free. When she reached up
to touch the iron bars, though, a powerful electric jolt threw her
across the room. She skidded unceremoniously backward on the
ﬂoor, her nerves jangling and yelling, her whole body twitching.
Lois slowly picked herself up, her pride more injured than her
body. Now she saw the naked contact wires connected to each iron
bar. Time to ﬁgure out a plan B.
Lois had no superpowers, of course, but she did have her
experience and skills as a reporter. Before meeting Superman,

298

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

she’d extricated herself from plenty of desperate circumstances,
and she could do it again.
Superman needed her help now. She had to ﬁnd some way to
circumvent the electriﬁed bars. Luthor had left her nothing but a
Paper Mate pen and her notepad. Did he expect her to write a last
message? A will?
Standing on a small wooden bench so she could peer through
the barred window, Lois considered her options, racking her brain
for a solution. She stared once again at the electriﬁed bars, the
wires that made them live contacts. All she had was her pen and a
notepad.
A metal pen.
Clipping the pen’s shaft to the spiral binding of the notepad,
now she had enough metal to stretch from one naked wire on the
electriﬁed bars to the next, enough to blow out the circuit—she
hoped. The pad of paper should provide adequate insulation for
her ﬁngers . . . maybe.
She had to take the risk. She loved Superman and everything
he represented. Unlike many people Lois had met as a reporter,
he was a genuinely good and decent person. Though she was
somewhat reluctant to dig so deeply into her feelings, she realized
that she was willing to do just about anything for him. For once, in
so many ways, she had met her match.
Squeezing her eyes shut, Lois jammed the metal pen across
the contact wires at the base of two bars. Sparks showered out,
accompanied by an oily smell of electrical burning. She jerked her
head away but held the metal contact in place. The circuit blew,
then nothing—no more sparks, no more sound.
Gingerly, she tapped the cell bars with a ﬁngertip, expecting to
ﬂinch from another shock, but she received none. Her notepad was
scorched and curling. She used the ﬂat pad to protect her palm as

ENEMIES & ALLIES

299

she smashed at the bars, trying to break the mortar loose. The iron
rods weren’t overly thick or well anchored; apparently the electric­
ity was supposed to be the primary deterrent. She twisted the bars,
then tugged backward, throwing her whole weight into the effort.
Finally, the ﬁrst bar worked free as gray mortar ﬂaked away.
When the end was loose, she bent the short bar upward and
worked double time on the adjacent bars. Within minutes, she had
created a gap large enough to worm through. Breathing hard and
sweating, she pulled herself up to the thick stone sill, then wriggled
her head and shoulders out of the gap.
She was at least ﬁfty feet above the ground.
The stone blocks of the headquarters tower had been stacked
roughly atop one another, mortared together centuries ago. She
would have to work her way around to a ledge, lower herself to
the next ﬂoor, and hope to ﬁnd another foothold. Her deck shoes
should give her enough traction.
No matter what, it was better than remaining a guest of Lex
Luthor.
Now that she had climbed free of her cell, she could see the
island’s small harbor and two modern speedboats tied up at the
dock. If she reached the ground, she could run out to the dock,
power up one of the boats, and race westward into the ocean. She
would eventually be rescued, she was sure.
But she couldn’t let Luthor continue with his plans. If the
Soviets were still holding Superman prisoner, then she had to do
something.
Luthor’s main control room was two levels down in the modern
portion of the building. With ﬁngertips and toes, she could work
her way along the stone blocks of the outer wall and reach one of
the lower windows. She would ﬁgure out what to do once she got
inside.

300

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

She had already seen Luthor’s radio transmitters and micro­
phones. If she managed to gain access, she could send a message,
broadcast a warning to the world—even call for help. During the
supposed alien invasion, her father would certainly be monitor­
ing the airwaves. She hated to rely on General Lane, but even Lois
couldn’t do everything herself.
Not looking down, she worked her way precariously along the
ledge, ignoring the seagulls that swooped around her. Mountain
climbers did this sort of thing every day. Sir Edmund Hillary could
have done it with his eyes closed while singing an aria, she told
herself.
Lois reached the open window to one of the rooms adjacent
to the control center and swung herself inside. By now her calves
burned, her arms ached, and her ﬁngertips were raw, but she was
very glad to be on a solid ﬂoor again, even if it was inside the lair of
Lex Luthor. Down the corridor, she could hear the hum of activity,
transmitted words from numerous screens and radio speakers. She
heard Luthor cursing and drew particular pleasure from the fact
that he did not sound happy at all.
Several slithery white cleansuits with hoods hung on wall pegs,
and Lois slipped into one as an idea rapidly took shape in her mind.
She covered most of her head with the hood, tucking her dark hair
out of sight, and obscured her face with a set of lab goggles; a
clipboard completed her disguise. Looking intent on her duties,
she strode brazenly into the buzzing control room.
Luthor sat in the middle of the controls and screens, watching
it all. She had to force herself to keep from staring at the images on
the video screens: huge “alien” ships hovering over Metropolis.
And Superman! He ﬂew alongside a sleek black plane, hurtling
forward to engage the invading ships directly above Metropolis.
Lois drew a quick breath, so overjoyed to see that Superman was

ENEMIES & ALLIES

301

free from the Soviet prison camp that she nearly called his name
out loud. The weakness that had afﬂicted him seemed to be gone!
No wonder Luthor was cursing.
The radio bands were ﬁlled with chatter and outraged transmis­
sions. Luthor’s ploy had been discovered, and the game was up!
“Acquire new targets,” Luthor growled. “Forget the alien
ships—there’s a new enemy to destroy.”

Chapter 58

M ETROPOLIS

SSQUADRON OF NEW-MODEL WAYNE ENTERPRISES ATTACK

craft came roaring up behind the Batplane, ﬂying in
perfect formation over Metropolis. The newly commissioned jets
swooped in with amazing maneuverability and opened ﬁre with a
suite of targeted rockets.
“The Air Force has been itching to try out these production
models,” he transmitted to Superman.
Without revealing his identity, he used the Batplane’s communi­
cation system to spread a warning throughout the squadron. “The
alien ships are fakes. There is no real attack from outer space.
Nevertheless, prepare to take out the remaining strange vessels
before they can ﬁre their weapons again.”
Unlike the ﬂying saucers, however, the death-beam projectors
atop the LuthorCorp headquarters were indeed real. Now they
rotated their dishes and pointed snub-nosed antennae toward
the harrying Wayne Enterprises jets that bombarded the faux
spacecraft. A barrage of furious heat energy lanced out, striking
two of the trailing ﬁghter jets. The pilots didn’t have a chance.
As the pair of aircraft exploded in the air, the squadron

ENEMIES & ALLIES

303

commander snapped over his command frequency, “Evasive
action—we’re taking ﬁ re!” As the ﬁghters peeled away, Luthor’s
death beam struck out again and obliterated a third jet.
The Batplane streaked toward LuthorCorp headquarters,
arming another set of missiles. Those dishes had to be taken out.
He studied his cockpit targeting cross, adjusted the range, and
primed the ﬁring systems. He thought of the dead pilots and their
families. How many children had Luthor just made fatherless?
Did the man even care? Did he count the cost of human lives as
just another one of his business expenses, an entry on his proﬁtloss statement?
The targeting crosses ﬁnally aligned, and he squeezed his black
gauntlets around the ﬁring controls, launching the three small
rockets. But the rooftop energy beams discharged ﬁrst.
He yanked his stick violently to one side, sending the Batplane
into an evasive spin. The death beam lanced past, missing the
aircraft core but vaporizing the aileron and spoiler on the wing
along with the tip of the vertical stabilizer.
Alarms shrilled in the cockpit, and he fought to maintain
control. The energy-beam projectors tracked him, aiming once
more. If the ray hit him again, the Batplane would be vaporized
in the air. In a last desperate move, he punched his rocket engine
control, but the dark aircraft went into an uncontrolled dive.
The ﬂaps still functioned, but the rudder and elevators in the tail
section were useless.
The dishes retargeted, pointing directly at him, and this time he
knew he was in their path.
But just as another blast struck out, a blue and red blur
streaked between the death beam and the Batplane. The energy
ray slammed into Superman, crackling all around him like a solar
corona. Kal-El reeled in the air but somehow kept himself aloft.

304

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Layers of carbon soot covered the bold S emblazoned on his chest,
and his red cape was singed.
Out of control, the Batplane plunged toward the skyscrapers
of Metropolis. Within seconds, he would crash into the populous
heart of the city. His only chance was to eject, to blast himself
free and hope he landed intact on the streets. But the plane still
carried armaments and fuel aboard, and he could not allow it to
crash into the ofﬁce towers and apartment complexes.
Through the cockpit canopy he could see himself careening
directly toward the Daily Planet building. He ignored the bleating
alarms and held on to the controls all the way down as he fought
to pull up, managing to veer slightly toward the river. He strained,
using every functional system, trying backup controls.
The last engine failed, and all his cockpit systems shut down.
The Batplane was now an aerodynamic black rock trailing smoke
and ﬁre. Falling.
He simply stopped in midair. Fuselage metal groaned, and
the engines roared as they struggled to ignite again. But the sleek
aircraft simply hung suspended, then began to move away.
Superman had caught him. Holding the Batplane up, he ﬂew
away from the streets of downtown Metropolis to a clear landing
area. Kal-El looked at Batman through the canopy glass. “My
turn to rescue you.”

Chapter 59

LUTHOR ’S ISLAN D

HILE LUTHOR WAS BUSY TRYING TO SALVAGE HIS PLAN,

Lois set her sights on a more immediate goal. Inside the
L
crowded control chamber, she had identiﬁed a communications
array with a dangling headset and microphone plugged into one
of the panels.
The rest of the henchmen remained engrossed in the broadcast
images of titanic battles against the extraterrestrial ships over
Metropolis. She didn’t think Luthor had expected to engage in an
actual full-scale war but had meant to cow the world’s leaders by
virtue of the threat. The bodyguard Bertram and three companions
clomped around the edge of the room, encased in their insectile
battlesuits, acting like playground bullies.
No one paid any attention to Lois in her cleansuit, hood, and
goggles. She was indistinguishable from the other workers, so long
as she kept a low proﬁle. But she wouldn’t accomplish anything
if she kept hiding. She had to pull out all the stops and send a
warning. The choice seemed obvious to her, even if it was a brash
and foolish one.
Clipboard in hand, she pretended to study the readings on

306

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

various dials and gauges as she worked her way to the communica­
tion system. Jotting notes on the clipboard, she ﬂicked the power
switches, nodded to herself, and turned the black knobs to adjust
the frequency to one of the military emergency bands. No one
stopped her.
An angry ﬂush covered Luthor’s face and his smooth head. He
was ﬁring deadly energy beams from skyscraper towers, but at
real targets now, rather than the empty alien invasion ships. She
watched in horror as the brunt of a beam caught Superman and
blanketed him with a crackling discharge.
Lois bit back a cry of disbelief, but Superman quickly shook
away the effects. She should have known that even Luthor’s worst
couldn’t stop the Man of Steel.
On the screens, she saw Superman—in his usual heroic
fashion—making fast work of Luthor’s defenses, which elicited
a string of particularly foul and furious curses from the bald man.
Good . . . that meant Luthor was thoroughly preoccupied.
When the radio gear was fully powered up, Lois picked up
the headset and placed it clumsily over her cleansuit hood. Years
ago, she had used a classiﬁed military band to tap into Air Force
communications, trying to get a story. Her audacity had backﬁ red,
and she’d gotten into a great deal of trouble. Her father had barely
managed to keep her out of federal prison for that particular breach
of security, and he had warned her never to use that particular
band again. As a two-star general, he was a fearsome ﬁgure; as an
angry father, even more so.
Lois didn’t hesitate a moment before dialing to that frequency.
She picked up the microphone, hit the transmit button, and spoke
in a rush. “This is Lois Lane, daughter of General Sam Lane and
reporter for the Daily Planet, with an urgent message.”
“Lady, get off this band! This is a classiﬁed military frequency.”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

307

Lois snapped back, “Maybe you don’t understand the meaning
of the word ‘urgent,’ soldier. I repeat, I am the daughter of General
Sam Lane. I am being held prisoner by Lex Luthor on an island
just east of Cuba.” She gave a quick rundown of the mock alien
spacecraft he had launched from his base and how he was control­
ling the attack with the energy weapons. She embellished his evil
schemes a little, but not by much. Lois was so intent on her message
that at ﬁrst she didn’t realize the shouts inside the control room
were now directed at her.
“Bertram, stop her!” Luthor yelled. The bodyguard was already
stalking forward, the hydraulic pistons in his battlesuit whirring
and humming. Each footfall was the step of a giant. He crashed
toward her and raised his purple-encased ﬁst.
“Gotta go, soldier!” she yelled into the microphone, then ripped
off the headset as she dodged. The man in the battlesuit swung an
armored ﬁst at her with the force of a pile driver.
Lois dodged again, her goggles falling off and hanging around
her neck. Bertram moved to intercept, and she hoped the other
battlesuited guards didn’t join the fun. Luthor’s main henchman
lumbered forward with more speed and power than he seemed
able to control.
“Be careful of the equipment!” Luthor shouted. Several tech­
nicians in cleansuits dodged out of the way as Bertram stomped
after Lois. She threw her clipboard at him, knocked over chairs
that spun about on casters. In his suit, Bertram smashed entirely
through a rail, making a straight line toward her.
Lois spied a bright red ﬁre extinguisher next to one of the
blinking computer banks. She snatched it from its cradle and
clanged the cylinder with all her strength against the green armor.
It didn’t make a scratch, though her hands and wrists vibrated
from the impact.

308

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Luthor yelled, his face red, “Bertram, you lummox! Catch her,
but don’t—”
Infuriated, the armored bodyguard swung at her again, his face
dark with concentration and effort. He drew back his powered
arm and slammed it forward, intending to smash her into a pulp.
But Lois dropped to the ﬂoor, and Bertram’s armored ﬁst plowed
into the control bank and power center. The gauntlet sank deep
into the array, destroying the workings.
Luthor roared at the stupidity of his bodyguard, but the
background explosions and sizzle drowned out his words.
Blue electric bolts skittered all around the battlesuit until
the bright green armor and all its internal power systems were
completely short-circuited. Though the burly bodyguard cursed
and struggled, he could not move. His high-tech armor was
nonfunctional, imprisoning him inside a statue.
“You missed me,” she said.
Luthor stood in a dead control room, as furious as he was
helpless. The smell of ozone and burning circuitry ﬁlled the air. All
the monitor screens in the room went dark, leaving Luthor blind
and unable to use his energy beams. Bertram was alive, unharmed,
and completely immobilized in his battlesuit.
That was a lot more than Lois had expected to achieve, but
when she saw the remaining battlesuited guards advancing quickly
toward her, she doubted her celebration would last very long.

Chapter 60

M ETROPOLIS

ITH MANY OF THE “ALIEN” SHIPS OUT OF COMMISSION

aand others severely damaged, Kal-El focused on the
real danger now. The false invaders continued to shoot their
embedded weapons, but Luthor’s energy beams from the top of
the LuthorCorp tower were the greatest threats.
Kal-El darted in to intercept the next deadly blast before it
could vaporize another Air Force jet, again intentionally taking
the full brunt of the discharge. Surrounded by fumes and ozone,
he took a moment to recover, pushing back the pain and steadying
his jangled nerves. Then he dove forward.
Time to put an end to this. Now.
He shot toward the top of the LuthorCorp skyscraper, where
the beam generators stood like insectile frameworks. Before they
could ﬁre again, he furrowed his brow and intensiﬁed his heat
vision, pushing into the infrared until his own beam melted the
insulated energy cables. Sparks ﬂew, and the support girders bent,
but that wasn’t good enough for him.
Kal-El ﬂew in, arms outstretched, ﬁsts clenched, and crashed
like a battering ram into the transmitter towers. He ripped apart

310

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

structural girders, uprooted power cables, and released a shower
of lightning. The tower tipped over with a crash onto the roof of
the LuthorCorp building, looking like the skeleton of a beached
sea creature.
Only then did he take a breath.
The Batplane was safely landed, but now Batman was out of the
ﬁght. Emergency crews and national guard squads rushed through
the streets, mounted ladders, and set up rescue stations to care for
the injured inside the damaged buildings.
The ﬁghter aircraft continued to circle the remaining alien ships,
spattering them with small missiles or streams of hot bullets until
the supposed invaders had been neutralized. At last, Metropolis
was safe.
Suddenly the clear voice of Lois Lane startled him as her message
broke through chatter on the military command frequency. He
focused his concentration on the transmission, heard the details of
her message, and all the pieces fell together. Now he knew where
Luthor was hiding, where he had orchestrated this spectacular and
deadly con job.
And where he was holding Lois prisoner.
Kal-El didn’t hesitate for an instant.
On the radio, General Sam Lane bellowed orders to redirect
F-100D squadrons southward while commanding another squad­
ron to launch from Tyndall and Eglin Air Force bases in Florida.
But Kal-El knew they would never ﬁnd the small Caribbean island
soon enough. Lois was in danger now. He could think of nothing
else.
She had gotten herself in trouble, tangled up in Lex Luthor’s
scam, while he’d been trapped in Siberia. Kal-El hadn’t been there
when she needed him.
Even if the USAF jets reached the island base at supersonic

ENEMIES & ALLIES

311

speeds, how could they land and deploy soldiers in time to rescue
her? How could anyone get on the ground swiftly enough to save
her?
He could. I’m coming, Lois, he thought.
Kal-El streaked off, heading due south.

FROM HIGH ABOVE, H E SCAN N ED TH E CARI BBEAN ISLAN DS

and keys with a growing sense of urgency, trying to locate the
correct one. Kal-El crisscrossed the skies, desperate to ﬁ nd Lois.
She had ended her transmission so quickly, he knew she had to be
in deep trouble.
Lois continued to get herself into impossible situations, such as
this one, but this time she had also exposed Luthor’s location. In
her own way, she was ﬁghting to save the world. He felt very proud
of her, and his heart pounded harder as he increased speed. He
knew it was not only fear that drove him faster. It was about how
much Lois meant to him, how much he loved her. The thought of
a snake like Luthor holding her captive made him clench his ﬁsts.
Not only had Luthor threatened Earth, he had threatened her.
He sped toward a tiny dot of an island in the middle of the
blue sea. Sharpening his vision, he saw the outline of the small
patch of land, the beaches, industrial areas, docks and shipyards,
soot-stained rocket launchpads . . . and the control center, modern
structures built around the ruins of an old Spanish fort.
Lois was in there. Her transmission had cut off abruptly, and
she might already be dead.
Kal-El ﬂew down faster than a missile, directly toward the
headquarters building. He landed on the rooftop with a thud,
spreading his red boots apart for balance. He bent over, cocked
back his arm, and slammed his ﬁst into the metal tiles. Battering

312

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

until he smashed through the roof, he ripped away shingles and
support beams and cleared an opening through the ceiling. He
dropped down into the control room, landing amid the debris.
Lois was easy to spot next to a grinning Lex Luthor—who held
a loaded Luger P08 pistol to her head while grasping her ﬁrmly
around the waist. Though the technicians scattered as Kal-El
crashed his way down into the control room, Luthor simply
sneered. “You’re utterly predictable. What took you so long?”
“I had to ﬁnish cleaning up your mess in Metropolis. Put the
gun down, Luthor. I’m delivering you to the authorities.”
“People should never presume to tell me what to do.” He
pressed the gun barrel ﬁrmly against Lois’s temple. She looked
more annoyed than afraid, but Kal-El wasn’t fooled.
“Ask yourself, Superman,” Luthor continued. “Is capturing me
worth the price of Miss Lane’s life? I really don’t want her pretty
brains splattered all over my suit, but . . .” He shrugged. “I can
always get a new suit. Finding another Lois Lane may prove a bit
more difﬁcult.”
Kal-El didn’t move, careful not to endanger Lois. When her
eyes met his, he saw her complete conﬁdence in him—her love for
him—and that gave him strength. “If you’re the great genius you
claim to be, Lex Luthor, then you’ve already ﬁgured out you can’t
get away.”
“I still have alternatives,” Luthor said. On cue, three battlesuited guards stalked forward to protect their master, encircling
Kal-El. “I designed those suits to match your abilities. Three of
them will be more than enough to squash you like a bug.” He
smiled at Kal-El. “These are my supermen.”
The guards raised their gauntlets and shot small explosive
rockets at Kal-El’s chest at point-blank range. The detonations
made him stagger backward into a wall so hard that the cinder

ENEMIES & ALLIES

313

blocks crumbled. But the weapons did not damage his suit, his
S emblem, or him. Picking himself up from the rubble, he strode
through the clearing smoke, taking satisfaction in the astonished
expressions on the armored bodyguards.
From their arm cannons, a stream of large-caliber bullets
poured out, only to bounce harmlessly off Kal-El’s chest, though
the deﬂected projectiles ripped craters in the walls and damaged
control banks. Two ricocheted shots struck the paralyzed Bertram
with loud spangs; trapped in his immobile armor, he ﬂinched down
beneath the raised collar shield. He struggled and strained, but
the uncooperative battlesuit kept him imprisoned in his petriﬁed
shell.
Seeing that a ricochet could easily kill Lois, Kal-El used a burst
of his heat vision to melt the already-hot barrels of their inset
artillery.
When their weapons failed, the guards activated their jetpacks
and launched themselves directly at Kal-El, smashing into him. All
three used the most powerful engines and hydraulics, slamming
piston-powered blows into Superman from all sides, hammering
and hammering.
But all he could see was Lois being threatened, the pistol pressed
against her head, and the pure evil in Luthor’s face. Kal-El could
no longer afford to be cautious.
He seized one of the guards by the front of his thick battlesuit
and hurled him up through the gaping hole he had left in the
ceiling. Kal-El picked up the second man bodily and smashed him
into his companion with the force of two colliding trucks. The
plated armor may have been impenetrable, but the reverberating
impact was enough to knock both men unconscious.
As though he had just mopped up several opponents in a bar
brawl, Kal-El turned to face Luthor once more, ﬂexing his ﬁ ngers.

314

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

The other man’s conﬁdence seemed to drain away, leaving him
paler than usual. His expression was twisted as he held Lois
tighter; now he was desperate and even more dangerous.
“Not one more step,” Luthor said. “You know I’ll kill her. Don’t
doubt it for a second.”
“Please don’t hurt me.” Lois’s voice shook with terror, and she
wobbled against him. “Please, Lex!” Kal-El saw her give him a
quick, sly wink.
Surprised at her sudden change of tone, Luthor glanced at
his captive—and Lois stomped down hard with her full weight,
grinding her heel ferociously into his instep. Luthor howled in
pain, instinctively doubling over, and she brought up her knee.
Hard.
Reacting instantly, Kal-El unleashed a burst of heat vision,
and the Luger in Luthor’s hand turned cherry red. The bald man
hurled the throbbing pistol aside as Lois ducked free of his grasp.
Kal-El seized Luthor easily, though the man continued to struggle
and argue (it seemed a matter of pride for him).
Holding Luthor easily up off the ﬂoor, where his feet kicked
and thrashed, Kal-El smiled at Lois. “The Air Force will be here
soon, Miss Lane. Your father received your message on the secure
military band. I’ll wait here until you’re safe.”
Lois nodded matter-of-factly, surveying the ruined control
center with a wry chuckle. “The general will be annoyed that I
used that frequency again.”
“It was a matter of national security, Miss Lane. I’m sure he’ll
understand.”
“You don’t know my father.”
Still smiling, he took a step closer, wanting to put his arms
around her, but he couldn’t let go of Luthor yet. “Then I’ll put in a
good word. How could anyone stay upset with you for long?”

ENEMIES & ALLIES

315

BY TH E TI M E TH E AI R FORCE JETS ARRIVED AN D A GROUP OF

paratroopers landed on the island to secure the base, Kal-El
had already done most of the mopping up and locked Luthor in
one of his own cells. A U.S. Navy destroyer came shortly there­
after, dispatching marines who quickly fanned out and took up
their positions to stand guard over Luthor’s remaining weapons
systems.
Finally, Kal-El handed Luthor over to the marines and watched
as they put the scowling man into handcuffs and marched him
away to the destroyer’s brig.
“Good riddance,” Lois said. “I’ve had enough of this island.”
Kal-El put his hand on her arm. “I’d be happy to give you a lift
back to Metropolis, Miss Lane . . . Lois . . . if you’d like to ﬂy with
me.” For a minute the pair stood there awkwardly, not sure what
to do next.
Then Lois smiled and took his hand in hers. “I’d love to.”
He gently swept her off her feet, held her close, and the two
of them were quickly airborne, ﬂying free and alone in the empty
sky. She looked into his bright blue eyes and let herself enjoy the
sensation of being held in his arms again. They never once looked
back down as the island vanished below them.

Chapter 61

TH E DAILY PLAN ET

H E N C LA R K K E NT R ETU R N E D F RO M VI S ITI N G H I S

mother in Kansas, he congratulated Lois on her front-page
m
story. “It must have been quite an ordeal, Lois.”
“Good thing Superman was there to save her,” Jimmy said with
a grin.
Lois raised her eyebrows. “Give me a little credit, Jimmy—
Superman and I took more of a tag-team approach. Luthor didn’t
have a chance against the two of us.” She let out a wistful sigh. “I’m
just glad I helped restore the world’s faith in Superman. Some of
those innuendos Luthor made . . . And now we know what he was
up to all along! Even Senator McCarthy has denounced Luthor.
He’s in full-blown damage control.”
“Now, Lois, I doubt the world really questioned Superman,”
Clark said mildly. “He’s proved himself again and again with his
good deeds. Isn’t that enough?”
“Never a doubt in my mind,” Lois said. She looked at the folded
newspaper, the large-type headline, and more important, her own
name on the byline. “Superman certainly doesn’t slack off when

ENEMIES & ALLIES

317

people need him.” She pointed to the prominent photo of the Man
of Steel. “He’s a real hero.”
Upon returning to the bullpen, Clark was delighted to see Lorna
Bahowic back at her desk, happily wading through mountains of
complicated letters and compiling her next “Lovelorn” column.
Clark was relieved to see her diligently tackling those crises so that
he could deal with matters to which he was better suited.
“We all can’t be Superman, Lois.” Clark fumbled with his
eyeglasses and looked away. “I wish I could have been here myself,
but my mom wasn’t feeling well, and I had to take care of her. In
Smallville, Kansas, we’re raised to think that family takes priority.”
Lois’s expression softened as she looked sincerely at him. “Of
course, Clark. It’s just . . . well, you always seem to be gone every
time something exciting happens around here.”
“Something exciting is always happening in Metropolis, Lois.
And the Luthor scandal is going to last for quite a while.”
Luthor faced a mountain of charges, thanks in large part to
Lois’s investigative journalism and all the information she had
discovered about his secret island base, his energy-beam controls,
the murders of many LuthorCorp employees, and his plans to
dupe the human race. More than a hundred people had been killed
during the attack of the fake alien battleships on Metropolis,
including ﬁve ﬁghter pilots, and Luthor would be held responsible
for those murders.
But the crimes did not stop there. He had also been impli­
cated in secret dealings with the Soviets, and the launch of the three
nuclear missiles had his ﬁngerprints all over it as well. Though the
Soviet premier denied all knowledge of a general named Ceridov or
the existence of any gulag in the Siberian wasteland, the computer
tapes recovered in Luthor’s control center told a different story.

318

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Once his plan was revealed, Luthor didn’t even bother to deny his
involvement. Instead, he wanted to receive credit for his genius in
developing the “alien” propulsion system, the invasion battleships,
and the ﬂying-saucer prototype that had crashed in Arizona.
Luthor even admitted to using his high-powered energy beams to
blast Sputnik out of orbit, which elicited furious demands from the
Soviets to have him extradited to face trial in Moscow as well.
All together, there was more than enough evidence. Luthor
wasn’t going to worm his way out of this one.
“So, Mr. Kent, maybe there aren’t aliens out there after all.”
Jimmy sounded glum. “I’m glad the invasion turned out to be a
fake, but still . . . all those movies can’t be wrong, can they?”
Clark sighed. “Just because one or two stories are hoaxes
doesn’t mean that all the rest are untrue.” He squeezed the young
photographer’s shoulder in a gesture of friendship. “After all, it
only takes one.”
Jimmy grinned at him. “And we know Superman’s an alien—
there’s no denying that.”
“See? There’s always hope.” In the back of his mind, Clark was
trying to convince himself, too. He longed to know that he wasn’t
alone.
Perry White stood at the door of his ofﬁce, impatiently tapping
his ﬁngers on the jamb. “Is this a newfangled journalism technique
they teach in school? Wait for the news to come to you? Come
on, people—stories don’t report themselves. Get out there, hit the
streets, ﬁnd some leads. Is it asking too much for a newspaper to
have a headline every single day?”
Clark took up his hat and notepad, Jimmy grabbed his camera,
and Lois got a brand-new pen to replace the one that had been ruined
during her escape from Luthor’s base. The smiling trio left the Daily
Planet together to see what Metropolis had to offer them today.

Chapter 62

TH E CAVE

E KN EW TH E WORLD WOULD N EVER BE TRULY SAFE--NOT

from petty thieves who were willing to murder, not from
corrupt industrialists who wanted to take over the planet . . .
perhaps not even from the threat of alien invasion.
But Earth was secure enough, for now.
Bruce sat in the Cave, still clad in his dark armored suit, the
black scalloped cape tucked behind him; he had removed his cowl
and it sat like a demonic mask on the corner of the laboratory
table. At the moment he was deep in thought, balanced between
being millionaire Bruce Wayne and vigilante Batman, half in and
half out of costume, both a corporate head and a hero. It didn’t
really matter which outﬁt he wore.
With Lex Luthor in disgrace, the future of LuthorCorp was in
limbo. The man had been too narcissistic to believe his company
could possibly function without him, so—unlike Thomas
Wayne—he had failed to create detailed contingency plans for his
demise. He had established basic guidelines for the company to
continue, and it would limp along for a time, but it was obvious that
Luthor had designated no heir. He did not trust anyone enough.

320

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Many of LuthorCorp’s pending R&D contracts had been
transferred to Wayne Enterprises. Bruce’s best researchers would
continue to develop sophisticated ways to defend America, and
with those proﬁts he could devote more resources to medical
research and the construction of new hospitals, which would have
made his father proud.
Alfred had brought him a club sandwich and small bowl of
canned peaches in syrup, a treat he had particularly enjoyed as a
boy. Bruce hadn’t touched either.
He regarded the empty cowl on the desktop next to him—the
black pointed ears, the empty eyeholes of the mask. But the focus
of his current study was the faintly glowing green rock sitting in a
lab tray, the mineral sample he had taken from Luthor’s mansion.
Superman’s Achilles heel.
If the story of Kal-El’s origin was true—and Bruce had no
reason to doubt it anymore—this might indeed be a fragment
of the exploded planet Krypton. And through some sympathetic
connection, a kind of radiation that primarily targeted someone
tied to that planet, even in small doses this “kryptonite” weakened
Superman. Because of the gulag’s reactor explosion, the entire
meteor crater at the Ariguska impact site was gone. All traces of
the Siberian kryptonite were almost certainly destroyed.
He wondered if the piece here was the only sample Luthor had
possessed, and now Bruce had it. Nobody else needed to know its
power over Superman.
He looked at the rock one last time, then sealed it in a new
lead-lined case he’d had specially constructed. He locked the case
in a vault carved in the Cave’s solid rock. For safekeeping.
He hoped he would never have any reason to use it.

Chapter 63

ABOVE TH E EARTH

AL-EL WANTED TO M EASURE H IS LI M ITS. H E N EEDED TO
A

k
know
how far he could go. As he shot straight up into the
sky, the details of the terrain below shifted from individual houses
and buildings to intersecting patterns of roads and the checker­
boards of crop ﬁelds, then to a blur of generalized landscape, and
ﬁnally the outlines of the continents themselves, swiftly masked
by thick white clouds.
The atmosphere grew thinner and colder as he ﬂew higher,
higher, straining toward the very edge of Earth’s atmosphere and
beyond. He had never tested himself like this before, never pushed
so high.
The air became vanishingly thin until he just kissed space,
where raw and unﬁltered sunlight continued to give him strength.
He felt as though his every skin cell was charging, like a minute
battery. He felt no shortness of breath even here. He was an alien,
after all.
No one had been here to teach him. He had no comrade to give
him advice, no other Kryptonian to tell him about his heritage,
his strengths and weaknesses. Kal-El simply drifted over Earth,

322

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

gazing out toward the inﬁnite universe. So many stars . . . so many
planets. So many questions.
He focused his telescopic vision, pushing outward into deep
space with a resolution greater than that of the best Earth-based
telescope. From here, he could see the moon with its artistry of
distant mountain ridges and round craters, the stark and lifeless
terrain drawn in sharp relief by slanted sunlight. He tried to
discern any signs of activity—lost cities or alien bases, domed
settlements, silver rocket ships, the barest hint of an extraterres­
trial civilization.
But he saw nothing. No hint of strange visitors, Kryptonian or
otherwise. He silently asked the universe if he was truly alone, but
the universe didn’t answer.
So he turned back and looked at the blue, green, and white
globe turning beneath him. From here, high enough that he could
see the planet’s curvature, Kal-El gained a new perspective: The
landmasses showed no political boundaries, no lines delineating
countries, no colors that separated Communist from capitalist.
Kal-El decided he liked this view of Earth best.
He descended swiftly through the atmosphere, cutting through
the clouds and soaring over continents, heading back to Metropo­
lis. He was not alone, because the people of Earth were his people.
And Lois. She could be more than just a friend. He’d like that, and
he knew she would like it as well.
Kal-El might have been different from them . . . but all people
were different from one another. Yet even with those differences,
they all shared a common bond. And Kal-El—Superman—would
always stay there to protect them.

Chapter 64

FE DE R AL COURT
BU ILDING , M ETROPOLIS

EX
X LUTHOR’S SENSATIONAL TRIAL PROCEEDED WITH GREAT

alacrity, an example of swift and effective American justice.
The news media loved it. He wasn’t the least bit surprised. These
little people who now accused him were incapable of seeing the
larger picture.
Nobody else saw the irony in the fact that he was entitled to
face a jury of his “peers.” Who, in all of the United States, could be
considered Lex Luthor’s peer? Nevertheless, the evidence against
him was incontrovertible.
With Lois Lane’s persistent and thorough investigative work
over the past several months, as well as Superman’s repeated
interference, Luthor had been caught red-handed. Because of his
covert cooperation with the Soviet KGB general, Luthor was even
branded “un-American.” Senator McCarthy renounced any and
all connection he’d ever had with Lex Luthor.
That was the most annoying of all.
Lois Lane was a permanent ﬁxture in the gallery, sometimes
sitting next to Clark Kent, covering the story daily. As Luthor
glanced at her without catching her eye, he expected to see her

324

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

gloating, or at least exhibiting some personal satisfaction to see
such a great man brought so low. But she was a professional
newswoman, and she reported the story for the Daily Planet with
a reasonable degree of objectivity. With grudging respect, Luthor
had even considered complimenting her efforts but decided that
she would probably not appreciate the gesture.
He insisted on being his own legal representative, since he was
far more qualiﬁed and talented than any lawyer he could have
hired. Certainly no one had a greater incentive to succeed. But
his conviction was a foregone conclusion—he knew that from the
start. Lex Luthor refused to beg, refused to make excuses. In fact,
in his cool and logical summation, he did his best to convey to
the jury, and the hordes of reporters in the gallery, the breathtak­
ing complexity and scope of his plans, his sheer genius in creating
the false alien battleships and directed-energy defensive weapons.
Surely someone had to admire that.
Not surprisingly, the little people of the jury took less than an
hour to ﬁnd him guilty, convict him of treason, and sentence him
to death.
Luthor remained seated, motionless. He didn’t rage, didn’t
curse, didn’t make a scene. Of course, the government was too
shortsighted to take advantage of his brilliance. In his mind, the
wheels were already turning. Starting now, he had to plan his
escape.
Looming over him, the portly, sour-faced judge said rather
snidely, “I believe, Mr. Luthor, that our penal system uses a model
of electric chair designed and built by LuthorCorp.”
Not at all rattled, Luthor gave the judge a cold smile. “Then,
Your Honor, I am conﬁdent it will work properly.”

Chapter 65

GOTHAM CIT Y

AL-EL FOUN D BATMAN SITTI NG AMONG TH E GARGOYLES
A

on a rooftop in Gotham City. Hunched over, the other
man looked like a gargoyle himself in his black cape and cowl. He
directed his intent gaze at the streets, as vigilant as the silent stone
sentinels beside him.
Drifting down in a quiet swirl of red cape, Kal-El landed next
to him. Batman didn’t ﬂinch, his gaze never ﬂickered, but he spoke
in a deep voice. “Greed, corruption, jealousy, poverty—even pure
evil.” He turned to look at Kal-El, his eyes darker than the shadows
around him. “People will always ﬁnd reasons to cause harm. And
the world will always need men like us.”
Kal-El added his increased acuities to scan Gotham City. “I’m
glad to know I won’t be the only one protecting the innocent and
defending against injustice.”
Batman frowned. Even without any sort of superhuman vision,
he seemed to see as much as Kal-El could. “I hope you aren’t going
to propose a partnership. You’re the hero, Superman. I prefer to
operate out of the public eye.”

326

KEVIN J. ANDERSON

Kal-El frowned. “We could accomplish more together. We
have the same goal—to make the world safer from criminals.”
“Criminals,” Batman repeated. “The Gotham City Police
Department considers me a criminal. But I’m not going to stop
what I’m doing simply because I don’t ﬁt into one of their neat
categories. What exactly is a vigilante? Do you ask permission to
rescue those people you save, or do you act on your own and follow
your conscience? As long as I do what’s right, I’ll keep doing it.”
Now he did smile slightly. “Besides, I don’t need a sidekick.”
Kal-El was surprised. “You thought I wanted to be your
sidekick?”
“I said I don’t need one.”
“Neither do I. But we don’t always have to operate alone. We
don’t each have to be alone. Sometimes we’ll encounter problems
large enough to warrant cooperation between us. There’s got to be
some sort of trust.”
Batman nodded. “Agreed.”
Kal-El stood tall then, smiling. “And in that spirit, I promise
I will never expose your real identity . . . Bruce Wayne.” He had
secretly used his X-ray vision to look through Batman’s mask,
recognizing him immediately. “You can trust me, Bruce. My word
is my bond.”
Now Batman rose from his crouch, an unexpected smile on his
face. His black cape ﬂuttered in the suddenly cool night breeze.
“And I promise not to reveal the location of your Fortress of
Solitude . . . or your secret identity, Clark Kent.”

AUTHOR ’S NOTE

Readers may have noticed that some details in this novel differ
from “our” version of the late 1950s. For instance, the real Senator
McCarthy died several months before the launch of Sputnik (and
had he been alive at the time, he would surely have suffered a stroke
to see such a blatant demonstration of Soviet superiority in the
space race). Nikita Khrushchev’s famous shoe-banging incident at
the UN occurred years later than the similar actions by the Soviet
premier in this novel. In our 1950s, no Soviet nuclear missiles were,
in fact, launched at the United States, nor was Sputnik shot out of
the sky.
The role of Superman and Batman in historical events is, of
course, perfectly accurate.

ACKNOWLE DG M E NTS

Many people helped me with this book. My special thanks to
Christopher Cerasi, Steve Korté, and Paul Levitz at DC Comics;
Mauro DiPreta, Jennifer Schulkind, Jack Womack, and Danielle
Bartlett at HarperCollins; John Silbersack at Trident Media
Group; Elizabeth Thomson for her lightning-fast typing ﬁngers;
and my eager and enthusiastic test readers Deb Ray, Diane Jones,
Louis Moesta, and Rebecca Moesta Anderson for their insightful
advice.
And, of course, to the genius of Frank Miller, Jeph Loeb, and
Tim Sale for providing such a solid creative foundation for this
story.

About the Author
K E V I N J . A N D E R S O N is the author of the
internationally bestselling and award-winning
Dune prequels (coauthored with Brian Herbert),
and has carved an indisputable niche with science
ﬁction epics, including his own successful Saga of
Seven Suns series and The Last Days of Krypton.
His work has won or been nominated for numer­
ous major awards. He lives in Colorado.

www.wordﬁre.com
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive
information on your favorite HarperCollins author.

HARPE RCOLLINS BOOKS AL SO BY KEVIN J. ANDE RSON

The Last Days of Krypton

Credits
Designed by Daniel Lagin

Copyright

This book is a work of fiction. The characters, incidents, and dialogue
are drawn from the author’s imagination and are not to be construed as
real. Any resemblance to actual events or persons, living or dead, is
entirely coincidental.
ENEMIES & ALLIES. Copyright © 2009 by DC Comics. SUPERMAN,
BATMAN, the Superman “S-shield,” Batman logo, and all related names,
characters, and elements are trademarks of DC Comics. All rights
reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted
the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in
or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known
or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader April 2009
ISBN 978-0-06-191558-1
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 

Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

