DARK BECOMING

Dark
Becoming

1

DARK BECOMING

2

DARK BECOMING

Dark
Becoming
A book of days...
and hours

3

DARK BECOMING

4

DARK BECOMING

Dark
Becoming
A book of days...
and hours
by Marcus D. Mébes
based upon a concept by Marcus Mébes and Derek Block

G

Lulu Publishing
2006
5

DARK BECOMING

Dedicated
to friends and family
and fans of dark fantasy
Special thanks to
Jeff Rester for his assistance
in preparing this book
for publication

Dark Becoming: A book of days... and hours
Copyright © 2006 By Marcus D. Mébes
First written in August, 1992, revised September 1993, second revision June 1994, third revision July 1995, fourth revision April 1997.
Chatacter drawings featured at back of book copyright © 1995 and
2006 by Marcus D. Mébes
Map copyright © 2006 by Marcus D. Mébes, based on the original
map drawn by Derek Block.
All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or
in part, by any means, without written permission of the copyright
holder; except for brief passages to be included in a review of the
work.
Book Design: Marcus Mébes
First Printing—September 2006
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Published by
Lulu Publishing
6

DARK BECOMING

dark becoming...

Prologue:

O

urs was a wondrous, magical world, filled with elves, dwarves,
dragons, faeries and their mystical, magical like. The beings
dwelt in the lush green flora, bathed in the light of the sun. It
was at this time that, in the verdant kingdom of Erz, Queen Senna,
with the gift of foresight, set off to prevent the prophesized possibility of the divine Sphere of Knowledge falling into the hands of those
that might do evil with it. The great Sphere had been kept sacred within
protective hands for an indeterminable amount of time, yet its whereabouts had somehow been made known. This did not bode well with
those for whom its secrecy was paramount. Several beings wished to
gain control of it, to wield the power of the twelve gods who had died
to create it. The fabled queen foresaw cataclysm befalling our world if
the potential threat was not subdued before it became a reality. She found
the Sphere through great effort and travail, burying it then deep within
the hot sands of the Monshera Desert, never to be found...
She never returned to her kingdom. Her children, the noble Prince
and Princess of Erz, set out to find their mother, but they too were lost
in the shifting sands of the deadly desert.
The disappearance occurred so long ago that no one remembers much
of how it truly happened, or—for some—even why. All that remains
known is that cataclysmic destruction ensued phenomenally swiftly and
7

DARK BECOMING
for no apparent reason to those ignorant of Queen Senna’s efforts, and
the bright candle of our sky was snuffed out. The Golden Age of Light
was no more. Our world became enshrouded in deep darkness, a veil of
impenetrable secrets that no man knew the answer to. All that anyone
truly knew was that it was growing colder, darker, and soon all would
inevitably perish. Though no accomplished scientists testified to it, astronomers warned that without a sun, our solar system would spin off
into oblivion. The common man knew nothing of gravity, only that
night had fallen, and morning never arrived.
The sudden loss of sunlight threw our world into turmoil, producing an era of ice, as well as of the Anger of Harlus. Hollow mountains
festered her surface, the blemishes spewing forth Harlus’ boiling blood
in vast flows of fire. The combination of cold and intense heat convulsed Harlus in pain, shaking her lands, deep fissures marring her vast
visage, swallowing up entire cities and men alike. Sicknesses came, bringing with them more death and destruction. It was all the mages could do
to enshroud an atmosphere polluted with ash and debris with a protective layer of clouds. Unfortunately, these clouds, though a barrier to
the harsh outer atmosphere and space, held in the moisture and combinations of heat and cold, rendering Harlus an eternally humid planet.
Little did the population of Harlus know that an even deeper magic, one
perilously close to losing its grip, was holding Harlus steady in an orbit
around the remains of a sun. Though the shockwaves of its explosion
had long since passed beyond our world, barely touching it, the damage
already done was enough to cause everyone great distress. No one realized that we had escaped sure destruction, and ought to have been grateful for the magic that kept our planet alive.
All known vegetation began to wither and die. Men became savages
who feasted unrelentingly upon those, human or otherwise, weaker than
they. The air became thinner. People came to rely upon the overburdened mages for protection and life. Raised almost to the level of gods,
those very mages who saved our world became ruthless autocrats obsessed with the power that events had bestowed upon them. They became the center of life. Cities and villages were erected around their
high towers, the obelisks. There were housed the new masters, and there
our masters were able to perform their duties in keeping the planet alive,
festering and haggard though it may be.
8

DARK BECOMING
The only light that our tiny world grasped was that produced by
the stars above our heads, glancing through infrequent gaps in the clouds,
no longer a reliable measurement of time and travel. As Harlus rotated
on its axis, different constellations emerged from the astral patterns
that could sometimes be seen, though none could confirm what they
thought had been glimpsed. The withered remains of the sun hung dim
and lifeless high above the clouds, adding only minuscule glow to their
nebulous surface. Had any surviving peoples questioned the ability of a
planet to revolved around a lifeless sun, minds would have staggered
under the heavy weight of the incredible concept.
With only candles under their control, a small group of people began to question the possibilities of a different source of light. As the
electrical storms roiled in the billows above, there came varying reports of light which seared the senses and lit the eternal night. Flickering Light they called it. Fire in the sky! This was no ordinary lightning—lightning which the people of Harlus were familiar with. This
was immense searing surges of electricity, passing under the heavy layer
of clouds and momentarily lighting up the planet’s surface as if it were
daylight.
With the people’s growing familiarity with fire and flickering light,
the mages were no longer needed and duly disposed of. After all, what
use were those who claimed to produced fire when any being, with effort, could? Massive uprisings of the people toppled their reigns and
brought an end to their tyranny. No thought was given to these mages’
responsiblity in holding the planet together, in keeping it spinning endlessly in an orbit that should no longer exist. How could they realize
that their actions were severely damaging the fragile threads that tentatively kept Harlus alive?
All obelisks and their mages were toppled but one. Ullix, most powerful and ruthless of mage-kind held beck the valiant, though futile attacks of the people. With his army holed up within the confines of his
Obelisk of Darkness, he stayed for more than a decade, growing ever
more powerful even as he expended more effort than ever before in keeping the planet intact.
Sky fire was the main concern of Harlus people. They would do
anything to have it, and kill to keep it. Many countless wars followed
the Era of Flickering Light. Torches lined highways across the king9

DARK BECOMING
doms, illuminating the many paths between cities for travelers. Bonfires lit the centers of the townships, their lurid light creeping outward,
silently caressing the stillness of the disturbing blackness. Bonfires that
steadily burned up any remaining fuel that the fragile ecosystem could
produce. The planet was dying, and its people were killing it.
A sphere of crystal lay embedded somewhere deep within the secrets of Harlus, where Senna is sure to be nearby. Within it, all knowledge that one could possess, including technology, a power to control
light, all of life’s secrets, could be answered with a simple touch. But
if one’s mind was not strong enough, the ultimate prize of knowledge
and wisdom would be denied. Instead, insanity would be the gift to claim.

10

DARK BECOMING

a book of days...
Chapter 1.
Senna had been captive in the dank dungeon for approximately four hundred years, by her reckoning. There had
been so many years she had lost exact count. The years did
not seem so important to her anymore, though. After the
first five decades, time grew swifter and passed easier. Looking back upon everything she had done, thinking of all the
enjoyment and laughter long lost into the oblivion of time,
smiling to herself, she remembered what it was like to have
sunlight dance across the features of one’s face, be they
harsh or defined, or soft and smooth like hers. The years
did little to tarnish the physical youth Senna held onto so
dearly. One day, one night, one moment... through the years
she had a dream to believe in, to hold on to. One step, one
goal, and perhaps one falter to a new world that she knew
so much and so little of. Nothing could keep her from her
journey. She had seen the vision of danger, and she had
seen herself abort it. She saw many things, not all of which
had come to actuality. She knew that she was the one to
stop the wrongdoing that came about from her failure. But
she had had that vision so long ago. Back when the sun was
still in the sky.
11

DARK BECOMING
Captivity in the dungeon proved effective in dimming
her memories of what life was like back then. Many of them
blurred and blended together, and though she could keep
some of them clear, many more were just a muddled mess.
All she had to look at day after day, year after year, were the
bleak walls of the small cave dungeon that she was locked
in. There was no light—not even when the guards came by
to leave her tray. Senna had seen many different guards
come and go in her centuries of captivity. Not all of them
chose to remember her food. Perhaps some of them considered it impossible for a person to survive so long, and
thus chose to speed her demise by witholding what passed
as food. But she grew accustomed to that. Just as she grew
accustomed to the darkness around her. It was no longer a
barrier to her vision. The roughly hewn walls, floor, and
ceiling of her dungeon were dug from the rocky foundation
of Ullix’s castle. Actually, it was an obelisk, but it came to
be known by many names. Oh, she was sure she did not
know them all, but she knew many of them.
Senna walked from where she was standing in the center of the dungeon to the far wall. It was opposite the door,
where a window might be. If ever a window could exist down
there. She lay her hand softly on its surface, worn smooth
by over four hundred years of her doing so. Senna would
imagine that this window opened out upon the lush countryside of her kingdom, with its rolling hills and quiet farms.
She could almost see, if she clenched here eyes hard enough,
the sun peeking over the horizon, in either sunrise or set.
It would not work this time for her though. For some
reason she was tired and... almost uneasy. Was this the time
that it was supposed to happen? Oh, how she wished she
could be sure. She tried hard to remember exactly how long
she had been imprisoned in this dank hole. Maybe if she
asked the guard the next time she got fed. Of course, that
could be within the hour, or within the next one or two
weeks. It seems that the guards had become more lax than
usual, forgetting—or neglecting—to bring her food for days
12

DARK BECOMING
on end. But she at least knew the time was close. Close
enough to worry.
And thinking of that, when was the last time she had
eaten something? Probably about three or four days ago. A
bowl of something or other. Probably gruel made from
crushed mushrooms and maybe even some bugs in it, too.
Senna did not really care any more about that. Bugs. Not
very ladylike. Not something the courtesans of her land
would deign to consume. Nothing was able to physically
harm her or make her ill. And the revulsion had long since
passed. Still, it would be nice to have some real food for a
change. Like roasted pheasant, with new potatoes and
brown gravy, and green vegetables, too! But first she would
have a fresh garden salad, with lettuce, leeks, onions, tomatoes, celery, carrots and thin slices of ham, all covered
with a spicy dressing. And for dessert she would order the
chef to bake a three-layered sweet cake, coated with sticky,
citrus gel, with raspberry preserves spread between the layers. And of course, she would only have one piece, and give
the rest to the castle servants.
She could also ask Broceliande or Garid. They were the
two ghosts that lingered down in the dungeons. They were
especial friends of Senna. She was the only one who had
been there long enough to get to know them well. In fact,
they were cell-mates with her at one time or another.
Garid had been a ghost for nearly twenty years.
Broceliande lived on as a disembodied spirit for over
two-hundred. Senna could still remember the days when
Broceliande was sharing the cell with her. She could remember cradling the despairing young woman in her arms
as she cried... Cried over her lost parents and friends. Crying over her captivity. Senna could even remember the night
Broceliande had been killed. She could recall the guards
coming into their dungeon so late that winter night. Three
of them, with no food to justify their entry. Two of them
took off their armor immediately, while the third leered
hungrily as they tore Broceliande’s clothes off. Broceliande
13

DARK BECOMING
later understood why Senna had not tried to stop them. For
some time after the event she was in no mood to realize
that. But Senna recalled every moment of that horrid night.
She could hear the screams. There had only been two. They
then stuffed her ripped dress into her mouth. There were
other noises, too. Goodness there were! Senna quickly put
those thoughts out of her head. Those distasteful memories had crept into her unsuspecting thoughts many times
before, and there was no need to further relive them.
Garid’s was a tragic tale, too. Similar circumstances, as
well, as she understood. Thankfully she did not see it happen. The guard had taken the poor lad to another dungeon.
She had heard nothing either. She was rather gratefuly for
that. Garid showing up as a ghost a week or two later confirmed her suspicions. And as the boy was very anxious and
vivid in his descriptions, it did not take long for Senna to
formulate the entire scene in her mind, despite her gentle
insistence that she did not care to know every lurid detail.
“Garid!” The call echoed through the lower hallways. The
dulcet tone was answered by a few moans and other less
pleasant sounds from the neighboring cells. “Broceliande!
Where are you? Please come to me!” Senna returned to her
stance in front of the door and waited patiently. Calling out
like she did could just as easily have alerted guards and their
less than honorable intentions, yet she felt no fear of that.
After only a few hours of waiting, she was promptly
joined by two ethereal forms. Broceliande’s form was white
and wispy, while Garid was just a gossamer gray version of
his original self.
“Dears,” she said softly to both. Senna was particularly
fond of calling Garid so, since she had practically been his
second mother for nearly twenty-three years. “Could you
possibly find out what day today is?” Without a word, the
two ghosts drifted from the cell.
What were a few hours to wait to someone as old as
Senna? It had taken the ghosts some time to get to her, and
she was sure it would take the same amount of waiting, if
14

DARK BECOMING
not longer, for them to return with the information she
wanted. That was fine, since it was not that close to the time.
And that certain special time was very important. Just as
long as she had a few days, weeks, or months to prepare,
she would be fine. But it would help if she knew what day
today was. Then she could mark the days on the walls of
her cell until the time when it would happen. She had been
waiting for this to happen for nearly five hundred years
now... Cocking her head, Senna realized that it could be a
challenge discerning the passage of time, and breaking it
apart into days. A pause, and she turned her head to regard
her surroundings. Well, there was no help for it. She would
simply have to put her ghostly friends to task on a daily
basis, until she could grow accustomed to the passage of
time again, and divide it into hours on her own. If it came
to that.
How much time had elapsed since she sent the ghosts
out? Senna had lost track of the time yet again. The years of
seclusion did that to her. She could not be sure whether she
had inadvertently slept on her feet or just forgotten how
long it was between thoughts. But she knew that it had been
at least an hour, or even two. Or perhaps it was just a few
minutes? Senna treaded softly to her corner. Here the walls
and floor were worn smooth from centuries of her touching, feeling, walking upon, sitting, and lying upon it. When
she had first been cast into the sparse cave it was encrusted
with animal droppings and dirt, roots of sorts, and rocks
and hay. Rodents and bugs occasionally found their ways
to her “home” and caused more discomfort. But Senna had
taken care of everything like that. Now the dungeon was
clean and tidy. All the refuse had been swept into the far
side of the cell, into a large crevice that had broken into the
wall some three hundred years ago. The years of her running her hands over the walls and pacing the floors brought
a smoothness upon them. Only the ceiling remained harsh
and rough. Senna’s cell was almost pretty to look at... except for its drab nothingness. No light, no furnishings, noth15

DARK BECOMING
ing. Perhaps it wasn’t pretty. Perhaps it was just not as bad
as it had once been.
Senna had no need for light once her eyes adjusted to
the dark. She had no use for fancy clothing or furnishings,
since barely anyone would see her. She had no real need for
food, nor receptacles for certain bodily functions. Her two
past cell-mates did, however. And she tidied up that, too.
Mortals could be so messy sometimes. Oh, Broceliande did
try to be clean, and Senna gave her privacy when she needed
it. But she could not help but wish that all mortals could be
like her. She could eat, and enjoyed it too, but her metabolism was something not known in others, and it was just a
small part of what made her special.
Broceliande and Garid silently drifted up behind Senna
as she contemplated the cold stone floor of the dungeon.
“Today is Fourthday,” whispered Broceliande.
“What year is it?” asked Senna, turning to the wraiths.
“Four-hundred ninety-five,” answered Garid. “I asked
a peasant out in the town. He told me that the Day of
Reckoning was at hand. I think he was drunk. Then he put
his hand through my head and got scared. Do you know
what he meant?”
“Yes,” replied Senna, reaching out her hand to lay it upon
Garid’s head, “I do.” Unlike the peasant that the ghost had
terrified outside the tower, her hand touched his head as if
it were solid. “It means that I’ve been locked in this dungeon for four-hundred and ninety-five years, and four days.
And it means that I’m going to leave it soon.”
She draped her arm around the boy’s shoulders, and held
him closer. The serene look upon her face belied the turmoil churning within her soul. She smiled at her foster son,
and kissed the top of his wispy head.

16

DARK BECOMING

a book hidden...
Chapter 2.
Galden lived in the midst of the great Kaelmorde mushroom prairie with his mother and his uncle. His family
owned a large farm, nearly five-hundred acres, of mushrooms and few other products. Originally, his father and
his mother had bought the land from the previous owners,
who were also farmers. Apparently the terrain was too harsh
and growing anything was miserable work.
The two of them—and later three when Galden was
born—lived there and farmed enough to maintain themselves. Then the rains came, making the ground more damp
and moist, allowing for larger amounts of produce (when
the languishing rot decayed), along with larger sizes of the
individual products. Galden Senior’s mushrooms came to
be known as the best in Kaelmorde. They grew lush in the
eternal blackness and the wet, nutrient-rich soil. Many centuries of dead and rotting animals and, long ago, plants,
added to this soil only, leaving other fields to grow only the
common varieties of fungi.
Of course, lingering magic had a lot to contribute to what
little grew, but its presence had long since passed into legend and obscurity. The mushrooms grew, and that’s all any17

DARK BECOMING
one needed or cared to know.
Galden Farms became a well-known name in the small
township. Everything was going along quite nicely until
Galden’s father died. Then his uncle Pat moved in. Pat was
not a very hospitable person, and soon the good name of
Galden washed away like the water in a sieve. However,
Galden and his family were still very wealthy in terms of
their harvest. They at least did not, and were not going to,
starve, no matter how many brawls were started by “Uncle
Pat,” nor how many virtues were lost to his craven thirst.
Outside, in the mushroom fields, Galden felt a sort of
desolation creep through his young body. The great expanse
of the horizon before him was made up of carefully cultivated fields of food-caliber mushrooms. The workers they
employed certainly did a good job, but the mechanical precision of the acreage left nothing to the imagination. And
imagination was something Galden reveled in... something
he escaped to. His had been a life well cared for. He never
went hungry, and all his needs were provided for. He lived
all twenty years of his life in the comfort of Galden Farms, a
well-known locale that bore his very own name. But now he
wanted something different. He no longer was satisfied
with his mundane farmer life, despite the benefits. He was
bored. Galden stuck his hoe into the soft ground and leaned
his weight against it. Stray wisps of hair fell across his eyes
as he stared upward at the black, cloud-filled sky. What excitement it would be to get away from it all! To find some
place where he could do something useful... Something that
would benefit others, and make people happy. He wanted
to do something that would help someone. Anything but
this life. His imagination was limited, considering only the
spectrum of what he was familiar with. Paramount was escape.
“Galden!” The shout startled him out of his reverie.
Stumbling a bit, but retaining his balance, Galden turned
to face the farm house. His mother was standing in the door
frame, a wash-cloth in her hands and an apron tied around
18

DARK BECOMING
her waist. “Supper time! Bring yourself in! I’ve got a mushroom loaf on the table and some potatoes on the side.”
“Are we having milk again?” called Galden to his mother
as she was about to reenter the house. She turned back to
him and nodded her head glumly. “At least it’s something
to drink,” he mumbled to himself. Milk was not something
people were too excited about. With only mushrooms and
small animals to eat, the cows produced a bitter-tasting
milk, a staple food for the majority of the population. People
usually added spices and flavorings to it, or diluted it with
water, but just the same, it was not a great favorite. On
Galden Farm it was plentiful, and a shame to waste.
Galden started a slow gait towards the house, pausing
shortly to gaze at the twenty-or-so cows that they owned.
They were penned up in a corral, munching lazily upon a
mixture of moss, mushrooms, and bone-meal. Galden noticed the fattest ones were already branded to be butchered.
One, let alone three, would provide enough meat for weeks
at the Galden household. It was a good thing they owned so
many. They used to own more, though. That’s where the
bone-meal came from.
As Galden entered the side door of the house, his mother
was setting the plates and utensils on the table. “Go downstairs and wash your hands,” she ordered him, taking stock
of his dirty appearance. Galden had been out in the fields
all day inspecting the next season’s harvest, and was covered with dirt. “Go on. Get your hands wet!” she remonstrated as he paused, staring at the food on the table. Mushroom loaf again, just like yesterday.
“When are we going to have some meat, Ma?” he asked,
starting towards the cellar door.
“As soon as your uncle decides it’s time to butcher one
of those cows,” came the curt reply. “We’ve already got them
marked. All we need is someone to help with the cutting.”
Mrs. Galden bustled about the table, making sure everything was in place. “Pat!” she called out the kitchen window. “Dinner’s ready!”
19

DARK BECOMING
Galden quickly sauntered down the stairs into the large
basement. He quickly took off the soiled clothes and threw
them into a large wicker basket. Grabbing a wash-cloth from
the side of a large tub of water, he quickly wiped the dirt off
his hands and face. He then grabbed some clean clothes,
threw them on, and returned to the kitchen, where his
mother and uncle were already at the table. Galden pulled
one of the large oaken chairs from under it and promptly
sat upon it. As soon as he was settled at the table, his mother
stood up from her seat.
“Oh, Heavenly Fathers,” she said aloud, “we thank You
for this dinner we share with You this day. We pray that
You continue to make our harvest plentiful, and await the
day when we can finally be with You all once again. Amen.”
She then sat back down again, and scowled at her brother.
“Why don’t you ever pray with us?” she whispered. She was
answered by an angry grunt, and Pat dug into the food on
his plate. She looked pleadingly at Galden, who smiled reassuringly at her. At least Pat had waited for her to finish.
That night, as Galden was preparing for bed, his mother
knocked softly on the door to his room.
“Come in,” he answered, setting down his night-clothes
on the bed. She entered silently, treading softly over the
hardwood floor.
“Galden,” she started, almost in a whisper. “What have
you been planning?” She looked at him squarely. She had a
way of reading his thoughts, and although he had grown
used to it, it never ceased to irk him.
“Nothing, mother,” he replied, looking into her blue
eyes. He could tell she didn’t fully believe him when he said
so, but he hoped she would not pry any further. Galden’s
mother stood in front of him for a moment longer, then
sighed and averted her eyes. “Whatever it is, don’t get your
Uncle Pat angry. You know what he does when he gets angry.”
“I know, Mother,” replied Galden, averting his eyes from
her gaze. She turned away from him and slowly left the
20

DARK BECOMING
room. Galden did not move until he was sure he heard the
click of the door behind her. Even then, he waited until he
was sure she had gone upstairs to her lonely bedroom, and
could hear the creaks her bed made as she got into it. His
mother sleeping alone on that grand bed, where once his
father shared it, was a sad notion. Galden knew he would
not sleep that night. He wasn’t the only lonely one in this
house, and his heart ached for her.
Even when he was sure both his mother and his uncle
were in their beds, Galden stayed under the covers for a
few moments more. There might still be the chance that
one or both might wake up and... Well, they would just notice that Galden was awake. He himself did not know what
he was going to do. He just knew that he was going to and
had to do something. Though he did not want to fall asleep,
lying in his bed gave sleep the ammunition it need to ambush him. He closed his eyes and told himself he would not
sleep. He would not. Not fall asleep. Just rest his eyes. His
breathing slowed down, and his body relaxed. Wake up!
Slowly pulling the covers back and easing out of bed so
as not to disturb the others, Galden set first one foot, then
the other on the cold floor. Shaking the sleep from his head,
and without making a single sound, he stood up and took
off his night-clothes. He had conveniently set aside his
clothes beside the bed, and these he put on immediately.
He then glided over to the trunk that was kept at the foot of
his bed. He had opened the chest earlier in the day, and
conveniently neglected to close it. It was to this that Galden
softly made his way, taking special care not to cause the
floorboards to creak—no small task in a house as old as his.
The moisture in the atmosphere infused everything, even
the deepest-set rooms of huge old farmhouses. He reached
softly into the wooden chest and removed a pair of leather
breeches, a loose white shirt, and a vest. Putting these on
over his lighter clothes, Galden noticed his favorite hat lying crumpled and stuffed into the side of the large chest.
This he grabbed also, and headed out his bedroom door.
21

DARK BECOMING
Galden found himself standing in the hallway of the
darkened farmhouse. He had no idea what he was doing or
why, and no plans on how and when to do it. Standing there
in the dim darkness of the candle that burned in the brazier, memories of his childhood flooded back into his mind.
The candle was such a welcome beacon in that otherwise
pitch black house, and it was to this that he would constantly
make his way. Galden wrapped his fingers around the thin
stem of the waxen rod and pulled it from its base. The flame
flickered only lightly in his hand, but a drop of wax fell upon
the skin of his hand. Stung by the sharp heat of the molten
candle, Galden instantly recalled the time when he was only
eight years old, and the same thing had happened to him.
He remembered how he had run upstairs to the attic,
unburying the ancient clothes to find the silken gown of
some long-lost ancestor. He remembered how he feverishly
wrapped the minor welt in the soothing gossamer fabric,
remembered how the soft touch of the silk against his hand
had felt. Holding the candle in his hand, Galden slowly and
silently climbed up the ladder that led to the attic. He pushed
tentatively on the trap door above his head, but it did not
seem to want to budge. Galden again pressed his free hand
against the wooden planks, and this time they moved a little,
creaking heavily under the weight of the years. It had been
over ten years since anyone had been up there, and Galden
had his suspicions about what was causing the wooden door
to hesitate. With a hard shove, Galden finally pushed the
door upward, hailing a cloud of dust that fell down upon
his face and the candle, almost extinguishing its flame.
Galden coughed and brushed away the grey oldness, waving his hands in front of his face to deflect the settling
dust. He shook his head to loosen the dust that had fallen
in his hair, and clambered up the ladder into the darkness
of the attic.
It did not take long at all for Galden’s eyes to adjust to
the total darkness of the attic. In fact, being raised in an
entirely dark environment, Galden had no trouble seeing
22

DARK BECOMING
in the dark. His mother always told him to eat up his roots,
that they’d make him be able to see in the dark. Lucky thing
for them that beets, carrots and turnips were among the
few vegetables that were still able to grow in the lightless
climate of their world without a sun. No wondering about
why those and few other plants grew, but the majority of
additional plantlife did not. They just did.
Galden saw and recognized all the wonderful peculiarities of the old attic... The old spinning wheel, various tools,
a ladder, boxes of centuries-old family heirlooms which had
long since been forgotten, chests full of clothes, books, and
other oddities. Maybe this was where Galden was supposed
to go to get away from it all. Maybe this old attic held the
secret key to his escape. Up here he was able to be alone,
living in a world of his own imagination, creating what he
wanted to be reality. Galden located a box of old candles, lit
the wicks of two of them from his slowly decreasing one,
and set them on two copper dishes. These he set upon a
large table in the center of the attic, and blew out the first
candle. The small storage space was instantly lit with a
cheery glow from the two flames, and Galden was able to
see around him much better. Ah, how well he remembered
the times when he would run up into this old attic to hide
among the family’s relics. Times when his Uncle Pat was
being violent and angry, and abusive. The man would never
follow Galden up into the dark room, too lazy to muster the
energy to climb up the rickety ladder after him. Galden
would sit alone among the musty artifacts, tuning out the
boisterous ranting and ravings of his mother’s brother.
Galden picked up a tattered and worn blanket that was
lying among the dusty boxes. He slowly held the blanket up
to his cheek, rubbing the familiar softness against his skin.
How many times had this blanket kept him warm... All those
times when he would spend the entire night cooped up in
the attic, hiding away from Pat’s unrelenting brutality, wondering—hoping that his mother had a similar escape. Galden
folded the old blanket against his lap, and set it on top of
23

DARK BECOMING
one of the many boxes. Someday, he told himself, he’d have
to explore the contents of all of these boxes. Someday... But
now was the time. He had come here to escape, and had
plenty time to sort through the myriad artifacts of a history
unknown. Especially since he was wide awake, and not about
to fall asleep in his excursion.
There were so many boxes to choose from, though.
Which to choose first? All of them were the same kind of
dusty, wooden crates, sealed against time and aging. Of
course, Galden had opened one or two of them when he was
younger, finding himself bored with sitting alone in the
darkness. He found so many interesting things in those wondrous old chests. The books, the clothes, the ornamental
brocaded tapestries. But he was too young at the time to
realize any historical importance in them. He just enjoyed
the softness of the silk, and the fantastical pictures in the
books. It was to the chest with the book and the gown that
Galden now went, locating it instantly, nestled away at the
back of the attic, surrounded by the collected history of his
lineage.
The soft silk dress felt just as smooth and cool in his
hands as it had that day so long ago when he’d wrapped it
around his burn. Galden lifted the gossamer dress to his
face, letting it fall gently against his pale skin. It felt like the
slender fingers of an elfin woman as it caressed his face.
And an eflin woman—in his imagination— had hands of silk.
Galden pressed it against his skin, rubbing it slowly down
his face, enjoying the faint scuffle as it scraped against the
fuzz that was growing on his chin. He shut his eyes, letting
his mind see the lovely elf-maiden as she stood naked before him, her soft hands sliding over his skin, her soft
breasts pressing against him as she trailed her hands
from his face to his stomach. Galden unbuttoned his shirt
with the other hand, and let it fall silently to the floor. He
let the slick surface of the ancient garment slide down his
neck and onto his chest, where he pressed the silk once more
against his flesh. The feeling was ecstatic and thrilling, like
24

DARK BECOMING
nothing he had ever quite felt before. Galden sat down upon
the floor, sending up swirls of dust. He lay down on the
musty boards that made the floor, and the silk floated softly
down to join him as he did so. A smile crept onto his serene
face, and the skin of his body prickled as thousands of tiny
goosebumps wound their way up his stomach, onto his
chest, and down his arms and his neck. He pulled the folds
of cloth over his face, using it to shield himself from breathing in the dust. He closed his eyes, again swearing that he
would not fall asleep. Stay awake, enjoy the feeling. Stay
awake.
Galden did not realize how long he had been lying there
with the silken gown covering his chest, but when he rose
from the floor, a layer of dust stuck to his back and he felt
the damp cold of the old wood creeping into his muscles. It
was still night, that was certain, and he was sure he still
had ample time to further explore the contents of the
chest. Galden did his best to shake off the dust from his
back, and put on the shirt and vest he had dropped before.
He folded the dress and set it on the table with the candles—
lower than they were earlier, but still high enough to let
him know he had only dozed a few moments—making sure
to wipe away the thick layer of dust before he let the fine
cloth touch the hard surface. Galden did not bother to button his shirt up all the way, but stuffed the bottoms of it
into his pants. He then tied up the top leather strings of his
vest, and bent downward to further explore the chest.
The book had always been a pleasurable plaything for
him. The pictures of the people were so quaint. They wore
all manner of strange garments, and the drawings themselves were so realistic and colorful that Galden thought
they must have been done by some great royal artist of a
wealthy family. Now that Galden had learned to read and
recognize the authenticity and value of the ancient tome,
his mind reeled with the import of such a volume. The cover
was deeply embossed with gold in the thick leater, with the
words that amused him so much for their fanciful
25

DARK BECOMING
script, but which now intrigued him more for their meaning. The first words had been partially obliterated with age,
but he could make out the words following them. “...et itur
ad astra. Senna ni Rohmhain ni Galdenne.” He had no idea
what the phrases meant, but thankfully the inside was written in the common language of the people of his land.
Certain letters, though, were formed differently and the language usage was a lot more formal than he was accustomed
to, but he was still able to make sense of them.
Galden sat for what seemed like hours, reading of the
family Galden. He read about how his ancestors had come
to this land from across the ocean, settling it and reaping
its rich harvests. He read of how the world was filled with
bright light from a large, burning sphere in the sky called a
“sun.” The book described the mythical color green, which
was all but unknown in his world. The plants all had green
in them, even carrots and kohlrabi. The root-plants that
grew around the farm had small, sickly leaves that were
yellowish white at best.
Galden read of a Queen named Senna, who had the uncanny ability to see the future. He read about how she had
sought out and discovered a magical sphere said to have
been created by the pagan gods of those early eras; the gods
that his mother still prayed to. He read how she had buried
it deep within the burning sands of the Monshera desert,
and how she had been captured and the sphere retrieved
by an evil Mage. He had heard of Mages, but the stories
were sketchy, and treated like myths.
“Good night my dear,
now listen and you’ll hear,
the story of the magic men who turned out all
the lights.”
The lullaby crept into his mind as he closed his eyes, if
only for a moment. “No lullabyes,” he said aloud.
The page facing the story of Senna and her quest and
subsequent captivity held a lovely, painstakingly detailed
drawing of the Queen Mother. He saw the long silken gown
26

DARK BECOMING
she wore, and the bejeweled coronet upon her forehead...
Galden set the book aside and glanced over at the table, at
the silken dress he had folded and set upon it. He then returned his gaze to the illustration, and then once more to
the dress on the table. Was that the same dress that the
Queen Senna wore in this illustration? Galden stood up and
walked to the table, taking the book with him. He set the
tome onto the table and opened it to the page with the drawing. He then lifted the silk and let it fall in front of him,
holding it up by the shoulders. Yes, it was the very same
gown. Now Galden’s interest was caught. This woman was
definitely an ancestor of his, and he held in his very hands
the royal gown she wore. What possibilities could this find
hold for him? What did it mean? Galden set the dress back
down upon the table and returned to the chest. The other
items inside it were of similar tailoring, all of them being
made from exotic cloths and embroidered with golden and
silver designs. Galden lifted out various articles of clothing, documents, drawings, and odd metal items that were
covered with colorful designs and archaic symbols. Examining each item for understanding proved fruitless, as he
was unable to make out any significance in any of them. So
he returned the items to the chest with great care, and resumed reading in the book. He discovered that his ancestor, the Queen Senna, had been lost in the desert, obviously captured by the Mage, that two of her children, a
prince and a princess, had set out to find her, but were also
lost in the storms of the arid expanse. The book gave
no mention of them being captured by the Mage, however,
and Galden assumed that he had captured them, too. Then
there was a large section of script devoted to the mystical
sphere that everyone had been longing for. This he just
skimmed over. There seemed to be nothing of note, except
that it was said—in overly poetic wording—to have been created by some god named Mannedor while some other gods
were having a spat. The words seemed to go on and on...
Until Galden’s eyes were captured by a phrase that was writ27

DARK BECOMING
ten in italics, and in capital letters. “And all who took advantage of touching the orb were allowed the secrets of all
life, the answers of all man’s questions, and the knowledge
of things past and things to come!”
Galden stopped reading and pondered over the lines.
Such an object could help a lot of people, he thought. It could
provide great power... But... With a start, Galden realized
that this orb was in the possession of the evil Mage he had
read about, along with his ancestor. And he had proof that
these old tales were authentic. The clothes and things in
the trunk were real enough, and they corresponded with
the drawings in the old book. But then, wouldn’t this Mage
character have conquered the entire world, if he owned such
a great power? Was his power limited? Why hadn’t he heard
of him before? And if he existed, where did he exist? And
did he still have this orb?
Galden ceased his musings and returned his attention
to the book. There were a large amount of pages devoted to
the various guardians of the orb, some pages about Senna,
and the Mage, whom Galden discovered to be called Ullix.
It had mentions of various episodes of people going to rescue the queen and restore the orb to her keeping, but each
attempt was met with defeat. And there had been many of
them in the past centuries. How could there be so many
searches over the years? he wondered. Wouldn’t she have
died long ago? And each time the tome mentioned that the
queen and the Mage were still around and alive. And that
could mean that they might still be around today. Galden
closed the book and returned it to the chest. He closed the
lid, and sat upon the strong wood.
Pressing his hands together, Galden thought to himself,
What would Baringer think if he saw me rolling around in
the dust with a centuries-old dress? Especially... No, he did
not want to think that. Imagining a dress was an elf-maiden
that he was making love to. No, that was something that
would lay buried in his mind for a long time. It was curious,
though, that he would find such interesting artifacts up in
28

DARK BECOMING
his attic. Maybe he could get famous and rich if he sold the
junk. Or even better, he could rescue this ancestor, kill this
Ullix person, and own that wondrous orb. Well now! He
could have his pick of women! He could line them up and
pick and choose to his heart’s content! Of course, he would
choose the most beautiful one, the one with the best legs
and breasts and loveliest face.
Galden sat on the chest and thought about these things
for quite some time before he decided to let his best friend
Baringer in on the deal. Baringer and Galden had been best
friends since childhood, and when Galden was not hiding
in the attic, he was with his friend exploring the ruins of
the old obelisk in the town square, or making up fanciful
daydreams and playing them out. Yes, that was what Galden
was going to do. He gathered the book under his arm, extinguished the candles, and climbed down the ladder. As
he closed the trap-door above him, the dust settled softly
on the old chest, alone in the darkness.
Galden was in his room packing spare clothes and a few
other items in a satchel when he heard the scratching at his
window. Dropping the sack, Galden froze where he stood,
motionless in the darkness. There it was. He heard it again.
Someone was scratching at his window. But his room was
on the second floor of the antiquated house. No one he knew
would be dumb enough to climb... But then he remembered
Baringer’s pet raven. If Baringer ever wanted to contact
Galden, he would always send Po to get him. Galden’s uncle
did not like Baringer overmuch, and this way he avoided
any unnecessary confrontations.
“I was just on my way to Baringer’s,” whispered the
young man as he opened the window to admit the bird. He
snickered as he thought about what caused both him and
his friend to be awake at this hour and wanting to contact
each other. But then, they were always staying up late and
getting into trouble. Po jumped inside the room and hopped
about the floor, settling his feathers back. Galden smiled
as he watched the odd bird quietly jump around, always
29

DARK BECOMING
under the impression that the message he carried was of
some great importance. Why, he could remember the time
that Baringer had caught a rabbit, and Po acted as if some
life-threatening emergency required Galden to go to
Baringer’s hut immediately. Baringer lived alone in a small
hut on the outskirts of the town, not far from where the
Galden farm was located. Baringer had lived alone there
since his was ten years old, his parents abandoning the boy
there with his pet unicorn and raven. That hut had become
like a second home to Galden, and he was anxious to get
there so he could find out what Baringer wanted.
Galden tied the straps together around his satchel and
slung it over his shoulder. He could feel the weight of the
book as it struck his back, but it caused him no discomfort.
“Quietly, Po,” he whispered as he held out his arm for the
bird to hop on. Po deftly jumped up and landed on his shoulder with only a minor fluttering of his wings, which he instantaneously settled. Galden was used to this, for many a
time had it been that the old raven would act as a harbinger for Baringer. Galden scanned his room, noting nothing
that he needed to take along that wasn’t in his satchel, and
silently exited his room.
The trek down the stairs seemed to last for decades.
Nearly every one of the steps had their own personality.
The top one was coy and demure, murmuring only softly as
Galden pressed his weight upon it. But the second one was
loud and boisterous, and did not appreciate anyone standing upon its surface. It was easy enough to step over the
angry ones, but towards the middle, there were four steps
that all groaned together when someone walked upon them,
and it took some time for Galden to silently pass over these
loud sentinels. He eventually made it to the base of the steps
and the front door. Po had remained silent during the entire journey, not even fluttering his wings. The bird would
only turn his head at times to cock an eye at some particularly interesting object, then at some other. As soon as
Galden opened the door, Po sailed off his shoulder into the
30

DARK BECOMING
air. Finally free of the confines of the farmhouse, Po
decided it was now acceptable to caw as loud as he felt, and
fly all over the place.
“Hush! Quiet, you stupid bird!” Galden called to Po in a
harsh whisper. He vainly tried to silence the raven, and almost lost his footing in the mud trying to chase after him.
“Just watch my mother and Pat wake up from this noise!”
he mumbled under his breath, running lightly across the
field to catch the bird. “Come down here at once!” he
ordered. Po ceased his calls and fluttered down to rest upon
Galden’s outstretched arm once more. “Now be quiet!” he
whispered to the bird. Galden got down on one knee and
pulled a sheet of paper and a pencil from his satchel.
Scribbling hastily upon it, he wrote a note to his mother
explaining that he would be gone for quite some time, and
to look for him at Baringer’s house would prove unsuccessful. He hoped that the mention of his friend’s home did not
seem overly conspicuous. He folded th7e note, and shoved
it underneath the front door of the house, to which he had
slowly crept back. He then took up a hasty gait and dashed
across the mushroom fields, on his way to Baringer’s place.
Oblivious of his mother sadly peering out of her window at
his flight.
Po flew overhead, guiding Galden on his way, though
he knew it by heart. As he ran, the heavy book in the satchel
banged up and down on his back, rattling and poking him
in places. At least he was sure that it was still in there. At
times he felt like reaching into the satchel to reassure himself that it was still there, and still in one piece, but he did
not want to risk the chance of his mother, or even worse
yet, his uncle seeing him. So he kept up the pace, and after
about ten minutes of running, came upon the small hut of
his best friend. It was a welcoming sight, ramshackle and
old as it was. It was nestled at the base of a gigantic mushroom, whose cap served partially as a roof for the small
house and with a stem as thick around as a horse. There
was an even smaller lean-to built onto the back of it, where
31

DARK BECOMING
Baringer kept Speedwell, his unicorn.
As Galden neared the dilapidated domicile, he could see
his old friend standing in the doorway waiting for him.
“Hey! Galden!” whispered Baringer in the darkness.
“What’s going on?”
“You’re the one to answer that,” replied Galden as he
strode forward to Baringer. “You’re the one who sent for
me.”
Po fluttered down from the air and perched on Baringer’s
large shoulder. Baringer was a large individual. He was
overly proud of his physique, and did much to flaunt it to
others. His build was well-defined, and he worked hard to
keep it that way. In his excitement, he failed to flaunt it in
front of Galden, who would not have noticed anyway—or
cared. “I want to show you something,” he informed Galden
as he emerged, leading him around to the back of the hut.
Galden followed him, and the two young men rounded the
corner of Speedwell’s manger. Galden peered inside the
doorway of it, and was surprised to see that the unicorn
was not inside.
“She’s been out in the field all night,” spoke Baringer,
noting Galden’s perplexed glance. “She’s with that thing I
dug up. I think it’s important to her.”
“What is it?” questioned Galden, trotting a bit to catch
up with Baringer’s long strides.
“Wait and see,” answered the other mysteriously, smiling confidently at his friend. He tried to grab his friend’s
satchel from him and toss it on the floor of his hut, but
Galden resisted, and held on.
Shrugging, Baringer led him away, and toward a field of
large mushrooms. Presently, the two of them came upon
the mushroom patch that Baringer had indicated. Speedwell was snorting and traipsing around what looked like a
stone carving, angrily poking her snout at it.
“I suppose she remembers it from some time ago,”
mused Baringer. He did not know exactly how old the unicorn was, but he assumed that she was at least four... or
32

DARK BECOMING
even five-hundred years old. At least. “I dug it up just about
half an-hour ago,” said Baringer to Galden.
“You told me she was running around all night,” responded Galden, watching the unicorn prance around in
an agitated manner.
“It was sticking up out of the ground,” anwered Baringer,
ignoring the question. “Didn’t want anyone tripping over
it.” As he advanced toward the object, Speedwell backed
off, allowing her master to present it to his friend.
“Take a look,” he said, pointing at the object’s top. The
thing was definitely carved from stone. It was approximately
three feet in height, and had a fairly thin stem. The base of
it was a square block of the stone, and a slender, round rod
rose from the block’s surface forming the stem. Atop the
rod was a flat round disk, and this was the most interesting
feature of the thing. At the exact center of the perfect circle
rose a fin-like protrusion. Spaced at equal intervals on the
circumference of the disk were what appeared to be letters,
or numbers... Some kind of unknown and archaic scripture.
These symbols were carved deeply into the stone, the carver
apparently taking the time to ornately clarify each. Freed
of the dirt that it had been buried in, Galden could see that
the rim of the disk was also encrusted with designs. The
stone had been carved to form the shapes of leaves and
branches of those mythical plants that all the children’s
mothers had told them about when they were young. Galden
was enrapt.
“What do you suppose it is?” queried Baringer, noticing
Galden’s slack jaw. “You look like you’ve just seen a ghost.”
He glared questioningly at Galden, narrowing his eyes in
concern. He could tell that Galden was on to something. He
was alway on to something.
“I have,” whispered Galden in return. He diverted his
gaze from the object to his friend’s face. “I mean, I’ve seen
something like this before. In fact, I was going to come over
here to show you...” He stumbled across the words. “Here,”
he said, dropping the satchel to the ground and squatting
33

DARK BECOMING
to remove the book from within, “take a look at this. I found
it not so long ago either.” He opened the book to the illustration of Senna, and pointed to a rendition of the same
stone oddity. The drawing presented the queen-mother in
the foreground, while the landscape behind her was that of
a lush green meadow, the object standing plainly behind
her. “See?”
Galden related the entire story of Senna and the orb—
as much of it as he could recall—to Baringer, as his friend
had never learned to read, nor had the desire to. He explained to him how he had discovered the volume along
with the old clothing and other artifacts in the chest in his
attic, and how he planned to discover his ancestor, and reap
the rewards of his quest. Baringer noticed Galden grow red
when he spoke of the gown, and squinted in curiosity at
him. When Galden was done explaining, Baringer spoke.
“Now just wait a moment here,” he said. Baringer,
though uneducated and poor was nevertheless quite wise
for his age, and was able to better and more clearly formulate thoughts than his brash companion. “First, tell me this.
Where exactly are you going to look for this woman? And
how do you expect to get there? Alone? Got any way to pay
for this trip? How are you going to do it?”
“You’re going to come with me!” replied Galden eagerly,
raising his eyes to look up at his friend. He stood up and
slapped Baringer on the shoulder. “You always do things
with me. Why, you even introduced me to Glera, and...”
“And you never did do anything with her,” concluded
Baringer, before Galden could stumble over a sentence they
both knew he couldn’t satisfactorily finish. That was one of
the differences between him and Galden. Where he was always willing to take—and purposely looking for—risks,
Galden would unfailingly defer. Of course he had been with
many women, human and elfin, but every time he tried to
introduce Galden to one of his “friends,” Galden would get
nervous and shy off. And it was for that very reason that
Baringer’s interest was piqued. It was usually he who sug34

DARK BECOMING
gested such ventures, and not the younger man. And the
various strange and ancient objects that they had so conveniently found on the same night did lend an ambiance that
beckoned alluringly to them. It might be worthwhile.
“Why not!” agreed Baringer nonchalantly. With a toss
of his head, he picked up the stone object as if it were a
simple piece of mushroom and lugged it back to his hut.
Galden, Po and Speedwell followed. Baringer propped the
stone thing in front of his house, and stepped quickly inside. Before Galden could join him, the other had already
exited, holding a crumbled piece of paper in his hands.
“Would you write something for me?” he asked of Galden.
A noise startled them, and they turned to see two cloaked
figures hurrying along the highway not far from Baringer’s
hut in the mushroom field. At this late hour, they only
expected themselves to be awake, and though it was not unheard of, travelers out in in this part of the country—this
late—were few and far between.
“Of course,” he agreed, taking the paper from his hands.
He looked nervously at the stalking figures, noting that they
strode in the general direction of Galden Farms. Breathing
deeply, he shook any worries from his head and allowed
himself to forget about them. After all, they didn’t notice
the noisy group—or at least didn’t care to. He withdrew a
pencil from his satchel and smoothed out the wrinkled
paper. Using the book as a table, he stooped, ready to write.
“Ready?” asked Baringer. Galden nodded, and Baringer
continued. “Good, then. This is what I want you to write for
me. ‘All ye who venture near this hut beware...’ You know
how to spell that right?” he asked. Galden rolled his eyes
but nodded his head affirmatively, and Baringer spoke
again. “‘...for the man that once lived within is now under
my power, and if ye should come within, ye shall meet the
same fate!’ There, that ought to do it!”
His head shaking in annoyance, Galden glared at his
friend, believing that this note was pure foolishness, and
that no one would pay any mind to it. “I don’t know why
35

DARK BECOMING
you need this,” he said as he handed the note over. “It’s not
as if anyone will want to go inside your hut anyway.”
“Ah, but there’s where you are wrong, my friend,” spoke
Baringer, winking. “You and I know that, but the townspeople and folks like them don’t!” He peered off in the
distance at the travelers, who had all but disappeared in
the darkened distance. His merriment subdued, he peered
off in the darkness for some time. “And besides, you know
that those foolish people are so scared that they’’ll believe
the note. They’ll make something up.”
“Maybe,” said Galden sarcastically, nodding his head.
He had been staring with Baringer at the distant travelers,
now nothing more than a small spot of blackness nearly
indistinguishable from the landscape.
“Well, then,” sang Baringer cheerfully. “Let’s go!”
“But what about supplies... and clothes...?” wondered
Galden. “You said...”
“You’re taking care of that,” replied Baringer. And
Galden was quite pleased with the fact that he had remembered to secrete some gold coins in his satchel. Uncle Pat
wouldn’t be too pleased when he found out, but that did
not bother him. What bothered him was that Uncle Pat
might take it out on his mother... until she made him stop.
And she was one powerful woman; quite good at making
her brother stop his foolish antics. Galden gathered his book
into the satchel, tied up the ends, and caught up with
Baringer and his animals. “I’m glad you’re coming,” he said.
Baringer smiled at his friend. “That’s what friends are
for,” said he. The small entourage was heading the opposite direction of the travelers; as good a way as any. For
one, it was away from Galden Farm. For another... well,
they couldn’t come up with a valid reason. It just felt right.
He took one last backward glance at the note he had
stuck on the door of Baringer’s hut, and then returned his
attention to the journey, swearing that he was not tired, and
that if they stopped to rest somewhere, that he would not
close his eyes. Especially if Speedwell let him ride.
36

DARK BECOMING

depths
Chapter 3
The silence was not unwelcome to Senna. In fact, she
had grown quite accustomed to it. Silence was her friend
when solitude forced itself upon her. Maybe she should sit.
She had been standing for a couple of days, now, and her
legs were beginning to get tired. Senna never got fatigued,
but her joints and muscles did ache from time to time if she
did not move much. At least, she thought that they must.
Senna closed and opened her eyes blankly, barely moving
as she did so. She stood like this for a moment or an hour
more, and then with a sudden, unexpected movement, sat
cross-legged on the floor, like a toppled tower deprived of
its foundation, crumbling down in ruin.
Senna was completely out of thoughts, and she had
already remembered events from her past many times,
blurred though some might be. She stared for a long time
at a stone that was situated in the corner of her cell. It was a
simple, grey stone; no special features on it. Probably about
two centimeters in diameter. Askew oblong shape. Senna
stopped thinking. She sat on the floor for an entire day. Doing nothing. Thinking nothing. Regarding the stone.
“Senna,” whispered the ghostly voice of Broceliande. It
37

DARK BECOMING
was not that she was obliged to whisper so as not to disturb
or alarm anyone, but simply because she was able to employ no other means of speaking. The transparent figure
flowed into the dark dungeon like a fog, trailing wisps of
ghostliness behind her.
“Good greetings, Broceliande,” spoke Senna cheerfully.
She gestured to the ghost with one of her hands. “Come,”
she said, “sit with me.” Broceliande drifted lightly to a sitting position in front of her. Broceliande respectfully waited
in silence, glancing at her friend from time to time. After
some time, she spoke. “What brings you here at this time,
my friend?” asked Senna of the ghost.
“I bring news to you, my lady,” she answered softly.
“Word has been spreading throughout the Obelisk that Ullix
is preparing to use the sphere...”
“What?” gasped Senna suddenly. She put one hand to
her breast and began to breathe slowly again. She shook
her head from side to side, as if shaking loose cobwebs that
had gathered in time. “I apologize,” she spoke again, nervously blinking her eyes. She could see that Broceliande had
more to tell her, and asked, “What news do you have to tell
me?”
“Just that the Mage intends to touch the orb sometime
soon, and that he is going to make some of the prisoners
touch it, first. He wants to see what effects it will have on
an ordinary mortal before he tries it upon himself.”
“But he has forced several people to touch the orb
throughout the years. I wonder what he is up to,” Senna
mused. She knew that his was the one hand that tenuously
held the planet together, and that there were more factors
than most cared—or needed—to know about his place in
the world. She put her hand to her chin and thought momentarily. “Whom do you suppose he will use?” she asked.
“Word is that he plans for you to touch it,” replied
Broceliande. She drifted closer to the woman. “I hope and
pray that it is not you who shall be used. I dread to think
what will happen.” Ethereal tears welled in her eyes, float38

DARK BECOMING
ing off and dissipating in the dank dungeon air.
Blinking, the other smoothed the folds of her dress about
her knees and ankles nervously. “Don’t you worry about me,
my dear,” whispered Senna softly, looking at the floor
through narrowed eyes. “I can protect myself if need be.”
She looked up at the somber face of the young girl. “Thank
you, though,” she said, noting the look of concern on the
ghost’s face. “I appreciate your help. I know I can rely on
you to keep me informed. You’ve done well.”
“Yes, absolutely my lady,” breathed Broceliande, rising
slightly from the floor. An innate attitude of subservience
gave way to gratitude, as the ghost enjoyed being of use. “I
will always be here for you.” Broceliande returned to her
sitting position in front of Senna, and held out her slender
hand. Senna, knowing that the girl was ethereal and therefore unable to touch too substantially, extended her hand
to her, and Broceliande lay hers within it. Unlike Garid, who
had been a ghost only a fraction of the years Broceliande
had, there was little resistance if she raised her own fleshand-blood hand. She had learned to be as still as the grave;
an easy task.
Thus the two old friends spent the next several hours in
quiet conversation, recalling the times when trees grew and
flowers bloomed in the sunlight. They spoke of what things
would be like for them if the sun had never left, of what
they would have done with their lives, and what they would
be like. They did not speak, however, of things beyond
Broceliande’s grasp—of science, of catastrophic stellar
events and dire consequence, of gravity’s force, or of magic
and undeath.
Garid joined the two silently whispering figures presently. His presence did not go undetected by the other ghost
and the queen. Time had allowed Senna the ability to sense
when her friends were near, and Broceliande, being one of
Garid’s own kind, did not need to know of his coming, for
she knew it already.
The little boy ghost joined them in their conversation,
39

DARK BECOMING
adding a more vivid and sprightly life to their imaginings,
amusing them with his droll ideas and playful antics.
Though the boy suffered eternally as a disembodied spirit,
his childlike nature was still within him, and greatly apparent. Soon the three of them were laughing merrily, an unusual and oft-times frightening thing to be heard in the
Obelisk dungeons. Other prisoners, frightened into believing that the laughter was that of the Obelisk guards or soulhungry demons, huddled tightly in the darkest corners of
their cells, frightened of what doom might befall them.
Presently their fears were confirmed with the loud footsteps of several guards. Senna and the ghosts could hear
them—at least five they thought—struggling with some
unlucky captive who apparently was trying his best to break
free from their grasp. The prisoners could hear the grunts
and cussing of the men, and could hear the wild, almost
animal-like cries of the captive. They knew that it was a
male, and from the sound of his voice and the cracking of it
as he cried out—as foreign as it was to their ears—they could
deduce that he was young. What a shame. Without turning
her head from the door, Senna glanced quickly at Garid,
her eyes darting back almost immediately. If she could help
it, Garid would be the last of his kind.
As Senna, Garid, and Broceliande were beginning to talk
again, murmuring nervously, they were confronted with the
ever-increasing plaintive cries of the young captive. They
easily understood what had happened and what was probably going to befall the poor boy. Broceliande and Garid
rose swiftly from the floor and glided to the door. Though
their existence was a lonely one, they knew enough of compassion to fear their fate befalling another.
“Go see what is happening,” ordered Senna in a whisper as she stood, anger whipping her spirit into resolution. The two ghosts immediately dissolved and vanished
from sight, and Senna knew that they were already spying
on the situation.
But Senna did not stray from her position. She was statu40

DARK BECOMING
esquely standing in the center of her cell when the door was
jarringly unlocked and thrown open.
“ ’Ere y’are, witch!” yelled one of the burly guards, admitting the struggling mass of the other guards. “Got company for ye!” He laughed boisterously, and was joined by
two other guards who stood out in the hallway. The guards
abruptly thrust the thin form of a young boy forward. He
stood facing Senna as she clutched the wall behind her, a
ragged youth with wild, unkempt hair and tattered remains
of trousers about his waist. For a single moment he stood
motionless, enrapt by Senna’s ageless beauty. A shared vision passed between them, capturing both like flies in amber. And then a heavy gauntletted fist came smashing down
upon his neck, sending him flying into Senna’s waiting arms.
Time passed. Slowly one eye fluttered open as Senna
watched. She had his head cradled in her lap, and had
brushed all the stray wisps of hair from his face. Even unconscious, his hand gripped her arm tightly, almost painfully; though she did nothing to pull herself free.
Broceliande and Garid had rejoined her, and both had kept
strict watch over the two.
The woman was beautiful, and he felt almost safe with
her. That was something he very rarely felt. But the two
other beings frightened him, even though one was lovely
beyond all comparison and the other was but a small boy.
He struggled to sit up, but two strong, gentle hands held
him down.
“Be at peace here, child,” whispered a soothing voice.
He looked up once again to see that the pretty woman was
speaking to him. He wished he could understood what she
said. Oh how he wished it! He wanted so much to trust her,
but that was something he just could not, and would not
do. In his fevered pain and exhaustion, he allowed himself to rest, but remained wary.
Senna could feel his apprehension at the two other figures in the cell. “Garid, Broceliande. Please leave us,” she
whispered to them. She did not want to startle the boy so
41

DARK BECOMING
she made no gestures to them, and spoke barely above a
whisper. Her statement was sufficient enough. The two of
them left hastily, casting backward glances at Senna. She
nodded reassuringly at them, and they dispersed.
“What is your name?” she asked gently, still cradling
the boy’s head. His long hair felt slick and sweaty beneath
her touch, and his youth was enviable to her. She was not
entirely sure, but she thought she sensed innocence in her
fellow captive. That, along with mottled fear and trust. She
looked upon him with a mother’s eyes, seeing what only a
practiser of matronly wisdom and love could see. “I won’t
hurt you,” she reassured him in dulcet tones, hoping that if
he did not understand her speech, then at least her voice
could soothe his fears. She looked deep into his eyes, searching for something she did not know of. She stared long and
hard into the hazel depths of his soul, delving deep within
him with her gaze.
What she saw in those myriad depths caused her to feel
a flush of empathy with the boy. She saw no real joy. Only
sadness, fear, and apprehension. It was as if he was an animal, living by instinct, unable to trust, self-reliant. Not a
child, for lack of a childhood.
He seemed to feel more at ease as Senna searched his
eyes with her own, and gently caressed his head. He, too,
could sense things from her. He felt her protectiveness and
compassion. He felt he could trust her, no matter what his
instincts might say. He was hurting and confused anyway.
What good had his instincts done him when he allowed himself to be captured? He wanted so much to trust her. Maybe
he could try. As long as he could fall asleep and rest.
“You’re not from around here, are you?” asked Senna
gently of him. He tried hard to understand her, wrinkling
his brow in concentration. The back of his head still ached
from the blow he had received. It had been totally unexpected. He would never have allowed himself to be caught
unaware like that. If he had, he would have been knocked
out long ago already, by many different fists, for many dif42

DARK BECOMING
ferent reasons. Suddenly his fear returned, and he reached
back to touch his neck, trying awkwardly to rise.
“Don’t fret yourself, child,” smiled Senna. She gently
brushed her fingertips over his eyelids. Relaxing, he allowed
her to close his eyes for him, basking in the soft gentleness
of her touch. Hers was the first soothing touch he had ever
felt in such a long time. Longer than he could remember.
And he already felt a sort of bond to this motherly figure.
He relaxed his taut muscles and lay his head in her lap. Yes,
he would trust her. Who else could he?
“I hope you don’t mind if I give you a name,” whispered
Senna, although she suspected he was already oblivious of
her talk. She realized the importance of speaking, and that
though he might not understand her words, he certainly
understood the tone. Even asleep. “You are so different from
everyone else. So lost and innocent in this world.” She
paused, her motherly instincts reasserting themselves after so long a time. Breathing slowly, she adjusted her position so she would be more comfortable, never letting go of
her newest charge. “I will call you ‘Valza’in’. The innocent
one. In my time, in my... home, from so long ago, we had
many different words, different languages, and people
shared and enriched each other with our cultures.” She
closed her eyes against the onslaught of memory.
“‘Valza’in’,” she repeated softly, gently stroking his head. It
had been so long since she had last had a son, or at least
someone to call a son. Garid had been with her so briefly
before he was taken from her. She hoped with all her might
that her newest son would not be taken from her too.
Bending over gently so as not to wake his sleeping form,
she kissed him lightly on the forehead. Although her touch
was not enough to wake him, Valza’in curled up his legs
and arms to his body, nestling himself closer to Senna’s loving warmth.
Over the next few days, Valza’in grew to trust Senna
more and gradually became accustomed to his surroundings. Even the two ghosts no longer posed a threat to him,
43

DARK BECOMING
and he grew to enjoy the company he kept, even though the
cell was quite depressing. Now that Senna had Valza’in in
the dungeon with her, she, along with him, got fed on a regular basis. It took some time to get Valza’in to eat the gruel
they were served, but with time that obstacle too was overcome. Senna, took advantage of the situation, re-learning
how to become more active and alert, and to be more aware
of herself and her surroundings. In a way, his presence in
the dungeon was welcome in more ways than readily apparent.
And Valza’in was young. He had enough time to get accustomed to his new home. Senna presumed him to be at
least eleven or twelve. She was immeasurably pleased to
become Valza’in’s new foster-mother. She held him close
every night as he slept, and cared for his every need. Whenever the guards would fail to bring him his food, Senna
would raise a tremendous noise until he got it. At other
times, when Senna could sense that the guards were in
no mood to be harassed, she would give him her own meals
that she had saved for him. Valza’in grew closer to Senna
everyday, and she to him. Little did either of them realize
how dangerous affection was in the dark tower’s dungeons.
But there was one thing Senna promised herself and
Valza’in on the very first night. She swore that she would
not try to teach him how to speak, or be like her, or adapt in
any way to what she so distastefully spoke of as civilization. She treasured so much his innocence that she felt
she did not have it in herself to stoop so low as to hurt him
so much. His innocence was to be cherished by her, and
envied by others. But, oh, how she wished sometimes that
they could communicate in words. Their non-vocal communication would have to suffice.
Valza’in the Innocent became a great favorite of ghosts
Broceliande and Garid. No longer was Senna their only
friend. Now they had two people that called them friends.
Valza’in not in so many words, but nevertheless, they knew
it was so. Val, as they called him, was delighted by their
44

DARK BECOMING
differences. He often attempted to run his fingers through
Broceliande’s flowing blonde hair, and every time his fingers passed through her transparent body, the others would
laugh in delight. Garid, on the other hand, was more substantial, and could surprise the boy by apparating behind
him and tapping his back when he least expected it. He was
quite willing to daringly fetch morsels of food from the
guards’ very own plates, and carrying those small treasures
through fissures in the rock wall into the dungeon.
One morning, the entire dungeon was rudely wakened
by a garish clatter from the guard room, as Garid roguishly
upset a pitcher of malt beer that a guard had been drinking
from. The guard, fearful of demons but brusque and pompous nonetheless, insisted it was the other guard who had
done it, and the two brawled noisily until other guards came
to relieve them.
Garid and Broceliande spent much more time than they
usually did with Senna visiting Valza’in. Although he was
unable to understand what they said, Valza’in delighted in
listening to their fanciful stories. And Senna, vicariously,
was herself delighted by Val’s happiness. Feelings of motherly pride swept through her every time her two friends
would play with her new son. Here she had adopted a wild,
frightened young boy, and taught him how to trust again.
At night, while Val slept, Senna fought her own private
battles, suppressing her precognitive ability, and confusing it with the mad worries and dreams her troubled mind
concocted. Visions of Brocliande and Garid were joined by
visions of Val as a ghost, haunting her as the two already
did. And haunting was not what a soul was meant to do.
Haunting meant that the soul had not crossed over, that
something was holding it back in this plane of existence.
And for what reason? Was it she who was holding them
back? Certainly there was trauma—significant trauma—in
their deaths. Trauma on that level would certainly confuse
a spirit, and create havoc with its progress beyond this
world. She did not want to see Valza’in as a ghost, tied to
45

DARK BECOMING
this world and its accompanying misery by his affection for
her. Or by her affection for him. What was it that kept
Broceliande and Garid trapped in-between? Was her love
and her need to have their company tormenting them? Certainly her own two children had passed on with no trouble,
or at least so she hoped. Thankfully she was able to suppress the anguish and grief of so many years ago, at the
realization that she had outlived her own children.
Never once did Val try to impose himself on anyone,
being of a stubborn and self-reliant nature. Having another
person after the longest time who truly needed to eat, Senna
steadily cleared away the garbage that filled the crevice in
the far corner of the dungeon and taught Valza’in how to be
discreet. Luckily the crack ran quite deep into the rock foundation of the Obelisk, even though the fissure was only about
a foot in width. Such details! How will a mother’s work ever
be done? Garid was a great help, dissipating his essence
enough to pass through the smallest fissure, yet retaining
enough substance to push away anything foul or obstructive.
And Senna enjoyed fussing over someone again. She
enjoyed being a mother again. Her family was growing, and
that gave joy and hope to the conquered queen. Perhaps it
might grow even more after her release... if she could ever
hope for it.

46

DARK BECOMING

a matter of minutes,
of hours, and of days...
Chapter 4
Baringer and Galden had ample time to talk and to think
along the way. The roads they ambled along were desolate,
infrequently used dirt trails that wound through muddy
fens, rocky outcroppings from the surface, and vast mushroom forests. Ever a farmer, or raised as one, Galden
couldn’t help but wonder if any of the mushrooms were
food-stock, or if they were of a more common—or even poisonous—variety.
Ordinarily, common mushrooms on Harlus were the
small, bite-size variety. But with the condition that befell
the dark planet so long ago and reigned prevalent, the fungi
evolved into greater size and mass, no doubt infused with
remnants of the very same arcane and obscure magic that
held a tenuous grasp on the planet as a whole. Where what
used to be the husks of dead trees long felled, new and different forests sprung. The wild, inedible mushrooms grew
to enormous proportions. Their stems became huge trunks,
and their caps spread across at least one hundred paces on
the largest. These huge sporadocites proved quite useful in
shielding Harlus’ people from the heavy rains that poured
incessantly during the first hundred years of darkness. It
47

DARK BECOMING
was a wonder that the inhabitants survived such conditions
at all. But with no sun to evaporate the water that fell from
the clouds, and no solar heat, the water remained on the
surface of the planet. But there were still clouds in the sky
above them. In fact, the sky was filled with them. These
clouds were swirling with the atomized dust from the
scattered debris of what used to be Harlus’ twelve moons.
When the sun had exploded nearly five hundred years ago,
the dozen satellites proved in a small way effective in deflecting a small portion of the devasation, though the lunar
conflagration was only a momentary respite for the
harrowed mages. The moons were destroyed, and the majority of the debris remained in the atmosphere, where it
created vast thunderheads, letting loose frequently with
bolts of lightning and unsettling roars of thunder. But a large
amount of the moons’ surfaces fell to the planet’s own
surface, bringing about further devastation, injury and even
mutations. In the five centuries that had passed since that
time, only now was the dark planet healing its wounds.
No sun evaporated the water to send it back up into the
atmosphere. Magic and atmosphere kept everything on the
surface, with occasional rains to refresh. An ideal climate
for the mushrooms.
Baringer looked carefully at Galden often when the two
would silence their talk. He often felt sympathy for his
younger friend. Galden was always doing something embarrassing; though only to himself. He had been that way
every since their childhood. Baringer wondered what
Galden saw in him as a friend. Galden treated him like a
superior, deferring to him and admiring his every action,
and aspiring to be as much like him as he possibly could.
Why, Baringer came as close to a rogue as anyone possibly
could be in the small township they lived in. While Galden
conformed with the rest of his society by wearing the traditional horsehair shirt, vest, breeches and boots, Baringer
tried his hardest to be different. He acknowledged his appearance, and flaunted his appeal to everyone he came
48

DARK BECOMING
across. He wore no shirt at all, being quite used to the cool
climate. He wore a brightly colored leather vest of blue and
purple, vividly lavender and rose gloves, tight blue kneebreeches, leather sandals, and an outlandish hat with a large
feather stuck in it. He also took great care to keep his body
in peak physical condition, allowing his vest to hang unlaced on his shoulders, exposing his admirable physique to
those who would admire it or envy him for it. He even
went so far as to tie bright strips of cloth around his biceps
when he wanted to be particularly garish, drawing attention to himself in welcome and unwelcome ways. He felt
himself to be as far from a role model as anyone could be. It
was a mystery to him why Galden looked up to him. Perhaps it was his superior skill with the women, and his great
appeal with them. Galden could not boast of such prowess.
He gave Speedwell, his unicorn, a slap on the rear flank.
“Go get that deserter back here for me,” he ordered the steed
as he fell further behind his traveling companion. Speedwell responded with a brusque neigh and trotted a bit faster
forward to where Galden had wandered. Lost in his
thoughts, the young farmer had left his friend and the animals behind, paying attention to the road and his own
musings.
Speedwell nudged Galden’s shoulder with her soft
muzzle. He turned his attention on the white steed, patting
her affectionately on her forehead just below the base of
the horn. He turned back to look at Baringer, with Po sitting on his shoulder, apparently asleep. Galden wrinkled
his nose in distaste, seeing that the bird had no qualms
about where it deposited its waste, and knowing Baringer’s
own apathy. How the other could stand having a large bird’s
sharp talons on skin shielded only by a leather vest he did
not know. “How far do you suppose we’ve gotten?” he asked
of Baringer.
“Well, considering the fact that we’ve been walking now
for about... fifty hours, with about... ten, twelve hours of
sleep in the past three cycles, I’d say we’ve covered about...”
49

DARK BECOMING
He paused, touching the fingers of his left hand to his chin.
Pursing his lips, he looked skyward as if expecting an answer from the few stars he could make out through the
cloudy canopy. “Maybe... Two-hundred and fifty miles.
Maybe three hundred. Then again, maybe a lot less. I’m no
better than you are at calculating things like that.”
“And it’s over two thousand miles to Erz, according to
dearest Uncle Pat,” added Galden glumly, wrinkling his
brow. “And Erz might not even exist anymore. And if it does,
how would we know if it’s the right place to find Senna and
Ullix?”
“Don’t ask me, friend. I’m only along for the adventure.
It was your idea to set out on this quest in the first place.”
Baringer slapped Galden hard on the back, knocking the
wind out of him and causing him to stumble forward. “I
hope you’re not backing out already.” He looked wisely at
Galden, who was hanging his head in thought. “I’m sticking with you to the end of the road, friend.”
“No,” he replied, “I’m not backing out already. The book
says that Senna came from the kingdom of Erz. And even
though it says she didn’t return to it, she may be there now.
And if she isn’t, maybe someone there knows where she is.
Besides,” and he brightened at the thought, winking gleefully at his friend, “I’m out of the house, and we can do what
ever we want to; with no Uncle Pat pissing in our mushmeal
about it.”
“Suits me fine,” said Baringer happily. He put his arm
around Galden’s shoulders and pulled him roughly. “All we
need now is a little elf woman for you and a warrior woman
for me, and we’d be set!”
“Fat chance!” laughed Galden nervously. He blushed
inward, his anxiety leading him to wonder if his friend had
any idea of what he did with an old gown in an attic. “Where
are you going to find an elf around these parts, let alone a
female one?” The elves of Harlus had become quite scarce
after the cataclysm. They preferred to be among their own
kind, adopting a nomadic way of life, hiding out in the great
50

DARK BECOMING
mushroom forests, hunting the occasional wild animal that
strayed too close to their presence. To purposely go out of
one’s way to locate an elf was nearly impossible, especially
when they stayed close to the cover of the forests.
Galden had seen a few elves in his lifetime, though. A
small group of them had come through Kaelmorde, apparently on their way to some great tribal meeting. In fact, with
startled realization, Galden remembered seeing the pointed
ears on one of the two late-night travelers that had crossed
their path back at Baringer’s hut. He reminded himself to
ask around about them, if he ever returned. From what he
could see of the group he had earlier witnessed, they were
vastly similar to regular humans. The only differences being that the elves had darker, ruddy skin, pointed ears,
slanted eyes, and incredibly long, black hair. They dressed
in simple leather clothes, but their hair was treated like a
great treasure. They took great care to keep their hair clean
and long. And the blacker it was, the more proud they were
of it. That was when Galden had seen the elf maiden.
He could remember how beautiful she was. She was still
quite young, judging by the relative shortness of her hair.
It fell only as far as the calves of her long, slender legs. But
she was nonetheless breathtakingly lovely. The outfit she
wore peeled off in his mind. The shifty tunic fell from her
shoulders, exposing soft skin the color of smooth silt, an
amber shade that intoxicated him each time he thought of
it. He peeled off the leather breeches she wore, leaving her
clothed only in the silken tresses cascading so darkly over
her shoulders. He could almost feel his fingers combing
through those locks. She remained long afterward in
Galden’s dreams and fantasies, coaxing him into doing foolish things with her coy eyes and alluring figure. Causing
him to roll around in dusty attics with antique dresses held
close to skin pricked with goose bumps. Galden inhaled
deeply, thankful that no one had ever seen him do such an
embarrassing thing.
“You never know,” he said to Baringer, putting such
51

DARK BECOMING
thoughts out of his head. “We may just yet run into some. I
bet this journey will take us at least a month!” He smiled
nervously at his companion, hoping that the prospect of at
least a month’s travel would not deter the other from accompanying him. He also worried that he might give up,
rational enough to realize that a long, arduous trip was not
as comfortable as his own bed in his own home. And so what
if he didn’t meet the elf-maiden of his dreams. He always
could go up into the attic... He shook his head violently,
shouting “No!”
“No? No what? Of course we could run into some elves,”
agreed Baringer simply, annoyed at his friend’s quirky habits. Shaking his head incredulously, Baringer was relieved
to see no signs of turning back in Galden. He had never
known him to undertake such a long quest, let alone stick
with it after three cycles of darker-ness. He sighed, having
long since grown used to being around his unusual friend.
Yes, Baringer and Galden had been trudging along the
winding roads of the bleak countryside for quite some time
now. At certain points of the journey, as one or the other
would tire of the incessant trodging, he would mount Speedwell, and the faithful unicorn would bear his weight for
many a mile before the rider chose to walk again. After all,
Speedwell was a thinking, feeling sentient being herself, and
though they appreciated her willingness to carry them, out
of respect for her, neither took advantage of her too much.
In this way the four companions held a steady pace toward their destination. The book that Galden had rescued
from his attic trunk contained a highly detailed map of the
countryside they now traveled. Although Galden was assured by Baringer many times that the map was long out of
date, it still provided them with the surest guidance. Hills,
valleys and other landmarks still corresponded with the
ancient map, and Galden was confident that this guide
would lead them to certain fame and fortune, if only they
had the fortitude to strive onward.
Their journey was beset by occasional rains, though not
52

DARK BECOMING
wet enough to dampen their spirits as they would their
clothes. As Baringer had pointed out earlier, the two were
quite fortunate that Galden had packed two extra outfits in
his satchel. Although Galden was a lot less brawny than
Baringer, his trousers fit him easily, as did one of his looser
shirts. At the times when they did have to change a shirt or
a pair of pants, Baringer would drape the wet clothes over
Speedwell’s mane, allowing the light fluttering of her hair
and the intermittent breezes to dry them out, at which point
he would promptly put them back on again, preferring to
opt for his outlandish appearance rather than that of a
Kaelmordian mushroom farmer.
The days passed slowly as the two adventurers made
their way unharassed over the dark countryside. Passing
the time with imaginary games helped; deciding what they
would do with whatever great wealth they would amass
never ceased to be amusing.
As they passed through various small townships that
were spread out intermittently across the land, Galden
would compare their position to the map, tracing their journey as they went along. Though several townships were not
represented, some had sprung up over the ruins of others,
which helped pinpoint their location. Indeed, the hands that
etched the ink on these maps were skilled, rendering highly
accurate directions.
In one small township they came upon the ruins of an
obelisk that had once dominated the town. Galden and
Baringer compared this structure to that of their own town,
which was in much better shape and had been converted
into a cathedral.
“Amazing how such a place of evil could become a church
back in Kaelmorde, isn’t it Baringer?” he asked, reverting
to his mother’s steadfast religious influences. He held the
old tome of history opened in front of him, looking from a
stylized illustration of one of the obelisks in their heyday to
the ruined building before them, and back again.
“Or a crumbling mess like this,” commented Baringer
53

DARK BECOMING
dryly. “Come on, let’s find a place to stay. I’m getting tired,
and I know Speedwell hasn’t rested since yesterday.” He
began walking toward some more agreeable-appearing
buildings located nearby. As with all the townships that once
were dominated by these large fortresses, its location was
in the town’s square, the gathering place of its inhabitants. The townspeople had built their homes close to the
sanctity of the now emaciated obelisk.
“Come on!” grunted Baringer, not very amused by
Galden’s fascination with the structure. “Get a move on!”
He couldn’t help but notice the suspicious eyes glaring at
them from within various homes.
“Coming,” acquiesced Galden, hesitating only momentarily in his musings before dashing over to where his friend
stood waiting for him. “I’m sorry,” he apologized to the
other.
“No problem, Galden,” stated Baringer more cheerfully
now. “Only next time let’s find a place to stay before we take
in the sights.” Baringer slapped Galden heartily on the back
and led him and Speedwell to a nearby tavern. Po had been
sailing overhead for some time now, acting as a lookout for
them. He now sailed down to land upon Baringer’s waiting
arm.
Fluttering noiselessly upon his extended arm, he croaked
a single phrase. “Storm coming!” He craned his neck to point
his beak skyward, indicating the westerly region they had
been heading for.
Baringer glanced toward the direction that Po had indicated. Squinting his eyes to make out the weather as best
he could, he muttered curses under his breath. “Looks like
a big one this time,” he said, crossly pulling Speedwell after
him to the tavern. “Come on, Galden. We don’t have time
to waste out here in the open.” Around them, the few
townsfolk that had ventured outside their homes for one
reason or another were bustling to get indoors, pulling in
with them children, animals, and clothing and tools that
had been left outside.
54

DARK BECOMING
Lumber was a construction material sorely lacking anywhere on Harlus. Mushroom parts weren’t as steadfast, and
had not the same durability as the ancient wood. What
buildings remained from the time before the cataclysm were
dilapidated and weather worn. Stone, thankfully, remained
a consistent structural foundation. Built of stone and ancient timbers appropriated from other buildings long since
past, the local inn was a larger structure situated between
other, less desirable shacks. There was a corral built of
mushroom wood to one side of the inn, and Baringer led
the others to it. Once inside, he did not tie Speedwell to the
stalls. The unicorn never wore a bridle anyway, and besides,
Baringer did not trust the strength of structures built from
giant mushbark. The inn itself seemed to be constructed
from solid rocks, but the lean-to stable looked rather flimsily put together. Baringer inspected the roof, walls, and
supports of the enclosure, finally reassured that it would
be able to withstand the substantial drenching it was sure
to receive. If anyone or anything served to bother the steed,
her horn and tough hooves would be the solution to the
problem.
“Stay here with her while I go inside and get us settled
in,” directed Baringer. Galden nodded in agreement, and
was promptly met by Baringer’s outstretched hand. He
stared at the hand and then at its owner curiously. “Well?”
Baringer asked impatiently, snapping his fingers.
“Oh.” Galden hurriedly reached into his satchel and
pulled out a small money purse. This he handed to Baringer,
who smiled appreciatively at the gesture and then left the
small stable.
“Well,” sighed Galden to Speedwell and Po. “I guess it’s
just you and me here. Along with all those other horses,” he
added, noting the other steeds that were in adjoining stalls.
Po hopped merrily back and forth over the floor and railing, amusing Galden. “You’re quite the clown, aren’t you
Po?” he asked, not expecting the bird to reply. Po displayed
an astounding intelligence, croaking words here and there
55

DARK BECOMING
and actually understanding the speech of others.
“Clown!” repeated the raven, dancing across the wooden
railing. “Hungry clown!” He looked quizzically at Galden,
tilting his head comically as he did so.
“Of course,” chuckled Galden, glancing around the small
structure. He noticed a bale of hay lying among others of
its kind nearby. This was quite odd, as hay was made from
the long roots of certain fungi and the sparse vegetation,
along with some of the very few grasses that still grew in
the cold climate. Therefore, it was very rare to find such a
bale, let alone seven or eight of them. “Looks like we’ve hit
the jackpot,” he commented to the two animals, retrieving
one of the bales and setting it in front of Speedwell. The
horse daintily nibbled at the block of feed, hungrily swallowing the hay.
“Yuck! Yuck!” croaked Po, angrily hopping away from
the bale. “Real food!” he remonstrated, glaring at Galden.
“Don’t worry,” he reassured the raven. “We’ll get you
something to eat once we get inside. Baringer’s going to get
a room and hopefully something to eat. He...” Galden let
the words trail off as his attention was abruptly seized by
another form in the stable.
Galden paled at the though of being cut down by some
dastardly rogue that had somehow managed to sneak in
upon him. He swallowed hard, trying his hardest to stifle
his fear. He backed up to the protective cover of Speedwell’s
horn. “Help me out, Speedwell,” he whispered to the unicorn.
“There is no need to fear,” spoke a female voice from
the darkness in front of him. Although the speech was
heavily laden with a distinctively foreign accent, Galden felt
relieved at the gentleness in it.
“Who are you?” he asked of the figure. “Come out so I
can see you.” He stepped cautiously forward, inviting the
stranger to do the same.
As she did so, Galden was surprised to see before him
the figure of a young woman. A young elfin woman. She
56

DARK BECOMING
was dressed in a simple animal skin, and wore leather moccasins upon her dainty feet. Her almond shaped eyes were
large and glistened brightly in the darkness. She had long,
silky black hair that cascaded down her back and shoulders.
This was the woman of his dreams, and now he stood blatantly in front of her, fearing her as a foe.
“Food time is now,” croaked Po, startling them both as
he hopped out the stable doorway and off into the dark and
stormy night.
“Who are you?” asked the elfin woman of the dumbfounded Galden. She stood temptingly in front of him, not
oblivious of the effect her beauty had on him. She reached
out a hand to touch his, which brought him out of his reverie. “What is your name?” she asked.
“G-Galden,” he spat out, trying to overcome his enchantment. He stared rapturously at her, amazed at the event
that fate had brought about. “What’s yours?” He was
squeezing her hand, and she winced demurely.
“My name is Vortigurn,” she answered in her elvish accent, coyly batting her dark eyelashes. “What are you doing
here?” she asked, pulling her hand from his.
He realized what he had done, and smiled meekly and
apologetically. Galden was pleased to have the opportunity
to converse with the woman of his dreams. He might get
a chance to know her better, and maybe even convince her
to join him on his quest, hare-brained and impulsive as it
was. “I’m here with a friend of mine. He’s in the tavern right
now, making arrangements. We’re on a quest.”
“A quest?” she breathed excitedly, pronouncing the word
distinctly. “What fun! What is it that you are questing for,
Gugalden?” She clasped her hands in enthusiasm, looking
eagerly at him.
Galden was sweating now, despite the relative chill. As
Vortigurn leaned closer to him, he did his best to fight
against his natural urge to back away. This was the girl of
his dreams, damn it! “For a lost treasure,” he faltered, not
wanting to give away too much of the details to someone
57

DARK BECOMING
who was still much of a stranger to him. Too late, he realized. Treasure was the stupid answer. He should have said
something about history, or a lost family member. He was
too nervous to even correct her mispronunciation of his
name. Galden looked a little closer at his visitor. She didn’t
seem to be the horse-riding type, and he wondered what
she was doing out in the stables so close before the oncoming storm. “Uh, w-what are you doing here?” he asked. “Out
here in the stables, I mean.” He brushed his hands against
her shoulders as she leaned alluringly closer, her breath
touching his lips. Suddenly she backed off, and took a step
away from him.
“I...” she began, looking nervously away from him. “I
am checking in on the horses...” she muttered. A rosy blush
covered her face, and she averted her eyes from his. She
caressed the mane of Speedwell, rather dejectedly.
“I see,” smiled Galden wisely. No doubt the girl intended
to steal a steed for herself and anyone she might be traveling with. At least, that’s what he’d do. If he had any gumption. Or was a risk-taker like Baringer. Or didn’t care what
other people thought.
“Are you here with anyone else?” he asked of her, now
feeling the upper hand. His confidence was returning as he
surmised her intentions.
“My father is inside the inn, in the tavern. I must go to
him soon.” She smiled appealingly at him. “Will you be joining us in there?”
Galden nodded slowly, smiling to himself. He had caught
her trying to steal horses for herself and her father, and he
now was feeling quite smug. He joined her in petting the
unicorn, their fingers almost touching. Vortigurn turned
off her allure, and appeared to be shy and nervous. “What
do you think, Speedwell?” he asked of the unicorn. He patted her neck and smiled knowingly at her. As he was doing
so, he was surprised to feel a hand reaching into his pant
pocket.
Spinning around, he faced Vortigurn once more, look58

DARK BECOMING
ing warily at the elf. She had quickly withdrawn her hand
from him and grasped it with the other behind her back.
An innocent smile spread across her face as she attempted
to back off.
“You’re... you... you’re just a... a girl!” he cried, amazed
at her impish gall and at a loss for words. He certainly did
not want to insult the object of his affections, and stopped
himself from accusing her of something he would later
regret. He grabbed her by the shoulders and held her. “You
were trying to pick my pocket, weren’t you? You’re no thief!
There’s no way you would’ve been that sloppy. What’s going on here?”
Her face grew saddened at his questions, and she looked
as if she was about to cry. Galden loosened his grip on
her arms and allowed her to lean against him. He breathed
in sharply at her touch. “Tell me,” he requested more softly
of the elfin girl.
Vortigurn looked into his brown eyes and began to tell
her story. “My father an I are here because we are outcasts,”
she informed him. “He is a human while I am an elf. People
do not look kindly upon a human adopting one such as me.
And he is blind now, so I must take care of him. We needed
horses so we could steal away before the storm ends. But
now, I suppose you will tell of my actions to the innkeeper.”
Two large tears trickled down her soft, brown cheek as she
looked pleadingly into his eyes.
“Maybe,” replied Galden, feeling the weakness of his
rapture beginning to fall upon him again, “and maybe not.
Why don’t you tell me more about yourself. My friend
should be back out here shortly, and then we can decide
what to do.”
The scent of her on him was intoxicating him now, and
he could not have stopped her picking his pocket even if he
wanted to. She did not, and he was grateful for that.
•••
59

DARK BECOMING
Baringer was met by the heavy aroma of strong wine
and ale as he entered the front door of the building. It did a
good job of covering the underlying stench of piss, vomit
and sweat, and of mildew, smoke and rot. All around him
were tables at which small groups of people sat, talking,
drinking, arguing and otherwise amusing themselves.
Baringer looked beyond the scattered tables and people to
see the barkeep standing behind a large counter. He was
writing something down in a book on the countertop, and
looked extremely happy. Baringer made his way through
the crowded room to where the barkeep stood, keeping a
firm grip on the money purse in his hand. As he passed
through, he received many glances from admiring women,
and even a few men. Baringer smiled inwardly, pride swelling up his exposed chest. He returned the smiles and continued onward. He smiled just as genially at those who
scowled at him, from the very dangerous to the very disapproving.
Plopping the bag of coins on the countertop, Baringer
spoke to the barkeep. “I need a room for the night. How
much will that be?”
The barkeep smiled genuinely at him. “Depends,” he said
with a chuckle. “Do ye want a dinner with that? We got one
last room left. It’s yours for two gold. Dinner will cost you
an extra half-piece.” He raised an eyebrow and looked at
the satchel, wondering what caliber of coinage it held.
“Make it two dinners, and you’ve got yourself a deal,”
Baringer replied, setting down three gold coins on the
counter. Gleefully picking them up, the barkeep reached
under the counter and removed a key. “This is the last one!”
he laughed. “All of my rooms are sold tonight! The storm
has brought every one to my inn!” He happily rubbed his
hands together and picked up the quill-pen he was writing
with. “Names of people that’ll be staying in the room?” he
asked, casting his eyes upon Baringer.
“Baringer and Galden,” he answered. “I’ve also got a
unicorn and a raven that’ll be staying in the stables.” He
60

DARK BECOMING
leaned comfortably against the counter, watching the man
write.
“How long will you be staying?” asked the barkeep, pausing from the ledger. Holding one of the coins close to scrutinize it, the barkeep whistled low, recognizing the mint as
that of a fairly lucrative family. If this wasn’t stolen gold,
then this fellow might have more.
“I’d say three or four days, judging from the storm.”
Baringer noticed other men at the counter drinking from
large mugs of ale. “Say, can I get one of those?” he asked,
gesturing to one of the mugs.
“Sure,” laughed the barkeep, looking at Baringer’s
money purse. “That, and your stay, and you’ll be into another four of these nice gold pieces. Dinners included.” He
smiled even broader as Baringer dropped four more coins
into his hands. “I’ll be right back with your ale, my good
man,” he said happily, walking down the bar to the barrels
of liquor.
As Baringer was leaning contentedly against the counter,
a wizened old man standing next to him turned his eyes to
him. Baringer was startled to see the empty whiteness that
clouded his eyes, having never before seen anything like
that.
“It is because I am blind, my friend,” spoke the elderly
man. His wrinkled dark skin told Baringer that he was
dealing with some ancient foreigner, probably traveling
from some far off country. The old man startled him by placing a gnarled hand on Baringer’s fore arm. Baringer instinctively pulled away, but he immediately felt ashamed of doing so.
“You are correct,” said the man. “I am from a far away
land.” He reached out a trembling hand to him. “Do not be
startled. I can sense what you are feeling.” He stood closer
to Baringer and bent in a whisper. “Do not show off that
money purse of yours around here, lad. People are not smiling at you just for your looks.” The old gentleman covered
the money satchel with his hand and pushed it closer to
61

DARK BECOMING
Baringer.
Baringer quickly secreted the bag into the side of his
breeches, thanking the man. “How do you know all these
things?” he asked of the old man.
“I am an empath,” he answered. “I feel emotions of others, and I act as a healer.” He whispered even quieter. “My
daughter is in the stables, too. She is now telling your friend
about herself, and the situation we all find ourselves in. She
is trying to steal the money that you have in your possession. It’s his money, isn’t it?” He winked at him, and continued. “I would advise you to join us for dinner tonight.
Look for me and a young elf-girl sitting at the far table. That
one back there.” He pointed a trembling finger at an empty
table that sat against the far wall, secluded from the others
by a partial wall. “Be there!” he ordered. His voice was not
questioning, and his tone implied that his order was to be
followed.
“Here’s your ale, friend,” said the barkeep, handing
Baringer the mug. Baringer stared into the amber liquid,
frothing atop the surface. He breathed in the heady aroma
and shook his head.
“I’ve changed my mind,” mumbled Baringer, shoving
the mug away from him. The barkeep raised an eyebrow,
but said nothing as he reclaimed the mug. “Can you give
this to someone else?” he asked politely. “I don’t think I can
handle this right now.”
“Suit yerself, lad. I’ll bring you another at dinner.” He
set the mug behind the counter and walked down the bar,
giving attention to his other customers. Baringer turned
once again to confront the blind man, but was surprised
to find him gone; no trace of his presence ever having been
there. Baringer looked around the room, trying to locate
the mysterious stranger, but to no avail. He grabbed the
key from the counter, tightly gripped the money purse, and
left the tavern.
Outside, it was colder than it had been but a few moments ago when he had entered the inn. The storm was get62

DARK BECOMING
ting closer, and he felt the droplets of rain already falling
cold upon his body. He trotted swiftly to the stables, calling Galden’s name as he did so.
“Baringer,” said Galden from within the shed. “Come in
here. I’ve got something to show you.” Baringer entered the
shed, finding Galden, Po, and Speedwell, along with a young
elf woman. Though he was not surprised to see her, having
been warned by the old man, he was impressed by her appearance.
“Well, now,” cried Baringer at the sight. “What have we
here? Looks like you’re finally taking my advice, Galden. I
don’t think your choice of locations is that great, but at least
you’re getting there.” He draped his arm about his friend,
and touched the maiden’s cheek with his finger. “Nice,” he
commented, smiling.
“Funny,” laughed Galden sarcastically. “This is
Vortigurn. She’s here with her adoptive father, a blind human. She said...”
Baringer cut him off. “A blind human?” he repeated,
slightly shaken. “I was just talking to one inside. Is he really dark-skinned, with a long white beard and a wooden
staff?”
“Yes,” answered the elf. Baringer liked the sound of her
voice, and drank in the accent. “That is my father. Did he
already ask you to join us for dinner tonight?”
“Yes...” stuttered Baringer. “He did. But how...” He
dropped his arm from Galden’s shoulders and roughly
pushed his friend aside to confront the girl.
“That does not matter,” curtly spoke Vortigurn. “What
matters is your answer. Will you?” She smiled at Galden,
who was angry at Baringer’s brusque gesture.
“I suppose we will,” answered Galden slowly. He looked
sternly at Baringer and then at her, trying to make up his
mind whether to trust her or not.
“I, uh, already told the old man that we would,” added
Baringer. “So I guess it’s decided.” He looked at Galden and
then at the girl. “I suppose we’ll see you at dinner tonight
63

DARK BECOMING
then,” he finished. Vortigurn nodded, then turned back to
Galden.
“If you’ll excuse me, I must be going now.” She gave them
both a short curtsy, and dashed from the stables.
“Vortigurn!” called Galden after her as she ran out into
the rain. “Wait... I...” But he had already lost her in the
gloomy rain. In his frustration, he scowled at Baringer,
wanting to blame him for something. Anything. He did not
want to be left sputtering after a girl in the presence of his
very virile best friend.
“Let’s go inside,” suggested Baringer in an authoritative tone. “I got us a room for the next three days. Come on!
I’m starving, I’m wet, and I’m tired. And I have no intention to walk for several days again without relaxing for a
few.” He looked commandingly at Galden, who in turn
looked at the animals. “Don’t worry about them. Po will eat
what Speedwell eats if he’s hungry, or he’ll find something
outside.” He pointed sternly at Po, who had inconspicuously
returned, and was hopping madly about. “Eat, Po!” he ordered. Looking then at Speedwell, he said to her, “Keep an
eye on the foolish one. We’ll check in on you two every now
and then.”
The two left the stables, and dashed around the side to
the front entrance of the tavern.
“Give me my money bag,” said Galden as they entered.
“I mean it, Bar. Give it to me.”
Pursing his lips and raising an eyebrow, Baringer
handed it to him, insisting that he had to take special care
that it would not get stolen in the large building. Galden
snatched it gruffly, and shoved it into his pocket. They
passed through the large dining and drinking area, heading for the stairs that led to the boarding rooms. At the very
top floor, halfway down the hallway, they located their room.
Baringer inserted the key in the lock, turned it, and they
entered their new home for the next few days.

64

DARK BECOMING

a book of dreams...

Chapter 5
Life in the dungeon was bad, as Valza’in well knew, but
not quite as bad as some of the things he’d experienced in
his life before he was captured. At least here he had regular meals, tasteless and unappealing as they were, and this
nice woman to take care of him. She kept him clean, warm
and happy, and always made sure that he never wanted for
anything. His two friends—the pretty white ghost and the
little grey one—visited them daily, spending nearly the
entire day with the two captives. On the occasions when
the guards would—strangely generous, though not in the
least unwelcome—bring them buckets of water to bathe in,
the pretty lady would let him use it all for himself. She never
seemed to eat much or need the same things he did. But
that didn’t matter. He liked her just the way she was. In
fact, he was rather pleased to have someone care for him
no matter what circumstances it was under. When he would
bathe in the water, she took the time to wash through his
hair, and over his back. She would use a large piece of material that she had torn from the long folds of her dress to
dry him off, and would then comb the hair out from his
face with her fingers. Yes, he certainly did appreciate her.
65

DARK BECOMING
It seemed that she never slept at night, either—at least,
as far as he could tell. That was good, too, since he would
always fall asleep on her lap. She could keep an eye out for
any guards that might come in to get him while he was
asleep. And the ghosts spent many nights along with the
days there with them. He felt safe and secure in the dungeon for the first time in his life. He did wonder, though,
what they did when they weren’t there with him and his
“mother.”
All he could remember of his early childhood were visions of fire, and hearing screams and shouts. He could remember being so overwhelmingly scared, a fear that remained with him for the rest of his life, until he was captured and put in the dungeon with his new family. His first
family was a pack of wild creatures. He did not know what
they were; animal, human, or something in between. He
remembered how he had first came upon them, stumbling
blindly in the forest, looking for food, and crying desperately for his mother. The pack took him in, and a large female creature adopted him as her own. He stayed with them
for the longest time, learning their ways, and hunting for
food as they did... Sometimes having to scavenge off of
the carnage of past killings, learning to be subservient to
the leader of the pack.
One such carrion feast was that of a man that had fallen
under the mighty blow of a bear. The beast had gorged himself from the man’s torso and neck, leaving a bloody husk,
complete from the chin up and the waist down. The pack
had come upon the kill from the acrid odor of cold blood
and flesh, and closed in on it. But for some reason, Valza’in
felt he could not partake of their feast. The dead creature
looked too familiar. It was not that he recognized the face.
The form of the creature’s body, and the fact that he wore
clothes reminded him of a life he remembered once being a
part of. Before the creatures of his pack had a chance to
pull any meat from the long-dead body, he snatched the
torn pants from the man, holding them up about his waist,
66

DARK BECOMING
to the uncertain growls of the other animals. From that day
forth, Valza’in was no longer a member of the pack. He had
to hunt for food on his own then, and scavenge when the
opportunity arose. At first, life on his own was harsh. He
was constantly being chased away by other animals, and
being scratched at and torn by certain ravenous things. He
shivered in the cold of night, and cowered under the darkness of day. He chose to steer clear from any human he saw,
horrific memories of that one night of scavenging filling his
mind. Instead, he stuck close to the dense underbrush of
the mushroom forests. There, the mosses and lichens grew
to immense sizes, protected from the elements by the huge
overhanging mushroom cap canopies. There, Valza’in could
hide in wait for his prey, which usually consisted of small
animals and rodents. He grew lean and lithe, qualities that
stayed with him for the rest of his life. His reflexes became
keen and sharp, and the animals soon learned to stay away
from the area of forest he inhabited.
That brought about a change in Val’s life style. He was
now forced to go nearer to the places he chose to avoid. The
towns had fenced in areas where they kept fat birds of some
kind that could not fly, but were edible nonetheless. During the times when most of the people would be asleep,
Valza’in would steal into these areas and snatch one of the
birds. But he would never stay in one area for too long. The
people in the towns grew wary of him, and he kept on moving from one to another to avoid capture or those annoying
good-intentioned people who wanted to help him out of the
cold, give him clothes and an education, and make him
civilized.
It was at this time in his life when Valza’in came upon
the one city in which the Obelisk of Darkness stood. He had
noticed many such towns where one such as this structure
stood in the center, but in all the other cases, they had been
torn down, converted into something else, or falling into
ruin. There were many differences between this place and
the others. The town was larger, but less densely populated.
67

DARK BECOMING
The tower in the center was black and shiny, the occasional
guard exiting from it, and the occasional prisoner being
pulled into it, never to be seen again.
Valza’in did not know of the vast evil that resided within
the tower walls, nor did he know of the immaculate goodness that dwelled beneath them. His only concern was that
of the food he could possibly find there, and how to get it.
The usual intrigues of creeping into the enclosed yards when
the other people were asleep were obsolete here. The people
were all awake at various points of the cycle; always someone around to see him if he should try. He had to devise
another way to get anything out of this town. Walking in
the streets was too dangerous. He would not feel comfortable doing so, being around so many of these people who
looked so much like him, and none of them dressed like he
did. He would feel too conspicuous doing that. But he had
to try something. He was slowly starving, freezing, and desperate, and rationality was swiftly leaving him.
The waiting behind the huge mushrooms was nervewracking to say the least, and he was getting bored quickly.
He had to have something to eat soon, or he would eventually starve. The mushrooms, if they didn’t make him sick,
were distasteful and tough to swallow.
One house nearest to where he hid had an enclosure that
contained these birds, and it was to this that he one night
foolishly crept. As he was creeping up on the sleeping fowl,
his presence alerted one of the dogs that slept also in the
yard. Valza’in had always tried to avoid these creatures, too,
but he had not seen them when he entered. The animals
made a raucous din, waking up not only the residents of
the home but the neighbors and many others as well.
Valza’in tried desperately to get away from the noise, but
he could not elude the angry dogs. They chased him around
the yard, tiring his legs and making his lungs ache for air.
Soon he heard shouts from outside the yard, and saw large
men in heavy garments racing in upon him. He struggled
even harder to escape the angry canines, and made it over
68

DARK BECOMING
the fence, where he started sprinting for his life toward the
forest beyond a small clearing. He could hear the heavy
breathing and the shouts of the men that bore down upon
him, their heavy boots making loud thundering noises as
they struck the earth. Valza’in’s breaths came in short gasps
now, and every one of them grew shorter and burned hotter than the first. His legs ached to rest, and his stomach
convulsed in aching cramps. Pumping his arms and legs
harder than ever, Val tried to widen the distance between
the guards and him, but they caught up with him before he
could even reach the forest. Five men bore down upon his
thin frame, pinning him kicking and screaming to the
ground. Struggle as he might, he could not break free. At
least the muddy road they fell on absorbed some of the
weight, and did not break any bones.
It took the five of them to drag him—thrashing and biting—into the Obelisk, and another two to help them along.
He did not get a chance to see much of the interior, since he
diverted all his attentions to breaking free. All he could recall was being led through a vast entryway into a black hallway lined with torches, with too many turns to recall his
way. But struggle though he might, Valza’in could not loosen
their grasp. The men took him down many long flights of
stairs, deep within the bowels of the earth, levels underneath the tower. Here they threw him into the dungeon with
the woman and her two ghosts. And there he had been since.
Oh, and he definitely remembered getting hit. That still
smarted occasionally.
Looking up from where he was crouching on the floor,
his knees pulled up to his chest, Valza’in saw Broceliande
and Garid float through the walls. A bright smile lit up his
drawn face. The memories of his past had served to dampen
his spirits, but the two spirits that now entered the cell were
far from being damp. They both wore bright smiles upon
their gaunt faces. They both sailed toward him like children dashing forward to meet a friend; in essence, exactly
what they would have been if they had not been killed ages
69

DARK BECOMING
before. Valza’in spread his arms out in greeting, allowing
the ghosts to pass ethereally through him. This experience
always served to greatly amuse him, and he enjoyed the
tickly feeling he got from Garid’s semi-substance as he
pulled the boy down onto his back. Senna looked up from
her weaving to take note of the frivolity. She had taken yet
another fold of her dress and torn it into small strips, which
she was weaving into a small mat. She meant for it to be a
make-shift bed and coverlet for him. Senna had been singing a merry hymn to herself as she did so, soothing Val into
his thoughts.
And it was from these thoughts that the two ghosts now
roused him. Still lying on his back, laughing gleefully,
Valza’in looked over to where the two ghosts now floated.
They were both crouched as if in a running position, their
ghostly arms outstretched and impish grins on their faces.
The two of them meant to chase Val around the cell, having
their fun and amusing him too. Garid pushed Senna’s patience on tickling Val, coming close to annoying the good
woman too many times.
“No you don’t,” said Senna in a stern tone. “I won’t have
you three making any noise today. The guards are in a bad
mood because I insisted that they get me a needle and some
thread. One of them appropriated some cloth from the Lady
Avalzanet’s chambers, and they are all in trouble for it. How
else do you think I’m making this coverlet for you?” she
asked Valza’in, knowing that the stern sound of her voice
would sufficiently chide the boy, despite the fact that he
probably had no idea what she was telling him. She shook
out the coverlet in her hands, revealing it to be much bigger than they had first expected. Not only had she woven
the strips of her dress together to create a mat, but she had
sewn onto it the heavy cloths she had gotten from the guards
into a blanket for it. And her gown was vastly layered with
varying colors and styles of cloth, silk being very prevalent
among them. But in all her many centuries of captivity,
Senna had no need until now to make use of them.
70

DARK BECOMING
Senna smiled inwardly, acknowledging the auspicious
nature of getting the guards to do anything for a prisoner
of the Obelisk; let alone steal from Ullix’s consort for her.
Valza’in hung his head in apology, smiling innocently
at his foster mother. Turning back to the ghosts after receiving a forgiving sigh from his “parent,” Valza’in held out
his arms to the ghosts, beckoning them to come closer. This
they did, and the three of them began humming a tune that
Senna had taught them. Though Valza’in did not know the
words, the melody was simple enough, and he hummed
along happily.
Senna looked up from her tatting and observed her
friends singing the old Hymn of Salvation. She set down
her weaving and listened more carefully. Val had such a
beautiful voice, and it blended smoothly and beautifully
with those of Broceliande and Garid. Theirs were ghostly
voices, ethereal as their transparent bodies. The combination of their two wispy voices and Valza’in’s humming was
almost angelic. Senna started singing with them, adding her
deep, dulcet tones to compliment theirs and augment the
melody.
The song they sang told about the ancient history of
Harlus, of the way it used to be, of her discovery of the orb,
her capture, Ullix’s gaining of the sphere, and the subsequent disasters. It also told of the impending rescue and
salvation of Harlus’ people, and of those who would make
it so. Senna had originated the song in her dungeon when
she was first entrapped there, and somehow it had leaked
out of the Obelisk, traveling from town to town over the
centuries on the tongues of bards and commoners alike. She
was sure Broceliande had sung it in the presence of one of
the town’s populace, and unknowingly started a tradition.
Or perhaps a guard, having heard it sung enough times
to remember it well enough, sang it to a child who in turn
remembered it and shared it with her own. The song
survived because the song offered hope for the people who
heard and shared it, even though many of those whose
71

DARK BECOMING
tongues had shared its beauty have long passed this realm,
as have many who had heard it.
The hymn was quite lengthy, and many of the bards
chose to shorten it in their chantings. Others customized it
to their own preferences, or misunderstood it; and thus it
evolved. But the melody and the message stayed the same.
The guards were in trouble for stealing material from
Lady Avalzanet. But the deed was not enough to be worthy
of Ullix’s attention. He had a world to maintain in his grasp.
It wasn’t as though the Lady Avalzanet was anything more
than a pawn to be played at his whim anyway. The guards
might be upset by their singing, or they might be comforted
by it. So Senna joined the three figures on the floor, casting
her ageless beauty upon them. The four sang earnestly, and
the beautiful aria wafted through the cracks in the walls
and the spaces in the doors to float gently throughout the
lower dungeon level, enlightening and bringing hope to
those few who heard it. Not once were they told to be silent,
for the guards that sullenly passed the time down there enjoyed the music too, despising their task as much as they
despised their hateful master. Ullix was not stupid. He
wanted his servants to value their lives enough to want to
go on. So he did not reign utterly in destitution and despotism. He allowed for some freedoms. Why keep this world
alive otherwise?
Senna, Valza’in, Broceliande, and Garid spent many
nights doing such things as this. While those who dwelt
above their pitiful abode were oblivious of the joy that was
felt in the pit of deepest oppression, sparks of joy lit up the
gloom like fireflies, darting here and there to be heard and
enjoyed by all within hearing range. Wails of the tormented,
moans of the sick, cries of the heartbroken and dying were
eased if only for the moment to listen to the hymn. The
guards leaned against their posts, nodding off dreamily to
the melody of two human and two ghostly voices. It seemed
that the beauty created in the darkness momentarily freed
everyone down there, and they were all the more happy
72

DARK BECOMING
for it. The guards and the prisoners were in solidarity; equals
in their unwanted fates, equals in the hope felt in their
hearts.
And for the reason that the inhabitants of cell number
four-hundred and thirty-eight brought respite from the
horrors of their everyday lives did the guards obligingly
begin to be more hospitable to the prisoners. Senna would
speak through the door of her cell to the guards at times,
requesting certain things such as the cloth, the thread, and
the needle. Now the food was never forgotten, and Senna
delighted in finding fresher, cleaner water more often for
them to drink and clean themselves with. Oh, Senna was
quite proud of the loving home that her jealous prison was
doing its best to oppose. And she was not about to give it
up. Broceliande and Garid heard no further news about Ullix
and the orb, and that was perfectly fine with her.
The guards that had secured the cloth for Senna had long
since forgotten their rueful woes, and were now thoroughly
enjoying the enchanting sounds that emanated from behind
the heavy door. It was made from heavy oak, a wood that
was common in the days before the cataclysm. It allowed
the music to pass more freely than stone. Lady Avalzanet
could stew in her jealousy and anger. Their positions were
secure.
Their only thoughts now were to keep the two prisoners
and their ghostly friends as happy as they could, for they
did not want to see them go just as much as the other prisoners wanted them to stay... to brighten their lives and bring
hope. Just as much as their captors had no intention of
letting them go. The majority of the guards that had thrown
Valza’in into the dungeon those many months ago were in
some manner or another dispatched or killed, allowing for
a feeling of less oppression among the guards and captives
alike. The guards even smuggled in juicy tidbits of meat
and other more desirable delectables for Senna and Val. The
inmates grew to know and even like the few guards that
spent their lives down there with them, for they—along with
73

DARK BECOMING
the ghosts—were the only contacts they had with the outside world. Sadly, the pair of ghosts and pair of guards rarely
left the Obelisk walls.
Loris and Pouldin, as Senna came to know the guards,
would often question them on any needs they might have,
or just call through the door to tell them any prominent
occurrences. The two guards were kind to them, often requesting that they sing their lovely melodies, or just ask
them to laugh. It so much warmed their hearts to hear Val’s
innocent laughter. Innocence was not commonly known in
the city of gloom. And very rarely was it heard. Valza’in grew
to recognize their voices too, eventually. Whenever the two
men would speak to them it usually meant food or water,
or something like cloth for Senna. Val liked these men much
better than the five who initially captured them, and he did
not care that they wore similar clothes.
Pouldin had a wife and children at one time, as Senna
learned. But the guard refused to speak of them, and Senna
soon put the notion out of her head to ask. Her ability to
read thoughts told her enough. The guards spent their lives
in the subterranean gloom with them, prisoners themselves
of their lowly positions. Their only respite was the knowledge that they were not considered prisoners, and that they
were treated a modicum better than the prisoners when
other guards came down there to inspect the place.
And eventually, they too became part of Senna’s family.

74

DARK BECOMING

...of regrets
Chapter 6
Baringer and Galden pushed themselves through the
throngs of people that milled aboutwithin the confines
of the tavern. Baringer noted that even more people had
gathered around the tables now than when he had first arrived. Most likely due to the storm outside. Though the stone
walls were thick and the people were loud, they could still
hear the thundering of the storm and the rain as it pelted
the walls and roof. The air was stale and musty, rife with
the scents of easily one hundred bodies forced together to
avoid the thrashing winds and wet outside.
The land had not received a decent drenching in quite
some time, although the rains were intermittent and
common, despite there being no sun to provide engorged
clouds with steam. Baringer was thankful that he had
checked to make sure the stable was reinforced with heavy
wooden beams and some slabs of stone on the sides. He
was satisfied that it would last through the downpour, no
matter how long the rains would last. No matter the wood
being easily five centuries old and not suitable to last another onslaught. Miracles happened. People took them for
granted, but utilized them nonetheless.
75

DARK BECOMING
Baringer pulled Galden along behind him through the
masses of people. They were all quite mellow and sodden
with ale, the few that weren’t noisily eating their food or
talking with their neighbors. Their nostrils were assaulted
with mingled aromas of meat, ale, spices, and mushrooms.
What a pity that everything always smelled of mushrooms.
Someone must have taken care of the urine and other bodily
seepages Baringer noticed earlier. Galden hoped he did not
have to suffer through a meal containing anything anywhere
near mushrooms.
Without warning, a big, sweaty head was pushed into
Baringer’s stomach, knocking him back into Galden, who
fell onto the floor. Baringer almost toppled, but saved his
friend from a concussion by keeping his balance. The head
belonged to a much sweatier man who staggered sideways
and upset a nearby table and its contents, sending the diner’s
drinks and food noisily to the floor.
Those seated, in turn, jumped to their feet and shoved
the man back, sending him sprawling onto the floor.
Baringer, who had caught his breath, steeled himself for
another onslaught, and with one menacing look at the agitators, informed them he was in no mood to be trifled with.
The drunkard remained in a heap on the floor, which
Baringer clumsily trod upon, though Galden skirted the
messy bulk, sickened by the vomitous dribbling from his
mouth. He helped the people set the table back upright, and
apologized for the loss of their meal. Making sure his friend
wasn’t looking, he slipped a gold coin onto their table, and
backed away quickly.
“Over there,” said Baringer, pointing to the back of the
room, at the lone, secluded table. He was either too focused
on their destination or chose to disregard the annoying fracas behind him. Vortigurn and the old man were sitting at
the table, the elf looking over the crowd to see them. Her
eyes met with Baringer’s and a smile crossed her face. She
called out to them in her thick accent, and gestured them
forward.
76

DARK BECOMING
“We have been waiting for you,” she said as the two
young men sat themselves at the table. From where it was
situated, the crowd was separated from them by a small wall
protruding from the building’s interior, apparently from a
time when the inn’s owner had decided to increase the
building’s capacity. It effectively shielded them from the
incessant babbling of the people behind them, and allowed
them to speak more freely and be understood better.
“The barkeep will serve your food momentarily,” spoke
the old man. “I have informed him that you two would be
joining us. He already knows you are here, and is preparing
your meal.” He focused his empty eyes on Galden and continued. “And he will not be serving you any mushrooms.”
Galden looked quizzically at the old man, but said nothing.
Vortigurn smiled at him, dizzying him with her radiance.
“Galden,” said Baringer after a pause, “this is... uh...”
He faltered, looking at Vortigurn pleadingly for assistance.
“Saris,” spoke the old man, nodding his dark brown head
politely. “And this is my daughter Vortigurn. We will be joining you on your quest.” He touched his fingertips together
in front of him, neither smiling nor frowning. He stared
straight forward.
Baringer’s politeness was instantly forgotten and he
brusquely questioned his statement. “And who said we were
going to ask you to join us?” he demanded, an angry grimace shrouding his face. “That is, if we were even on a quest;
not that we’ve said we’re on one anyway. It seems to me
that you’ve assumed...”
“I’ve assumed nothing,” interjected Saris, cutting him
off. “It was your own subconscious desires that asked us to
accompany you, and we gladly accept. You will find us valuable on your journey.” The pursed lips and icy stare added
gravity to the old man’s statement, and told all assembled
that there was no argument to be accepted.
Galden looked from Vortigurn to Saris, curious as to
what he was saying. “In what way can you two help us?” he
asked. “I must question your motives; and your ethics.
77

DARK BECOMING
When I first encountered your daughter, she was trying to
steal horses. And that doesn’t make you two sound very
helpful to me.” He folded his arms across his chest, trying
to avoid the intoxicating stare of the elf by focusing all his
attention on Saris. It wasn’t working well.
“I will prove it to you then,” acquiesced Saris, smiling
slightly. “Now, then, pay close attention to me, and every
word I say. He leaned across the table, closer to them, and
cupped his hand over his mouth. “I can read your minds!”
he whispered, smiling slightly.
“What kind of secret is that?” asked Baringer, angrily
sitting back in his chair. “You told me that earlier today.”
“Ah yes,” responded the old man. “But you both looked
directly at me for just a moment. Take a look,” he said with
a smile, waving his arm at Vortigurn.
“Oh!” gasped Galden and Baringer together, staring
blankly at where the girl had been sitting. Neither could
understand how the old man was able to get them to focus
their attention, and to not see anything else that happened
directly in front of them. Instead of her dainty elfin form,
the two companions saw sitting in her place the form of a
large, burly man, brawny muscles jutting out in every imaginable place, and large, shaggy furs draped over his rough
body. He growled ominously at them, revealing two rows
of sharpened teeth set deep in a battle-scarred face.
“Allow me introduce my daughter Vortigurn to you,”
mirthfully spoke Saris. The form of the warrior instantly
melted away to reveal her original shape, that of the elfin
girl. Galden breathed a sigh of relief and dropped his gaze
to the table. “I guess we could use you after all, “ he agreed,
noting the immense possibilities the girl held. “But what
about you?” he asked Saris, looking back at him. “What can
you do for us?”
“Not now, Galden,” stated Saris, looking up. Galden was
just about to wonder how the old man knew his name without him stating it when he was greeted by a buxom waitress who was deftly balancing a large round tray in her hand.
78

DARK BECOMING
On it were four plates of steaming food—no mushrooms to
Galden’s relief—and four large mugs of ale. Smiling at
Baringer, who basked in the momentary glory by
nonchalantly pulling aside more of his vest to reveal his
chest, she set down the four plates and mugs in front of
them, and then held out her hand for the gratuity.
Baringer drank in her appearance with his eyes. He could
see the milky white flesh of her decolletage as it heaved wit
her breathing, tantalizingly inviting him to partake in hidden pleasures. Leaning back, he opened his mouth and slid
his tongue across his upper lip. The waitress, not unfamiliar with his language, allowed a faint smile, and gestured
with her outstretched hand. The sly and frugal man that he
was, Baringer instead grasped her hand in his own, and gave
it a genteel kiss. He looked into her melting eyes and smiled
gratefully. “We all thank you for your fine service, milady,”
he said, further enrapturing the young woman, “and I look
forward to any additional... services.. you can provide.” She
blissfully pulled her hand back and backed away, all
thoughts of a gratuity forgotten in her enchantment. She
returned to the bar, giggling as she told her fellow waitresses about her experience.
“You are very wise,” spoke Saris, nodding at Baringer.
“Your talents will serve to save you a lot of money... Along
with your lives perhaps.”
“What do you mean: our lives?” queried Galden as he
lifted his fork and knife to cut into the meat before him. It
was tender and juicy, and cut easily as he sliced into it. It
tasted even better than it looked and he enjoyed it immensely. “Do you think we’re in danger?”
“I just say that as a warning,” he answered, starting with
his own meal. He daintily cut apart the meat and ate it along
with the various other items on his plate. Vortigurn, however, ate voraciously, as if she had not eaten in days... Or
did not intend to. Galden was fascinated by her, watching
as she ate, while she paid little or no attention to him. He
slowly began to partake of the meal himself, noticing that
79

DARK BECOMING
the others were already wolfing down the meal.
Baringer was no longer riled at the thought of their companionship, although he continued to be suspicious of their
motives. But, he thought to himself, it was apparent that
these two needed to escape from something, and that by
joining them, they could accomplish that. Why else had the
elf-maiden tried to secure them some horses? He stared
openly at the elf, noting the outfit she wore, and how well it
concealed her figure. He could tell there was a heavenly body
beneath the bulky animal skin—whatever fur that bulked
up her appearance couldn’t lie to him.
“What are you running from?” he asked aloud, setting
down his fork. He was met by instant silence from the table,
as all eyes were turned to Saris. He set down his utensils
and folded his hands together, leaning his elbows on the
table.
“That, Baringer of Kaelmorde, is quite a story, and worthy of a lengthy explanation. You two deserve to hear it, but
I shall not burden you with the details. Let it just be known
that we no longer wish to tarry in this village, and your quest
seems more appealing than what may befall us should we
decide to stay here. There are certain people who have been
hunting me... hunting us... and would stop at nothing to
kill us—should they find us. And I fear this may be soon.”
He fumbled on the table for his silverware, picked them up,
and returned to eating.
Vortigurn looked again at Galden, although this time
he did not feel entranced. She was looking at him earnestly
now, imploring him with her eyes. “Will you help us,
Galden?” she asked of him. “Will you let us accompany
you?”
“Of course,” answered Galden, unable to refuse her
pleading stare. How could he refuse her; and would they
even listen if he refused? They ate in silence, casting occasional glances at each other. As they were finishing the
dinner, Saris set down the mug he was drinking from and
placed his hands on the table.
80

DARK BECOMING
“The storm will end the day after tomorrow at precisely
midcycle. We will come to your chamber on that day, and
then all four of us shall depart, early that morning, before
the rains end. No one will be foolish enough to follow us.
No one will be expecting us to leave so soon.” He then rose
from his chair, as did Vortigurn, and the two departed.
“I must say,” said Baringer to Galden after the mysterious father and daughter had left them, “those two are some
of the oddest people I’ve ever met. When did you tell them
our names?”
“I didn’t. I thought you did. He... he read our minds. I
didn’t tell him. Anything.” He pushed his plate and mug
away and lifted himself from the chair. “Come on,” he spoke
in a low voice. “Let’s go back to our room before anyone
breaks into it and takes the book.”
“I wonder if Saris knows about that, too,” muttered
Baringer as he followed him. They hurriedly pushed their
way past the masses of people toward the staircase, making
sure to give a wide berth to the table that was upset earlier.
The drunkard was no longer on the floor. Someone either
moved him, or he got tired of being kicked, jabbed and
stepped upon. Once they made it to the inn’s front and the
staircase, they were no longer hindered by the various bodies getting in their way. They leaped up the stairs, taking
two at a time, and very soon arrived at their small room.
When Galden inserted the key into the lock, he was relieved
to find it still secured. They both went inside it, closed the
door behind them, and locked it securely.
“So we’re going to stay here one more day then, I guess,”
noted Baringer, looking squarely at his friend. He took off
his vest, kicked off his boots, and sat on th edge of the single
bed in the room.“We’re going to get soaked to the bone!
That old man is crazy if he expects us to...”
“Maybe not,” interrupted Galden. “At least it’ll give us a
head start. And besides, I’ve got some money. I can buy us
some cloaks and some more supplies.” He sat down on the
other side of the small bed, exhausted from the day’s expe81

DARK BECOMING
riences, and fatigued by the rain outside. The cold soaked
into his very soul, exhausting him more than any strenuous effort could.
“Move over,” grunted Baringer as he tossed his hat onto
the floor at the foot of the bed. He pushed Galden over to
his side of the bed, and lay down, pulling the bed cover over
himself.
“What am I supposed to use?” asked Galden, pulling at
the cover. Baringer only grunted in annoyance and pretended to ignore him. Glumly, Galden lay back upon the
bed, pillowing his head with his arms. When he heard his
friend’s snores and deep breathing, he turned his back to
Baringer’s, and gently tugged enough of the blanket over
himself to keep from shivering himself to sleep.
•••
“I’m going to tend to the handsome one,” said the barmaid to the group of giggling women that crowded into the
kitchen of the tavern. “You know, the one with all those
bulging muscles and... other things.” She traced a line from
her breastbone down to her stomach and grabbed herself
below, to the delight of the cackling barmaids.
“Ha!” snickered an older hag tried and true in the profession. “Every woman in the tavern saw it bulging the
minute you swung yourself and your loose tits into his
sight!” She pressed her own sagging mounds upward with
her hands and pursed her lips to mock the other.
The first speaker pouted and crossed her arms underneath the very mounds of flesh they were discussing. “Well,
that may be,” she said slowly, “but last night you were mistaken for a man six times by six different people!”
“You bitch!” shrieked the older one. “Kaydrith, you’re a
slut! You’ll end up on the wrong end of a pitchfork one of
these days. You mark my words: You’ll get what you deserve, and it won’t be a knob in your hatch or a coin in your
purse, either.”
82

DARK BECOMING
Kaydrith scoffed audibly at her warnings. “Right,” she
drawled. “Of course. As you say exactly, ma’am! You tried
so hard to teach us virtue, and this is how we turn out.”
“The other guy’s kind of cute,” spoke up a younger barmaid hopefully. She gulped hard, and blushed.
“That skinny little puppy,” laughed Kaydrith. “No. No
indeed. I’m going for the choice cut! The other’s just a baby!
Whatever meat he might have on his bones probably can’t
even get up on its own yet!” She sneered at the younger
barmaid. “He’s a little boy, and definitely not worth my time.
You’ll set your sights a little higher if you want to get anywhere.”
“I... I don’t mind,” replied the younger one, dejectedly.
She smoothed her short hair back, and brushed some loose
strands out of her face.
“Hey, girls,” laughed the old barmaid, who had been listening to the whispered intrigues of yet another who had
come up to them. “Hear this! Them folks are going on a
quest... for treasure! Word is they got treasure already up
in their rooms!” Indeed, with so many people in the tavern
and inn, Baringer and Galden’s schemes did not go completely unheard.
“Treasure?” repeated Kaydrith loudly. She narrowed her
eyes and licked her lips greedily. Facing the old hag and her
conspirator: “You heard that, eh? See that, Nisqué? Maybe
you should go after that puppy dog!”
“A quest?” whispered the youngest, Nisqué, under her
breath. Her eyes lit up, and a smile slowly spread across
her face. In her seventeen years of life, ten of them had been
spent serving ale and food to the aristocracy of filth that
she was also obliged to clean up after. A quest? Nisqué cast
her glance down to the floor, not speaking another word
about it.
The others continued their gossip, though Kaydrith soon
lost interest in their idle chatter. She had set her sights on a
prize, and meant to get her hands on it.
83

DARK BECOMING
•••
The next morning, Galden woke up to find himself on
the floor beside the bed. Scratching his head and stretching, he relized that he must have been dreadfully tired not
to notice such a tumble. The blanket was covering him, but
the fact remained that he was on the floor, and his side ached
from the chill he absorbed from the ancient floor boards.
He could hear Baringer moving about on the bed above him,
and this further served to aggravate him. Baringer always
managed to do things like that to him. Somehow during
the night he must have either spoken to and convinced him
to get on the floor, or very meticulously lifted him and deposited his sleeping form down there. That, or he really did
fall. Galden pulled the cover around himself and stood up.
His back ached and that did not sit well with him.
He noted the peacefully slumbering Baringer on the bed,
one arm propped beneath the pillow, the other lying across
his chest. Galden slowly leaned down to pull the pillow out
from under his head, when Baringer snapped his body upward, upsetting him from his plan.
“Huh? What?” he sputtered. He looked at Galden standing next to the bed, robed in the bedsheet. His alarm subsided, and he stretched luxuriously. “Thought you could
sneak up on me?” he asked with a wink. He punched the
pillow and set it straight on the bed. “Here, hand me that,”
he requested of Galden as he rose from the bed. Galden
grumpily gave the blanket to Baringer, who shook it out,
folded it, and set it on the bed. Again he stretched, extending his arms above his head and bending backwards. It was
an opportune time for Galden to toss some water from the
wash basin upon him, which he did.
Baringer looked Galden straight in the face. Galden expected him to jump upon him and fight, something they
occasionally did. But Baringer only smiled politely. Baringer
always did like to keep Galden one step behind him. And
Galden knew that Baringer would get him back for that
84

DARK BECOMING
when he least expected it. “What an idiot!” he thought to
himself grimly.
Before they could do anything further, a knock on the
door startled them. Baringer strode across the room and
cautiously opened it. He was surprised to see the woman
who had waited on them the night before. She was carrying
a bucket in her hand and dragged a large barrel-on-wheels
behind her.
“D’ye need any fresh water for your wash basins?” she
asked of him with a smile. Baringer noticed that she was
wearing a low cut blouse that hung loosely from her shoulders, cleverly revealing more than it was supposed to when
fully buttoned. He could make out the pink tip of her breasts,
which she proudly displayed for him. He rubbed his hand
across his chest and smiled. He knew that the tavern’s staff
would have filled the wash basin with fresh water later on
in the day anyway, and that the girl had gone through the
trouble of hauling up the barrel just to catch a glimpse of
him without his shirt on. Her choice of outfit did not go
unnoticed, and it was apparent to the skilled minister of
womanly virtue that her intentions were not of the honorable sort. Her dress was hiked up and pinned to the side,
revealing her slender legs underneath. She was barefoot,
and Baringer could see her small feet, pale against the dark
floor.
“Sure,” he spoke with a smile, admitting the girl into
the room. She entered, running the fingers of her left hand
across his chest as she did, passing Galden as he was buttoning his vest. Without giving him a second glance, she
grabbed the wash basin, opened the window, and tossed
the water out into the rainy, dark morning. She closed the
window before any of the drenching rain could fall in, and
set the basin back upon the small table across from the bed.
She then looked deep into Baringer’s eyes, staring intently.
“Ummm... Galden,” spoke Baringer, his eyes never once
averting from hers, “you go on ahead and get yourself some
breakfast downstairs. I’ll just stay up here and rest a bit.”
85

DARK BECOMING
“Yes,” added Kaydrith. “And I brought some breakfast
up here anyway... But only enough for one. I’m sorry,” she
said, looking apologetically at Galden, who grumpily closed
the door behind him.
“Now then, milady,” whispered Baringer as he picked
up the bucket of water, “do let me help you with this heavy
bucket.” He poured the water into the basin, and set the
bucket back upon the floor, but not before intentionally
spilling some on the front of his pants.
“Why, good sir,” she whispered back to him, putting a
trembling hand to her bosom. “You needn’t be so kind. I
can do my job.” She alluringly batted her eyes at him, sidling closer to him.
“May I take the liberty to ask your name?” he asked with
a smile. He too was slowly edging closer to her, goosebumps
spreading over his body. He reached out his arms and placed
his hands on her shoulders, then ran them down her arms.
The shoulder of her blouse slipped off revealing the smooth
skin of her arms and her breasts.
“Kaydrith,” she answered, running her slender fingertips across his chest and stomach.
“Pleased to make your acquaintance, Kaydrith,” whispered Baringer. He backed her against the foot of the bed,
planting a kiss on her anxiously awaiting lips. In one fluid
motion, Kaydrith unfastened the waist of Baringer’s
breeches, letting them join her blouse on the floor, and the
two fell onto the bed. Baringer, while kissing the girl passionately, pulled her dress off, and the two enjoyed the pleasure of each other’s company above the covers of the small
bed.
Below in the inn’s tavern, Galden glumly sat down at
the same table he had sat at the night before, setting his
arms on it. He angrily lay his forehead down upon his
clenched fist, clenching his eyes shut and grumbling about
the injustices of having a friend with tremendous sex-appeal. He could envision Baringer thrusting into the woman,
testing the endurance of that small bed... a bed he would
86

DARK BECOMING
have to sleep on that night; unless Baringer somehow kicked
him off again. How he hoped that he could find more sheets
somewhere. And another pillow.
A tap on his shoulder brought him back to his senses.
Galden looked over his hunched shoulder to see Vortigurn
standing there, smiling pleasantly. “May I join you for
breakfast, Gugalden?” she asked, sitting down beside him.
Galden returned her smile, grateful to have some company...
especially hers.
“It’s, uh, it’s just Galden. Where’s your father?” he asked
of her, before she could respond to his admonition. He no
longer seemed to be entirely flustered by her presence,
although she still made him feel giddy with her radiance.
“He’s ordering for us. I expected to see your friend
Baringer with you,” she added, looking to the empty seat
across from her. “Baringer is his name, yes?”
“He’s still upstairs,” he added glumly, not wanting to
talk about his companion and his ministrations.
“Oh, okay,” Vortigurn sighed, looking back to the
counter where Saris was talking to the barkeep. He reached
into a pocket of his robe, pulled out something, and deposited it in the barkeep’s hand. Then he stumbled toward
them, one of his hands groping slightly in front of him. He
thumped his staff lightly on the floor ahead of him, using it
to guide his way past the tables and chairs. Galden wondered why he even needed it, seeing that the old man moved
with the grace of a cat. As he arrived at the table, he sat
down with a soft plump, and leaned his staff against the
side of the table.
“Good morning, Galden,” he said brightly, smiling
cheerfully at him. “Where is Baringer?” He folded his hands
on the table. “He is meant to be with us this morning. I have
seen it so.” Galden motioned upward with his hand, then
remembering that the man was blind, he was about to speak.
Saris however cut him off, nodding patiently. “He is still in
your room, then. Just as well. We shall have to save his
breakfast for him then.” He wrinkled his brow in concern,
87

DARK BECOMING
and Galden wondered if the old man had an idea of what
was going on.
Vortigurn smiled shyly at Galden, then demurely cast
her eyes downward. Galden smiled at her as well, making
note of the slight hint of something in her eyes.
Breakfast was served them by another waitress, as
Galden well expected. The girl was younger than Kaydrith,
and less developed. “Here you are,” she spoke shyly, hastily
setting down the plates in front of them. She smiled broadly
at Galden, who failed to notice it. “Shall I save the fourth
serving, good people?” she asked, setting the glasses of
spiced milk before them. Her hands were trembling slightly,
and managed to upset the third glass she set on the table. It
fell over, spilling the milk over Galden’s lap.
“Oh!” she cried, tears beginning to well up in her eyes.
“I... I’m sorry. I didn’t mean...” She immediately ripped off
her apron and set the tray on the table. As she leaned down
to wipe the spilled milk from the floor and table, she bumped
her head against Galden’s as he, too, was leaning forward
to avoid the spilled milk before it soaked into his pants. “I’m
so terribly s-sorry,” she wailed, crying now.
“Nonsense,” laughed Galden, brushing her tears away
with his finger. As he did so, he looked into her young eyes,
a reflection of... something catching his attention. But only
momentarily. She smiled, and stood up. She deposited the
wet apron on the tray, and set the fourth glass of milk before him. “I’ll get another for your friend when he gets down
here,” she spoke softly, turning to go back to the counter.
Galden grabbed her arm gently before she could go.
Something stirred within him, and he asked, “Will I see you
again? I mean, uh, will you be our server today?”
She smiled demurely at him, and nodded her head gratefully. She then walked quickly to the counter, disappearing
behind the kitchen doors.
Galden sat at the table, the milk making his breeches
sodden and clingy. He smiled awkwardly at Vortigurn, who
stifled a giggle behind her hand. He knew that the milk
88

DARK BECOMING
would give him an unpleasant aroma if he did not change
into something else and clean his pants.
“Why do you not go back to your room and change?”
Saris asked, reading his thoughts. “Certainly your sitting
here will do nothing for your breeches. Do not worry,” he
laughed, “we will not eat your breakfast.”
“I, uh, I can’t go up there... right now,” stuttered Galden
in exasperation. “Baringer’s up there... with one of the girls.
The one that served us last night. They’re having... relations...”
“Good heavens, boy!” erupted Saris, standing abruptly
up from his chair. Galden looked confusedly at him then at
the suddenly worried face of the elf.
“What? What is it?” he asked, looking back and forth
between the elf and the old empath.
“Do you not see, lad?” asked Saris angrily. “The whore
will steal your book! Her only reason for having intercourse
with your friend is to steal all your valuables! She knows
about your book and your quest!”
“Oh no!” cried Galden, jumping up and running to the
stairs. He was followed closely behind by Vortigurn, while
Saris worriedly trotted along behind them, doing his best
not to bump into anyone.
Jumping up the stairs three at a time, they both arrived
at the door simultaneously, breathing hard from the run
up the stairs. Galden hastily fumbled the key into the lock,
and twisted it open. Throwing open the door, they saw
Baringer lying face down, inert and naked on the bed, a
stream of blood from an open slit across his neck soaking
into the bedsheets. Kaydrith, fully clothed, was rifling
through their belongings.
“Dear Heavenly Fathers!” gasped Galden, tripping over
the water bucket that Baringer had let fall by the door.
Before he could react, he heard an animalistic roar from
behind him, and turned just in time to see a huge gryphon
spring through the open door, striking its mighty claws at
the petrified Kaydrith. Vortigurn struck the back of her im89

DARK BECOMING
mense paw against Kaydrith’s head, and knocked the girl
unconscious against the wall.
As the whore fell limp to the floor, the shape shifter reverted to her elfin form and helped Galden to his feet.
“Hurry!” she cried as the two dashed to Baringer’s side. She
turned Baringer over onto his back, drew the bed sheet over
his lower extremities, and used the pillow cover to wipe away
the blood from his neck and chest. Baringer was deathly
pale, and when Vortigurn leaned her ear against his chest,
she shook her head sadly. “I cannot hear anything,” she
whispered, her voice trembling from the excitement.
“No!” shouted Galden angrily, he grabbed Vortigurn’s
shoulders and shook her angrily. “You’re lying! He can’t be
dead! He’s my best friend! I won’t let...”
“He is not dead,” spoke Saris’ voice from behind him.
“Yet.” The old man had stumbled his way up the stairs,
finally arriving at the room after Galden and Vortigurn’s
noisy entrance. “Step aside please,” he ordered sternly, shoving Galden away from the bed with his staff. Vortigurn fell
to the floor, a hurt look covering her face as she glanced at
Galden. Saris dropped his staff onto the floor, where
Vortigurn quickly grabbed it and held it close. The old man
leaned down over Baringer, extending his gnarled hands to
touch his neck.
“What are you doing?” shouted Galden, trying to rush
forward and snatch the old man’s hands away. The staff,
handled by the elf-girl, stopped his progress, tripping him
and sending him sprawling on the floor. From there he could
see Saris’ hands begin to tremble as a pale light shone forth
from his fingers, embalming his friend in its faint glow. Before his very eyes, the gash in Baringer’s neck sealed itself,
and the blood that had trickled out flowed back into his
body. As Saris pulled his hands back, he issued an order to
his daughter in some foreign tongue, and the girl jumped
up and retrieved the bowl of water from the table. This she
poured over Baringer’s face and neck, and Saris’ still-trembling hands.
90

DARK BECOMING
“What?” sputtered Baringer, coughing. He looked
around in surprise, blinking the water from his eyes. He
noticed Kaydrith’s limp form across from him, slumped on
the floor, and realized what had happened. He reached up
to touch his neck. “Did you...?” he asked looking astoundedly
at Saris.
The old man nodded and pulled him up. “Come, hurry.
Get dressed. We must leave today. Vortigurn. Get our
things. Galden, gather your belongings together. We depart
today. The girl too.” The old man helped Baringer to his
feet, the latter holding his hand to his head, still dizzy from
the healing he just experienced. He pulled on his clothes
quickly, casting stray disdainful glances at the unconscious
woman. Galden had just finished packing and Vortigurn had
just entered with two bags and several cloaks when the
young waitress burst into the room.
“I heard some noises from up here, and when I didn’t
find you at the table, I thought...” She gasped in mid-sentence, noticing Kaydrith on the floor. “Did she try to kill... I
mean... Oh Lords.” She paled, staring blankly around at the
other’s faces. Tears welled in her eyes, and she held a trembling hand to her chest. “Take me with you,” she whispered,
trembling visibly now.
“We can’t!” hissed Galden angrily at the frightened girl.
“We have no room!” He had not noticed Saris’ statement
thinking he was referring to Vortigurn. “ ‘The girl too’,”
he repeated, looking at the old man in exasperation. “How
many people are coming with us?”
“I’ve got a horse in the stables,” she pleaded. “I have
nothing here. No family... Everyone treats me like a child...”
“No!” snapped Galden, looking madly about him.
“But I...” she faltered, falling to her knees. “I c-can’t stay
here. I need to come with you. Please.”
“There is no time to argue now,” spoke Saris as he accepted a cloak from Vortigurn. “We have prepared for your
company, girl. Be swift about getting your necessities for
the trip.” He sniffed at Galden. “Do not ignore me again,
91

DARK BECOMING
boy,” he hissed angrily.
The girl hesitated a moment, then, prodded by the stern
look Saris gave her, rushed out of the room.
“What do you mean by taking her with us?” asked
Baringer. “For all we know she could be in with this slut
here!” He pointed angrily at Kaydrith’s slumped body.
Vortigurn handed him and Galden a cloak, shaking her head
firmly.
“She is not in league with that sort,” she spoke softly,
brusquely handing Galden the cloak. “If my father says so,
we must trust that she will be an asset to our journey. You
shall discover that soon.” She put on her own cloak and the
four bustled out of the room. Galden was relieved to find
the book safely packed in his satchel, never having been discovered by the unwelcome visitor to his room. The four
quickly glided down the steps, Saris being guided and supported by Galden, Baringer leading the way. They were met
by the young waitress, a thick cloak covering her head, and
a lump on her back that told them she carried with her but
a few supplies.
“I’m ready,” she spoke hastily.
Amid stray and curious glances from the patrons of the
tavern and the staff, the five hooded figures departed the
dry warmth of the tavern and entered the pouring rain outside; earlier than they had planned.
“Follow me!” shouted the girl over the roaring downpour. They dashed through the mud around the side of the
building and into the opened door of the stables.
Once inside, they breathed easier, the cramped confines
of the shed allowing them temporary respite from the rains.
Speedwell and Po instantly recognized their masters, and
gleefully crowded closer to them.
“We’re going out today,” spoke Baringer to the unicorn
and the raven. Po perched happily on Baringer’s outstretched arm and quietly folded his wings together as the
man pulled the bird under his cloak. The girl meanwhile
had pulled several extremely large blankets from an open
92

DARK BECOMING
cupboard on the side wall of the stable and began draping
them over some of the horses.
“We’re taking these,” she informed them, indicating the
four horses she had just covered. Galden assisted her in
bridling them and hoisting the saddles onto their backs and
securing them. The horses stomped anxiously at the floor
of the stable, knocking around the stray wisps of hay.
“These are not your horses,” Saris stated as Vortigurn
helped him mount.
Nisqué did not respond.
“What were you doing on your...” began Galden, but
stopped himself before he could speak further. He did not
want to know the intricacies of his friend’s sexual escapades.
Baringer turned away from his friend in shame, and helped
Nisqué finish the bridling.
Once Speedwell was covered by one of the tarps, the five
wordlessly galloped out of the shack, into the black rain of
early morning.

93

DARK BECOMING

a book of memories

Chapter 7
Candles were spread about at various spaces inside the
dank cell. Some of them were burning, some were not. Some
were melted lumps of wax, some were pristine examples of
new waxwork. On the smooth rock floor lay a small, woven
rag rug that Senna had created from various scraps of cloth
that Pouldin and Loris had managed to secretly smuggle to
them. Senna herself sat upon a makeshift chair fashioned
from pieces of one of the old oaken doors of a cell that had
long since caved in. Pouldin had fashioned it for them in
the solitary late nights when he and Loris, as was usual for
them, were left alone down in the dungeons to guard the
prisoners. It was not as if any of them were about to escape,
but they had been stationed there for a reason... These two
men were not deemed good—vicious, bloodthirsty?—
enough for Ullix’s army, and were to be kept separated from
the others in some useful function if they did not want to
end up as prisoners themselves. Pouldin had spent quite
some time building the chair while Loris kept watch for
other guards. Then they snuck it into the cell to the delight
of its four inhabitants. The chair had to be kept where it
would not be seen by the casual guard inspecting the cell,
94

DARK BECOMING
and the cave had enough space to guarantee that. It was,
after all, in the lowest depths of the dungeons. Not many
inspectors wasted their time down among the dregs.
Valza’in was sleeping peacefully on the mat and coverlet that Senna had made for him, his long hair falling over
his face. Senna enjoyed combing through his hair after she
washed it, lovingly comparing it to her own, which was now
all of five feet long. His was only about a foot long, give or
take an inch or two. It was constantly getting in his face
when he was awake, and he no longer pushed it back from
his eyes, being so accustomed to it.
Broceliande and Garid were off somewhere in the castle,
having their fun scaring the few unwitting denizens of the
Obelisk with their ghostly antics. Taking advantage of the
superstitious lot. Senna knew that the two spirits never
dared enter the higher portions of the black tower, knowing full well what sort of creatures dwelled up there. It was
common knowledge among all the residents of the Obelisk—
prisoner, guard, soldier and subordinate alike—what sort
of horrific experiments Ullix performed on the mutilated
bodies of his slain and wounded underlings. These experiments were occasionally seen from far off by various members of the guard battalion, their stories describing horrific
creatures part human, part elf, part wolf, part bear, and part
anything else that might come to mind. Broceliande and
Garid also reported having seen these diabolic abominations. Senna was well aware that they were too frightened
by the monsters to stray any farther upward than the ground
floor. Ghosts could be made prisoners, too, it seemed.
What a shame, she thought, that the two of them were
confined within the walls of the Obelisk. Their deaths had
been so terrible that their essences were locked within the
stone and mortar that made up the tower. Senna knew their
only hope of freedom lied with her and Val’s escape. Where
she went, so could the haunting spirits. She had been
present at both deaths, and she herself was the key to their
salvation. And she knew that that salvation was drawing
95

DARK BECOMING
near. She did not know how she could bear losing two such
good friends as they progressed to their new plane of existence. Perhaps they would stay with her long enough for it
to be done. Senna leaned back on the chair, closing her eyes.
She formulated an image in her mind; that of an open book.
With her mind’s eye she read the carefully etched writing
that had long, long ago been written on the pages of the
great tome... Written in the hand of her youngest son’s
youngest son. He had been too young to accompany his
older siblings as they followed in thier parents’ footsteps in
the almost traditional search for Senna.
Senna’s son was raised by his father in the kingly arts,
and grew up to become the new ruler of Erz. One of his sons,
Hronnemeer, rejecting the boring life of a pampered prince,
ran off to become a bard. It was he who wrote the many
passages of history in the book; imbuing it with his own
unique perspective. It was the passage that told of the creation of the Sphere of Knowledge that Senna now perused.
For countless ages the gods who created life as it is known to this
day dwelled high above the clouds, within the gaseous body of a star.
Norbinda, the gods’ stronghold, became the center of the universe... and
the center of life.
From the fiery depths of nothingness that surrounded this star an
unnamed planet erupted violently into existence within a dark expanse
of a newly sprawled out universe. Forged by the very power of the gods,
the world began to flower with a multitudinous variety of life, which
included many species fashioned to the exact forms and likenesses of
their own creators.
Humans resembled Mannedor, the god of mankind; elves bore a
likeness to Koorlinn, god of elven-kind; Zarfozoluk appeared exactly as
his own creations—the trolls; and so on until each species resembled its
divine creator. Each particular race or species was born with a deep,
innate belief, embedded nearly as deep as their souls, that his or her own
race was superior to the others.
A conglomerate of deities and demigods called the Great Twelve
poured as much life into the planet as possible. It was they who were
96

DARK BECOMING
responsible for the formation of Harlus and the vast majority of its
inhabitants, the other creations borne from unsanctioned and unholy
unions between various members of the different species. As tribute to
the twelve main races, twelve moons were erected around the planet,
each named for its corresponding deity.
As the vast throng of separate cultures grew, so did racial tension;
almost to the point of a smelting pot about to boil over and violently
splash its roiling contents into a fire that would surely increase tensions
to war. Within the marble halls of Norbinda, the gods and goddesses
became restless. Here, too, tensions between them grew. How could
they not support the standpoints of their creations? Does not a parent
love their child to the exclusion of anything else? As the years progressed, so did the immense hatred for one another. A major conflict
was unavoidable.
Mannedor gave the gift of foresight to Senna, the purest of her
kind, as a warning of what would become of the world. In a last desperate attempt, Mannedor began to fashion a sphere of crystal into a containment device for such wisdom, knowledge, and truth never before
known to mortals. Surely one as virtuous as his chosen would be the
ideal guardian of the wisdom of the gods.
Nearly ten days before the great cataclysm rocked the world, the
sphere of knowledge was spewn from the gods’ stronghold in the sun
toward Harlus’ gravitational field. From Norbinda to Harlus, unerringly
it rocketed downward, pulled by the planet’s gravity, landing somewhere
upon the surface in a rain of fire and smoke.
Days later, the house of the gods exploded, sending waves of shock
millions of miles in every direction, shattering any planet in its path. It
crushed moons and asteroids as if they were nothing but brittle glass.
Despite Mannedor’s greatest intentions, he could not stop the other gods
from decimating everything about them in their destructive hatred.
Harlus’ only salvation was its twelve moons, which, aligned in the
heavens as they were at this celestial moment, absorbed and deflected
the brunt of the blast. It was as if the moons, sensing their namesake’s
cataclysmic war amongst themselves, had chosen to offset the destruction as best they could. The moons were not able to protect the planet
completely though. Debris plummeted earthward, causing tidal waves,
volcanoes, and earthquakes to shake the world apart. And in its subse97

DARK BECOMING
quent darkness, the great Queen Senna was able to see the light of the
Sphere of Knowledge shining brightly amid the emaciated fields of her
once majestic kingdom.
Senna did not need to read further. She knew well the
story of her discovery of the orb and her subsequent disappearance. She noted that the book neglected to mention that
Mannedor had also given her the gifts of precognition and
immortality. Those gifts to her were most likely unknown
to the people of Harlus, as she disappeared soon after the
cataclysm.
It was obvious to Senna that the moons’ destruction
should have—and likely did have—far reaching effects; far
beyond anyone’s comprehension. Magic was the only
explanation for the unexplainable. The planet survived,
despite the despicable condition it remained in. What did
the forces of gravity, of stellar destruction and black holes,
the laws of physics and science... what did any of that have
to do with a single, lone planet remaining intact in a solar
system that did not? If there was life outside the known universe, life that was more aware of any known—what explanation could be made? How does one rationalize Harlus?
Senna opened her eyes and looked down at the still sleeping form of Valza’in. He usually slept with his head on her
lap, her comforting hands upon his head. Senna arose from
her chair and snuffed out the candles. She then lay down
beside her son, and put her arm softly over his slumbering
form. She pulled her hair into a pile beneath her head, and
closed her eyes. Her son’s mind would never be troubled by
the thoughts that plagued hers. It just could not be possible. It would not be possible.

98

DARK BECOMING

...of pride
Chapter 8
What started as one, then four, became seven, and then
ten. Galden, Baringer, Saris, Vortigurn, Po, Speedwell, and
Nisqué had been traveling for three days before they met
up with the two elves. Talkative and nervous, Nisqué had
been adamant about telling them her life story, about how
she had been abandoned at the inn by uncaring parents,
raised by barmaids and tennants, and taught to be subservient to all the wanton desires of the tavern’s customers.
She was highly proud of the fact that she was an expert cook
and seamstress, and insisted upon sewing up a jerkin for
Baringer, whom she suggested did not wear enough clothes.
The rains had died down the farther they were from
Kurlingforde, as Nisqué had identified the town for them,
and as the day was growing late, so the storm was dying
down. Nisqué knew the area well, and when she was told of
the quest that they were upon, she suggested that she knew
the easiest and fastest way to the coast of the Kaelmorde
peninsula. She spoke of a strait that separated the two peninsulas of the continent, and that beyond the second lay a
vast ocean. She had served several sailors and merchants
who had traversed that expanse of water, and was told many
99

DARK BECOMING
tales of the land of Erz. She told them all this as she cooked
their meals from the scant bag she carried with her. They
were amazed at the great amounts of food concealed within
it, and more than grateful. It was she who stumbled upon
the elves and the troll first.
The group, with Po flying off somewhere in search of a
rodent or anything dead, had rounded a large outcropping
of rock from the marshy surface, and discovered a rift in
the earth before them. Down the slope of the crevice they
were able to make out the two tall and one short forms.
Saris indicated that he sensed tension from the three
figures below, but also general good intentions and an obvious great need to be rescued. “Tension?” asked Baringer,
crossing his arms across his chest. “Really?” Galden and
Baringer unwound a length of rope that Galden had secured
in his satchel back in Kaelmorde. Nisqué insisted that one
day she would have to clean out and organize the large bag
for him, obviously wanting to discover the many interesting things within it and hopefully getting a glimpse at the
wonderful Book of Days she heard so much talk about.
Shouting down to the three indistinguishable forms,
Baringer made clear to them their intentions to help, and
the three figures down below hollered up their appreciation and cooperation.
The rope was quickly secured to the rocky outcropping,
and lowered to the unfortunate travelers below. Saris nodded happily as he recalled how a feeling of his had cautioned
them enough to be on the lookout for such pitfalls, and
Nisqué rebuked that it was her woman’s intuition that saved
them all. Vortigurn giggled to the others that it was their
boredom of Nisqué’s constant chatter that caused them to
keep their eyes peeled for anything else that might take their
minds off her ceaseless prattling. Galden politely asked
them to shut the hell up, and he and Baringer pulled up the
first of the unfortunates.
After some tugging and grunting, and some very obliged
help from Vortigurn in the shape of a massive quarterhorse,
100

DARK BECOMING
they hauled the first one up. He was a short, squat fellow,
of a sickly green complexion. He was approximately fourand-a-half feet tall, had a small hump on his back, and a
huge nose hanging above two chapped lips and below two
jaundiced, yellow eyes. The fellow had sharp fangs, large
pointed toenails, patchy hair, and clubbed feet. Altogether
he presented a rather ungainly sight, and the travelers knew
right off that the growling individual was none other than a
troll. He held a large shield and a sword in one hand, and
was grappling with a large bag, that appeared to contain
something or someone, with the other.
“My deepest gratitude, folks,” he growled at them, making a facial gesture that was supposed to be a smile, but
appeared to them to be an even deeper grimace.
As they greeted the troll, Vortigurn reverted back to her
elf-self. “You know,” she said, “no one asked me if I could
turn into a roc or a gryphon or something. You cannot expect me to do all of the thinking.” She folded her arms across
her bosom and stamped her foot. Before any of the entourage could reply to her statement, Vortigurn had flung herself over the cliff, changing shape to that of a winged horse
before their astonished eyes. They could see her winged
form flutter down to the awaiting captives of the crevice,
and before long, the two of them had ridden Vortigurn back
up to the surface.
For once, Nisqué was silenced in awe, a rare treat for
the others. Standing before them, albeit heavily bruised and
visibly wounded, were an elf, a half-elf that bore a striking
resemblance to the first, and the troll.
“We must extend our deepest gratitude to you and your
followers,” spoke the first elf to Vortigurn, kneeling in front
of her and kissing her extended hand. He wore leather
breeches and a vest of the same material, and moccasins
formed of a similar material. His long black hair hung loose
from his head, a thin band keeping it out of his face, and a
large beaded clasp at the end preventing the great mass of
hair from straying too far. Although he had obviously at
101

DARK BECOMING
one time bled profusely from the many cuts and gashes on
his body, he nevertheless assumed Vortigurn to be the
leader of the group and paid her his chivalrous duties. The
kneeling caused him discomfort and pain, but he bore it,
and bore it well.
“Oh,” she breathed, amused at his droll actions. “I am
not the leader of these people.” Looking around, her gaze
stopped on Galden. “He is.” She pointed at him. He smiled
briefly and waved a free hand. He and Baringer were rolling up the rope and re-depositing it in the satchel. Neither
had paid attention to the rescued elf’s actions, nor heard
what was spoken.
“Oh,” grunted the elf, wrinkling his nose in distaste. “Allow me to introduce my companions,” he said, standing
again. He extended his arm to introduce the two others,
both as wounded and bruised as he.
“I am called Kieran the Full-Blooded. This,” he said,
pointing to the half elf, “is my brother Koldin. It is not his
fault that he is only half-elf. He can... well...”
“I can do things with my mage half,” spoke the other
calmly. He was hunched over, slightly covered by his heavy
cloak, but the adventurers could easily make out his features. He wore a patch over his right eye, gloves on both
hands, and had streaks of elvish black and magish grey in
his long hair. He appeared to be the same age as his brother,
however, which Nisqué later assumed to be around one- to
two-hundred years old. “You know,” she whispered to
Baringer. “They live much longer than we do. Elves, I mean.”
“And this is Zeboblonuk Fenozizuk,” said Kieran last,
pointing to the troll. The angry creature nodded his savage
head, glaring at the spectators.
“Maybe we should’ve left him down there,” mumbled
Nisqué to Vortigurn, nervously, hiding behind the elf girl.
All the while, Galden had kept silent, but noticing the
prodding glances of the others at the old gentleman in their
company, he spoke to the three newcomers. “Please forgive
my ignorance,” he apologized, pulling Saris forward. “We
102

DARK BECOMING
have a healer with us, and I’m sure he can help you with
your wounds. Saris?” he asked, nudging him forward.
“Of course,” laughed the old man, extending his hands
before him. He neared Kieran, who backed away in disgust.
“A human!” he gurgled, paling in disgust. He shrank back
from Saris’ trembling hands, but a touch on his shoulder
from Koldin’s gloved hands held him in his place.
The half-elf looked calmly at his brother, and then at
the healer. “Be not prejudicial now, brother,” he spoke
calmly. “You know how I detest your superior attitude.” He
narrowed his eyes, and Kieran reluctantly allowed the old
man to run his trembling fingers over his wounds.
The gnarled hands grasped Kieran’s wrist. He rubbed
them both up the arms, and across to the elf’s neck. Kieran
tilted his head back, restraining himself though gritting his
teeth. The touch of a human, regardless of what that touch
meant, was almost as bad as what malicious blade caused
the angry gashes on his body. Saris, in a gentle movement,
knelt down and put both hands on Kieran’s thigh, rubbing
downward as if he was brushing dirt away. He finished at
the foot, and when he pulled his hands away, the elf abruptly
backed off.
Once Kieran was fully healed, Saris advanced slowly to
Koldin, who guided the old man’s wizened hands to the various parts of his body needing attention, an action that his
haughty older sibling had not seen fit to do. With the halfelf’s aid, Saris was able to more swiftly heal him, and the
troll had been so fat and well-armored that he had but a
few scrapes on his face, legs, and arms. Saris healed those
in no time at all, and stepped back, allowing Galden to begin the introductions.
Galden quickly introduced the members of his questing
party, beginning with Baringer, and ending with Nisqué and
Vortigurn. “She’s his daughter” said he, a smug smile upon
his face as he pointed at Saris. He could see the shock register on Kieran’s face, glad that the elf-maiden had not been
raised in the same prejudicial manner that the other elf was.
103

DARK BECOMING
His brother wasn’t so bad, though, he thought. Probably
because of his own tainted bloodline. Galden had always
heard stories of the pompousness and almost debilitating
pride of the elves, and now experienced it in person. “She’s
a shape-shifter,” he added, a mysterious edge to his voice,
“so watch out.”
“What brings you to this remote pass?” asked Koldin,
standing erect now that his wounds had been healed. “I’m
surprised you haven’t met up with the dark knights yet.”
He tossed his shoulders back and rolled them around, glad
to be free of the aches and pains that they had recently been
rid of. Nisqué, shy though she may be, was also quite personable and outgoing. She walked up to face him, smiling
shyly.
“Dark knights?” repeated Nisqué in excitement. “Oh!
Are there really dark knights here? Where did they go? How
many of them were there? What were they riding? What
did they look like?” She was promptly silenced by Baringer’s
hand as it clamped across her mouth. Her outgoing nature
already gave her a modicum of familiarity among her traveling companions, and Baringer had no qualms about treating her that way.
“Yes,” answered Koldin to her question, but speaking to
everyone. “There are quite a few of them riding their shadow
beasts around these parts.” He pointed to the continuing
road across the chasm. “They pursued us down this path,
and we fell down the crevice to escape them. They continued onward, wailing like bansiodhes as they passed over
us. We haven’t been waiting long, and when you appeared,
we were greatly relieved to see that you are quite alive...
not... like them.” He flashed an smile in their direction, and
extended his gloved hands. “We are your humble servants
now, and shall be glad to aid you upon your journey.” He
shot his brother a withering glance, and continued. “Do not
worry about my brother. He will not hinder you with his
fallibilities. Although he is extremely arrogant, he is also a
valuable warrior, as is Zeb.” The troll nodded in agreement.
104

DARK BECOMING
“You mean,” breathed Nisqué, freed from Baringer’s
grasp, “to tell us that there were dark knights not more than
a few minutes ahead of us?” She wrapped her arms about
herself, and shivered noticeably.
Galden realized now that the dumpy creature was not
glaring angrily at them, and that his expression was naturally frozen in an ugly grimace. He looked at Koldin, apparently the wiser of the two brothers, and spoke. “We are
already well-equipped for our journey, but I think we could
use a few more good bodies to join our quest. I must speak
with my companions before we make any decisions, but...
uh... I-I welcome you to join us for a short stretch, and then
spend the night with us as we make camp across the chasm.”
His speech was met with approving nods from the assemblage. They then concentrated on crossing the chasm.
Vortigurn immediately volunteered to change into the form
of a winged creature as she had done before, and as that
was the most feasible mode of crossing the gully, they all
agreed upon it. She was easily able to transport the eight
people across, and Po had no trouble flying across himself,
but Speedwell and the horses posed a problem for her.
“I am not sure what shape to assume to bring the horses
across,” she worried, looking at the others for assistance.
“Why not assume the shape of a roc and carry them
over?” asked Galden, not understanding the situation fully.
“That should be easy enough.”
“Your unicorn would understand my daughter’s good
intentions,” spoke Saris, “but the horses would be frightened away by her form. I’m sorry, but I believe that we must
leave the horses behind.”
“And walk?” demanded Baringer. He breathed out a
deep sigh and dropped his shoulders in resignation.
“We can’t leave my horse back there!” argued Nisqué,
stomping her foot in anger. “Take me back over there, and
I’ll make sure she won’t run away. You’ll see!” she declared,
impertinently thrusting out her hand to point at the horses
across the chasm. “Please! She’s all I’ve got!”
105

DARK BECOMING
“All right then,” agreed Vortigurn, assuming the shape
of a large bird. She grasped Nisqué by the waist and flew
her over the chasm. On the opposite side she set the ecstatic girl on her horse, and resumed her elfin body. The
adventurers could see that the two girls were talking to the
unicorn, who in turn nodded her ivory maned head in agreement. Then Vortigurn became a roc, and grasped Speedwell and Nisqué on her horse in her two giant claws. The
other horses shied off, settling down a short distance away.
The huge bird then flew her two burdens across the chasm,
and dropped them safely on the other side.
“I believe that leaves us without steeds,” commented
Baringer dryly, smiling sadly at Galden. He looked back over
the chasm to catch a last glimpse of the horses, when suddenly he saw a cloud of dust rising from around the rocks.
The horses apparently noticed this, too, an began to gallop
in various directions, snorting and neighing frantically.
“The gods!” cried Saris suddenly, throwing his head back
as he wailed. “A great evil comes this way! We must depart
immediately!” The old man began stumbling blindly away
from the chasm, frantically tapping his staff in front of him.
“What’s going on?” cried Galden, looking back in the
direction from which the cloud had arisen. By now the
horses had run off, while some had fallen over the cliff,
screaming making horrible crunching noises as their heavy
bodies met the bottom of the gully.
“The dark knights,” softly replied Koldin, smiling grimly
over the chasm. “They’ve circled back for us.”
Baringer looked back to see first one, then a horde of
the undead knights rounding the rock corner, riding their
monstrous steeds. The ghastly demons were nothing but
decayed bones inside the empty husks of what was once
regal armor, but an unholy light lit the empty sockets of
their eyes, filling their bony bodies and giving them an evil
life. They rode what were at one time great and beautiful
monsters; unicorns, dragons, and basilisks, that had been
struck down and killed long ago during the great cataclysm.
106

DARK BECOMING
The magic residue from the exploding sun and the disintegrated planets, along with that of the mages that once ruled
that land, imbued their dead bodies with the same unholy
life that invigorated the dark knights, mutating the once
majestic creatures into horrific denizens of death.
Galden faltered backwards, stumbling and falling upon
his back. All around him was chaos. Nisqué was screaming
hysterically despite Baringer’s best efforts to hold her, while
Saris kept reciting chants and prayers of protection. Kieran
and Koldin were already shouting orders to the others as
they assumed a fighting stance, and Vortigurn immediately
assumed the form of a gigantic fire-breathing dragon.
“Protect the old man!” shouted Koldin over the din as
the evil minions of death effortlessly rode over the opening
in the earth. Galden could see their faces now, deathly white
grins glued eternally upon their pale faces, rusty black remnants of armor hanging from their rotting corpses. They all
brandished weapons of some sort—sharp, deadly scimitars,
swords, spears, morning stars, and the like. It was all he
could do to lift himself up off the ground and pull out his
own meager sword before the horde of dark knights and
shadow-dragons befell them.
Galden backed as fast as he could to stand in front of
Saris, who was now wildly swinging his staff at the creatures around him. As he forced his back against that of Saris, a dark knight thrust his sword at him, slicing into the
hard muscles of his forearm. Sharp pain instantly shot
through his entire arm and chest, and he dropped his sword.
Saris reached back a frantic arm and, with superhuman
strength, single-handedly lifted him onto his feet, healing
his wound as he did so. Galden picked up his sword once
again, holding it out, ready to strike down any dark knight
that dared harm their healer.
As he watched the carnage around him, Galden saw all
the members of his entourage doing their best to defend
themselves. Speedwell was skewering the shadow-dragons
with her horn, disabling them and knocking the pale riders
107

DARK BECOMING
off their backs even as their flailing talons scraped long,
painful cuts into her snow-white coat. Vortigurn was roasting their undead bodies with the fire she exhaled like nuts
in their shells, crunching them as she stomped them underneath her immense dragon feet. Baringer, Kieran,
Koldin, and Zeb were lashing out with their swords, slashing off arms and heads from the dark knights. Nisqué was
frantically trying to hold onto her horse, the poor animal
frightened out of its wits. Another dark knight lunged forward, striking at him and Saris, but Galden was able to deflect the blow, although not without some difficulty.
The battle was fruitlessly continuing, both sides waging
a valiant struggle, the dead hopelessly outnumbering the
living. Nisqué was able to drag her horse over to where
Galden and Saris were standing, avoiding the jabs and
thrusts of the undeads’ weapons. With the four weakest
members of their group together, the others were able to
create a circle around them, holding off the attacking monsters.
But although they were able to strike down many while
affording only minor cuts and gashes, there seemed to be
no end to the invading mass of evil. The cuts grew deeper,
the blows continued to rain down upon them. Galden knew
that his people were going to tire soon, and some already
were. Koldin the half-elf was already pulling back to the
center, using great effort to keep his sword-arm up. And
Baringer had already suffered some nasty slashes across his
foolishly unprotected chest and stomach. There was only
one thing he could do, or rather, Vortigurn could do.
Galden craned back his head and shouted at her to catch
her attention. “Vortigurn!” he yelled waving his arms maniacally, “how long can you keep that shape?”
“Not too much longer,” came back the labored and
booming voice of the dragon. “Another hour, perhaps.
Maybe longer!” Though strained and altered, her words
were still painted by her distinctive accent.
Galden shouted over the battle to the other eight to be
108

DARK BECOMING
ready to mount Vortigurn’s back. The shape shifter instantly
understood his intention, and began lowering her massive
bulk to allow her allies to climb upon her shoulders. Her
tail lashed out, scattering their assailants and allowing them
a second’s respite. “Hurry!” he yelled to the others, pushing Saris toward his daughter. “Climb on!”
Still slashing frantically at the oppressing demons,
Baringer, Kieran, Koldin, Zeb, and Speedwell began making their way towards Vortigurn’s prostrate body, joining
Galden, Saris, Po, and Nisqué. While Speedwell and Kieran
remained to hold off the onslaught, the others climbed
aboard the dragon’s shoulders while she continued to spray
the dark knights and shadow-dragons with her fire. She
grasped onto Nisqué’s horse with her razor-clawed talons,
ignoring the frightened beast’s neighs of protest. Lashing
out with her tail and her other free limbs, Vortigurn spread
her wide wings and started to flap them above their heads.
“Get on Speedwell, elf!” cried Baringer, cupping his
hands over his mouth to carry his voice down to him as he
and the unicorn remained on the battlefield. Kieran obediently mounted Speedwell, both of them fighting with all
their might to fend off the swarming marauders. The dark
knights closed in around them, toppling each other over in
their mad rush to add the elf and the unicorn to their undead
affiliation. A black mass swarmed about the white speck
below the rising dragon. But before the demonic horde had
a chance to skewer them, Vortigurn’s other free claw
reached down and snatched them from the field, hoisting
them above the howling forms of the dark knights, up into
the air, and across the rest of the bleak peninsula.

109

DARK BECOMING

...of hope

Chapter 9
Valza’in had been sick for two entire months now, and
Senna was at her wits’ end. Never once in all his three years
in the dungeon did the boy fall prey to any of the germs
that floated about the dank dungeon air. Why did this have
to happen now, so close to the day when it would happen?
If anything happened to her dear adopted son Senna would
not be able to hold herself together when the time came,
and she needed to be strong. Valza’in was the vessel in which
all her strength and stamina was held in. He was her pillar,
her rock. And now he was lying on the tattered old coverlet
she had woven for him so long ago, sickly and pale, coughing pitifully every now and then. Loris and Pouldin had done
all they could to help the poor lad without being discovered
by the other guards, and their help did not amount to much.
They constantly brought in fresh buckets of water, treading dangerously close to discovery as they trudged out some
three times a day to retrieve the water from the well outside the Obelisk and hauling it down the levels. They
brought him clean blankets from somewhere outside the
tower, but Val shunned these, clinging painfully to the
ragged mat that Senna had created especially for him. Senna
110

DARK BECOMING
sat on the floor next to him, Broceliande and Garid hovering protectively nearby. Val’s head thrashed fretfully as he
turned about in his miserable sleep. Senna had sent Pouldin
and Loris out to find a specific type of mushroom that she
knew had medicinal properties and would instantly eradicate Val’s suffering, but so far all they had been able to find
for her were food and weed mushrooms. Senna had begun
to fear that the mushroom she was looking for had become
extinct in all her years of captivity, but Loris assured her
that he had a friend enlisting the aid of all the trustworthy
mushroom merchants and farmers in the area, and that if
the mushroom existed it would be found.
The candles were burning low, and only a few of them
were left. The two guards had stopped bringing the candles
to them as the supply room of the Obelisk was running low,
and they did not want to attract any further unnecessary
attention. They were in enough danger of being discovered
as it was, what with bringing all the best food and various
small supplies to Senna and Val. And now that they had
been straying out to get more water, their excuses had to be
made even more elaborate, and the two of them were slowly
being tangled in a web of lies. It was paramount that they
retain their guard posts by doing as good a job a they
were expected to, yet at the same time maintaining their
uselessness as combatants in Ullix’s militia. The precarious balance had to be maintained.
Senna did not dare look into the future to see if Val would
make it. She had already allowed herself to see the... event
that was prophesied to pass, and Val was not among those
fighting in the battle. That could mean many things, but
Senna did not allow herself to think of all the possibilities.
She only knew that she must do anything and everything in
her power to make Valza’in well again... Not only for his
sake, but for hers, too.
But for now there was nothing she could do for her son.
“Go now,” she said softly to the ghosts behind her, “but stay
near. I may need your assistance.” Garid and Broceliande
111

DARK BECOMING
glumly floated out of her presence, remaining immaterial
between the walls of the adjoining dungeons, awaiting her
summons.
Senna gently wiped away the beads of perspiration that
formed across Val’s pale face. She was wrought with worry
over him. When he was awake, which was less and less often the more the illness progressed, Val would feign
strength, assuring her with his eyes and demeanor that he
felt better than he looked. But Senna knew that the boy was
deathly ill, and she swore to herself that whatever brought
on his sickness would feel her wrath on the Day of Reckoning.
Oh how she wished she could experience what he was
going through. But she was cursed with the gifts bestowed
upon her by Mannedor. She could never experience physical pain or hunger, and sickness was beyond her. But she
could and did experience grief, never at all growing accustomed to it. What good was the gift of foresight when
visions of young men digging in ancient attic trunks mingled
with the mixed memories of the past and signs of things to
come? And why could she not see the immediate future,
the future soon to come? Why could she not see Val in the
epic battle?
Senna lowered herself to the floor beside Valza’in, and
lay her head softly next to his, looking sadly into his pale,
sweaty, beautiful face.
The queen-mother did not consider the visions she saw
in her sleep to be dreams. She knew them to be vivid memories of the past, not all of which she had experienced herself. That was another thing that Mannedor had given her.
Along with being able to foretell the future, Senna was able
to recall the past, in all its vivid detail.
The highly esteemed scientists and royalty of Harlus had
a difficult time adjusting to the great cataclysm. Their system of days, weeks and months and of telling time was now
completely defunct. The old system relied upon the rising
and setting of the sun and of the phases of the moons. Now
112

DARK BECOMING
all they had were periods of time in which there was only a
bleak, cloudy sky, and a darker, star-filled expanse of blackness barely visible for those moisture-laden clouds. This
they recognized as night, and it was only after years of
deliberation that they were able to suitably divide the other
period of time into what was then known as day. A “cycle.”
Fortunately for them, the absence of a sun, being replaced
by a nebula, allowed for the remnants of the decimated
moons to be visible all night long, and when Harlus’ axis
brought it around to face the nebula, the clouds and debris,
and also the dimness of the nebula, allowed for a dusky
appearance, allowing the people to see, albeit ever so
slightly.
Senna recalled the life of one such scientist. His lifetime
was not hers, but she remembered it in her dreams as if his
life were her own. He had been one to toil endlessly, experimenting in methods of telling time and separating the years
into measurable amounts. Candles, torches and bonfires
were commonly used at that time, their eyes not yet accustomed to the dimness of their new environment. Over
time, this scientist devised a certain candle that, when lit
and its flame shielded from the elements, was able to act as
a yearly calendar. The candle itself was created from a fifty
foot long length of rope soaked in melted wax. It was dipped
and coated in a four-foot diameter layer of wax, and to this
the scientist added at thirteen evenly spaced intervals flat
disks that fell from the candle as it burned down to the level
each disk was inserted at. The candle was held up by supports and placed in central areas of the towns that owned
one of the great calendars. As each township grew more
and more reliant upon these candles and needed to protect them, large obelisks were constructed around them.
The candles grew taller in height, and as they did, the
obelisks around them were added onto, reaching upwards
to nearly two-hundred and three-hundred feet tall. The
keepers of these obelisks were specially trained scientists.
The original inventor of the candle had appointed one of
113

DARK BECOMING
his fellow scientists in each obelisk to take care of the candle.
Each had their own unique abilities, magic-weilders and
alchemists alike. But one of them was abnormal. His excuse for becoming one of the candle-keepers was that his
abnormalities necessitated him to be separated from the
others, secluded in the candle tower. His name was Ullix,
and he was a demon.
Ullix was the first of the candle-keepers to be known as
a mage. His magical powers lent credence to that name, and
eventually all the other candle-keepers became known as
mages. The scientist whose memories Senna shared was in
constant conflict with Ullix, always cautioning him to control his abilities and use them for the good of the people.
Counsel upon counsel ignored, the scientist—already the
uncontested superior mage—grew weary of Ullix, and thus
his life was the first ended. But it was not ended by the
people who he ruled. It was ended by a fellow mage.
Senna’s dreams shifted, jumping from mind to mind of
past peoples, gleaning bits and pieces of memory to construct the rest of the dream.
The mages grew in respect and power, eventually becoming despot lords of the townships that had grown
around each obelisk. Naturally, theirs was the magic that
kept Harlus alive, enhanced by the scattered magic from
the atomized Norbinda and its denizens. It was only when
the people of Harlus had adapted to the dark did they dare
overthrow the candle-keepers and destroy or otherwise utilize the obelisks. Ullix, the one and only true remaining
mage, was the final candle-keeper in existence.
Senna awoke to hear the rattling of a key in her cell’s
door. It opened to admit Loris, a small bag clutched in his
hand. The big man dashed into the dark cavern, dropping a
handful of candles and matches on the floor beside her.
“Take a look inside, milady,” he whispered urgently,
extending the bag to her. Senna looked into the bag, aided
in viewing its contents by a candle that the guard held in
his other hand. “I cannot stay. Tell me: is this correct?”
114

DARK BECOMING
A smile of delight crossed her face. “That’s it,” she whispered happily. Loris breathed a sigh of relief as he handed
the bag to her. He quickly headed back to the door, a broad
smile across his face as he told Pouldin of their small victory.
Senna pulled the caps of the dozen or so mushrooms
and deposited their spores into the palm of her hand. Shaking Valza’in gently to wake him, she made him open his
mouth, which he did without hesitation, and she poured
the soft powder in. Valza’in grimaced in distaste, but did
not spit out the powder. Senna scooped some water out of
the bucket that the guards had thoughtfully left with her,
and Valza’in drank from it thirstily.
As Senna sat with her son, her hand propped against
his back to hold him up, she was greatly relieved to see the
lines of pain disappear from his forehead, and his eyes droop
with sleep.
“Ma,” he whispered as he drifted off into a long-awaited
peaceful sleep. He touched his still-shaky finger to her lips
and her eyes, and then to his lips, a gesture of affection that
he had originated long ago.
Senna let her tears of relief and motherly pride fall profusely on the cave floor, hugging Valza’in close to her breast.
“Thank you,” she whispered in the darkness, loud enough
for the two sympathetic guards to hear.
And deep in her heart Senna was positive that Ullix’s
candle was burning very low... Nearing its end.

115

DARK BECOMING

a book of flight

Chapter 10
The weary adventurers had been soaring above the
clouds aboard Vortigurn’s dragon-back, reflecting glumly
upon the experience they had just had. From the vantage
point that they held, they were easily able to see the stars
and the heavens. Vortigurn flew them high up in the atmosphere, above the rain-laden clouds, where birds seldom
dared venture. They were able to see the faint flicker of what
was left of their sun, now a red, smoldering crescent husk
in the sky. It was setting on the far western horizon of
Harlus, and the stars were blinking their brilliant eyes over
the eastern horizon. The few wispy clouds that lingered so
high up in the atmosphere were tinged pink with the setting nebula’s rays, and the quest party was awed into
silence by the eerily spectacular sight.
Vortigurn had been flying for nearly an hour, silently
flapping her red wings in the thin air. Their pace was a quick
one, no landmarks or villains to hinder their progress... only
clouds. The calm gave them a chance to talk among themselves, though it was Nisqué who really did most of it.
As was expected, she was the first to strike up conversation with her companions. Her first question was directed
116

DARK BECOMING
at Zeboblonuk Fenozizuk, the troll. She wanted to know
what the still-squirming thing was in his bag, to which the
troll promptly revealed her. He had captured a small, green
goblin in the bag. The only reason, as he explained to them,
for letting the imp out of the bag was that it had no possibility of escape, being confined to the back of a dragon in
flight. The creature had hopped madly about at first, vexed
greatly by his treatment from the troll. With the wind blowing over them as they soared through the atmosphere, they
were all morbidly curious to see if the goblin would sail off
and fall to his doom. He did not, though not for lack of trying. After he had calmed down and accepted his situation,
and was introduced to everyone aboard the shapeshifter’s
back, he introduced himself as Ganasta Goblin, and
promptly removed a corncob pipe from his pants-pocket
and began smoking it. It was nigh impossible for him to
light a pipe while they were in flight, but he somehow managed it. He presented quite a comical sight in his impish
garb, an orange-and-white striped cap with a bell on the
end perched precariously on his head, brightly colored vestments enlivening his meager body.
Po instantly likened to the little man, croaking madly
and flapping his wings as the two of them conversed in the
crow tongue. Fortunately the dragon’s back was broad
enough so that when Po was flung about by the wind, he
just landed, hopping back to where the others were huddled
about clutching scales. Galden was amazed that such a creature could actually hold a conversation in croaks and
screeches, but Zeb and Baringer only chuckled at the droll
sight. Kieran had secluded himself as far back on Vortigurn
as he could without falling off, but the others remained congregated between her shoulder blades, protected by her
massive neck. Nisqué and Koldin had prepared a small bite
to eat for all of them from their satchels, which kept them
suitably satisfied until the time when they knew Vortigurn
would land. And Galden realized that that time would have
to be soon. The girl had warned him that she was not able
117

DARK BECOMING
to keep up large shifts in shape over long periods of time.
And since night was beginning to fall, Galden called down
to the girl that she might want to land somewhere.
Vortigurn obediently soared downward through the
clouds, leaving the pristine beauty of the heavens behind.
The clouds were heavy and dirty, miniscule particles of the
disintegrated moons still—after the five long centuries—
floating within the mists.
As they emerged from the clouds, they were happy to
find that they had traveled quite some distance; more than
they had expected. The dragon had brought them to the
coast of Kaelmorde’s peninsula, and they could see the
waves of the inlet lapping against the coast, stirred into a
froth by the winds. Farther beyond the body of water they
could see the beginnings of the other peninsula that extended from the great continent of Gaelwinn. Galden hoped
and prayed that they could make it just far enough to cross
the sea and land on the opposite shores, saving them any
unnecessary troubles crossing by boat.
“Can you make it to that far shore?” shouted Galden over
the rushing wind that now pelted at them from in front.
Rolling one of her enormous eyes backwards to look at
Galden, the dragon nodded slowly, not wanting her movements to effect her flight. The gesture was understood.
“She is not as strong as she was when we set out,” spoke
Saris gravely, holding onto his daughter’s scales. “We must
rest the night or I fear my daughter will soon expire.”
“We’ll do that,” agreed Baringer, nodding at the old man.
He looked sternly at Galden, and the young man nodded in
agreement. “We’ll spend the night on the coast,” he shouted
over the wailing winds to the others. Looking at the four
newcomers, he shouted, “You four can stay with us if you
want.” He wanted to add, “We’d be glad to have your company,” but he was wary of so many unfamiliar faces on what
was supposed to be a personal quest. Or mostly personal.
“Believe me, gracious saviors,” called the half-elf Koldin,
“we shall be at your side as your humble servants always!”
118

DARK BECOMING
He made a very good attempt at a bow, but somehow, sitting on the back of a massive flying dragon against harsh
winds, his attempt was futile.
Vortigurn cut through the sky at a slant, sleeking her
wings against her body to speed her plummet earthward.
As they neared the surface, she leveled off her flight, skimming over the sandy coast and then the icy blue expanse of
the inlet. Cold sprays of water washed gently against the
riders of the dragon, and Baringer had to hold Po closely to
him to prevent the bird from being swept away. Speedwell
had been lying on the dragon’s back, her strong legs folded
beneath her crouched body. Now she was struggling to
stand, while Galden was struggling with her to keep her
down. The last thing he needed was such a valuable fighter
to be washed into the sea.
Vortigurn was nearing the opposite shore at a breakneck speed, and Galden had begun to worry. What if she,
unable to retain her over-sized dragon shape, was forced to
revert back to her true shape? If that—an elf—was her true
shape after all, thought Galden. Remember how coincidentally she resembled the woman of his dreams... down to
the very last detail... when she first met him? Was she a
mind-reader too? Her father definitely was, and if she was
too, did she assume the shape of the elf-maiden just to please
him? Just to infiltrate their quest? And if so, why? Galden
was forced to put such thoughts out of his mind and concentrate on their present situation. He was surprised that
Nisqué had not thrown a fit over losing the horse that they
had tarried so long to save, but the girl was mercurial, he
realized, changing with the wind. And there was plenty of
wind up in the sky. Kieran was still hanging onto Vortigurn’s
hind-section, haughtily shunning the company of the other,
lesser beings. Galden was not sure whether his would be a
welcome presence upon the quest. But Koldin and Zeb were
quite the opposite. Although both were misfits of one sort
or another, they seemed to have a genial attitude, and that
served to make them much more desirable than their
119

DARK BECOMING
companion. He had not gotten much time to formulate an
opinion of the goblin however, because the troll had roughly
shoved him back into the bag and slung him over his shoulder as they neared the surface. Zeb explained that the imp
was more than likely going to escape as soon as they touched
shore, but he did not go on to explain why he held Ganasta
in captivity in the first place. As they flew, Baringer and the
others had been healed by Saris, and the old man was
crouching on the dragon’s back, a stern look upon his face
as he grasped his mushroom-wood staff in one bony hand
and held onto a large dorsal scale with the other. Speedwell
had gotten the clue that Galden had been trying to give her
that it was beneficial for her to stay down. Fortunately for
her, the unicorn was able to curl one folded foreleg around
the base of Vortigurn’s left wing, and with buttressing from
Baringer and Zeb, remained secure on the expansive
dragon’s back. All were generally tense and ready to depart
the dragon’s back once they neared the shore.
And this they did almost immediately, to Galden’s surprise. He had been so caught up in his thoughts that he
neglected to realize that they had already arrived over the
coast, and Vortigurn was gently flapping her tired wings
and stretching out her legs to land.
“Everyone jump off as soon as she hits the sand!” he
shouted to the others. They were already preparing themselves to depart, and did not need Galden’s order to tell them
what to do. Vortigurn’s large feet skidded upon the soft sand,
leaving long scrapes in the beach behind her. She fluttered
to a semi-graceful landing, falling completely upon her belly
in exhaustion; nearly toppling over and throwing her riders. The all jumped off just in time for her body to glow
with her shifting and begin to shrink. Before their eyes, the
still-shifting Vortigurn stood up, her mercurial body flowing like a globule of jelly as she ran past the dunes that separated the coast from the rest of the peninsula.
“Wait!” called out Kieran, his only concern being for the
one whom he considered to be the only other true elf in
120

DARK BECOMING
their company. Though his bronze body bristled with
strong muscles, the thin, gaunt hand of Saris held him from
following her.
“Leave my daughter alone, elf,” he warned in a hiss. “I
do not approve of you. “
“I do not need your approval, human!” cried the elf in
disgust, trying to pull himself away from him. The old man
had a firm grip on his arm, and would not let go. “Let me
loose!” ordered Kieran angrily, throwing a punch at Saris’
face. The empath took the blow, falling upon his back onto
the soft sand.
“Kieran,” whispered Koldin slowly, advancing upon his
brother as the others glared in mottled anger, shock and
disbelief at the elf, “you will come with me.” Frozen by the
half-elf’s icy stare, Kieran could only watch as his brother
lifted him by the shoulders, shoving his gloved hands under his arms and plucking him from the sand as one would
pick a flower from a garden. The elf stared in cold horror
into Koldin’s uncovered eye, struggling meekly against the
cold hands that held him above the surface of the sand.
“P-please, Koldinnnnn... d-don’t do this, I... I... I didn’t
mean...” A tall and athletic figure though he was, Kieran
crumbled like a rag in Koldin’s arms, flailing about and
struggling in futility.
“Pardon us,” whispered Koldin to the others without
looking at them. He strode quickly behind another large
dune, covering the distance in amazingly long and swift
strides. Nisqué began to follow, but Baringer held her back.
Before anyone could react, they heard a scream of anguish
from the two elf brothers. There was incoherent murmuring and the sound of muffled crying, along with some grunts
and moans followed by more whispered arguing. They then
saw Kieran limping determinedly back to them, clutching
his stomach and doubled over in pain. His eyes were
clenched shut, and he relied upon his half-brother for both
support and to guide him as he stumbled blindly.
Koldin dropped Kieran to the ground in front of Saris.
121

DARK BECOMING
“I’m sorry for punching you sir. It was wrong of me, and
inexcusable. I...” he paused, swallowing hard and forcing
himself to utter the words he was obviously made to speak
by his brother, “I d-don’t expect your f-forgive...” he could
not speak the word, though his speech had obviously been
hastily rehearsed.
“Please, sir, if you would, help him now,” requested
Koldin kindly of Saris. He gently eased his brother to the
ground, guiding Saris’ fumbling hands to set upon his
brother’s chest. Kieran flinched, but did not move. He bit
his lower lip instead, and the pain and revulsion were apparent on his face.
“I have never felt pain like this before,” whispered Saris
in awe, pulling his hands back. Kieran’s chest was cold and
dry, as were his forehead and his armpits, where Koldin
had held him as he dragged him away.
“You can heal him though,” informed Koldin with confidence. “Please forgive my outburst. I cannot abide it when
my brother makes a foolish ass of himself.”
Galden and his crew looked warily at the elf, whose
apologetic smile made them feel more at ease than they
originally were with the elf-mage than when they had witnessed—or actually heard—him punish his brother. Saris
replaced his hands upon Kieran’s chest and drew the pain
and cold welts from his body. His ministrations took longer
than he was accustomed to, and he had to fall to his knees
in front of the defeated elf before he wilted. As he withdrew
his healing hands, Koldin squatted down and looked into
his brother’s eyes.
“Are you recovered?” he asked, genuine sincerity in his
voice. He smiled comfortingly, easing Kieran’s fear. He put
his hands on Kieran’s shoulders and squeezed them gently.
It was obvious that the brothers just participated in something that they were both accustomed to. Baringer could
not help but wonder what sort of relationship they had; and
how often they hurt each other like that. He shook off the
feeling with a violent shiver, bringing a glare from Nisqué.
122

DARK BECOMING
“Yes, brother,” whispered Kieran, wiping away anguished tears from his eyes that managed to escape despite
his best efforts. “I’m s-sorry,” he said, first to Koldin, and
then to Saris and the others. He allowed Koldin to lift him
to his feet, and hung limply in the half-elf’s strong arms.
“You are forgiven,” spoke Saris, though not with the
gentility that Koldin had exhibited. He stood erect and
stomped his staff twice against the ground, then marched
off to search for Vortigurn from behind the sand dunes.
It took the old man quite some time to locate his daughter, being blind and not knowing the area or where she fled
to. But when the two of them did reappear, the elf-girl appeared to be still exhausted, but none the worse for wear.
She smiled wearily at her comrades, old and new alike, and
lent a hand to Nisqué as she began burning strips of mushroom bark to start a small cooking fire.
Kieran and Koldin were found sitting against some large
rocks that were lying upon the beach, their backs supported
by the grime-encrusted boulders. They were talking to each
other in hushed tones, Koldin occasionally making a motion to wipe away stray tears that fell from his brother’s
eyes; but stopped each time by the prideful and strong hand
of his brother. Their dynamic was unfathomable, and it was
unknown which of the two had the upper hand in their
twisted relationship. With his arms about his brother’s
shoulder, constantly touching Kieran’s face and Kieran consistently swatting his brother’s attentions away, they presented an unusual—and discomforting for some—sight. Yet
though Kieran presented the appearance of disliking his
brother’s cloying attention, if Koldin attempted to rise up
or turn away for only a moment, Kieran would angrily tug
on his brother, not wanting to be parted from him.
“Twisted,” muttered Baringer, wrinkling his nose as he
spied.
Galden, Baringer, and the troll were unpacking the blankets they had brought along in their individual supplies,
spreading them smooth over the sand of the coast and roll123

DARK BECOMING
ing various large rocks around the perimeter of their camp
to protect them from the winds and predators. Once they
had done so, they headed further inland to gather driftwood—none was found—and dry mushroom bark for the
fire that the two young women were already cooking over.
The smell was mouthwatering, and the men were anxious
to taste what delectables Nisqué and Vortigurn had prepared for them. Even mushrooms would be welcome, for
their battle and the subsequent flight drained them all.
The meal consisted of baked potatoes and beef that had
been jerkied back in Kurlingforde. Nisqué had soaked them
in boiled water she had gotten from the sea and heated in a
small pot she had brought along, removing much of the salty
content of both the meat and the water by including the
potatoes in the boil. The adventurers ate these along with
some stray mussels, clams and some crustaceans they were
able to rustle up. Nisqué was able to roast them in their
shells and serve them with certain spices she had brought
along, presenting all in all a tasty meal for the tired group.
When she offered a small serving of the meal to Zeb for his
prisoner, the troll kindly refused, revealing to Nisqué that
it was not imperative for the goblin to eat, although the imp
did protest angrily and insist that he was hungry.
Later, when all had supped to their content, they retired
to their meager encampment. They were all beginning to
sit and lie on the blankets crowded around the fire when
Koldin spoke up from where he had been sitting with his
brother.
“If you all would permit, most gracious saviors, I would
like to do you a favor, although it in no means could repay
you for what you have done for us.” He stood, ignoring a
protesting hand from Kieran fruitlessly trying to pull him
back. “I dabble in the mystic arts every now and then, having inherited some skill from my... er... father’s side of the
family.”
“Koldin, no,” protested Kieran, reaching out to stop his
brother, to no avail. The stockier elf rose to his feet and fol124

DARK BECOMING
lowed his brother, but Koldin shook his head at him as a
parent would a naughty child, and continued. “I believe I
can transform your blankets and these rocks into a suitable
camp for our needs, better able to protect us from the night.
May I?” he asked, looking questioningly at the rest.
“What do you think?” asked Galden of Saris, who was
sitting next to him with Vortigurn. He trusted the old man
implicitly, although he was not entirely sure why.
“He is benign... mostly,” spoke up the old man, nodding
his head. Vortigurn smiled in agreement, and Galden nodded his head to the elf-mage.
“Go ahead,” he said, unaware of what to prepare himself for. To Kieran’s chagrin, Koldin removed his gloves and
eye-patch revealing underneath two scaly, clawed hands and
an amber-colored eye, a red slit down the center of the pupil. Nisqué stifled a scream, and the others shrank back in
horror. Koldin, sadly gazing at their distaste, nevertheless
began chanting in an ancient and long-forgotten tongue,
and waved his arms mystically in the air around him. As
they watched, the rocks and blankets around and underneath them began growing upward, forming a dome that
circumscribed their camp and covered them from above.
Koldin stopped his chanting just before the dome sealed
itself above them, leaving a round hole large enough for
them to see the stars above as they winked through the
heavy cloud cover. He then pointed at the side wall of the
interior of the dome, in which they now all stood or sat, and
traced the outline of a door. As he did so, a beam of light
sliced through the air from his amber eyes, cutting an opening into the wall. Koldin then put his gloves and eye-patch
back on, and returned to a sitting position on the few blankets that still covered the floor of the dome.
Nisqué, looking over the fire and through the smoke that
separated her from the elf-mage stood and walked over to
him. “We need to talk,” she stated matter-of-factly. “You
look like you could use a friend.” She helped the half-elf to
stand again, much to his surprise, and the two headed for
125

DARK BECOMING
the far end of the dome, sitting down upon the sand with
their back propped against the wall. They began speaking
in hushed voices, and soon the others returned to their
senses and began to talk among themselves.
Baringer took a deep breath and patted Speedwell’s
snout. The unicorn had lain herself down beside him, and
Po was nestled quietly between her strong legs. “I don’t
know about this, Galden,” he said in a whisper to his old
friend. “Remember how it was supposed to be just you and
me, and Speedwell and Po? I thought it was just going to be
us four, and now there’s...” He paused to count the motley
crew of adventurers. “Eleven of us... right? One of them is a
magician, one is an overstuffed elf who’s obviously got his
dick stuck up his ass, one is a troll who looks uglier than a
pile of dung, and the rest of them aren’t half as different!
The healer and the shape shifter I can understand, and
maybe Nisqué to cook the meals... and I suppose the troll’s
a good fighter, but I don’t like the elf. Or his brother.”
“Saris and Vortigurn seem to trust them, and so do I,”
replied Galden, whispering as his friend did. He, too, had
noticed the odd relationship the two brothers shared. How
could he not? He sneered in spite of himself, repulsed by
their behavior, but recognizing the benefit of their company.
“And when did you start trusting those two implicitly?”
asked Baringer, gesturing toward the now sleeping father
and daughter with is head. His blond locks bounced in the
midnight coolness, glistening as the meager starlight fell
upon his head from the hole above. “I admit that I like them,
too, but...I can’t say why.” He received no response from
Galden, and only shrugged in wonder. “What a quest this is
turning out to be,” he commented, to no on in particular.
Galden nodded, and soon the two friends were fast asleep.
Late, late into the darkness, Vortigurn was awakened
by a strong hand clamped down upon her mouth and
another holding her arms pinned to her stomach. A weight
like that of two strong legs held her feet down, and try as
126

DARK BECOMING
she might, she could not struggle free, nor alter her father
sleeping nearby.
“Sshh!” hushed a male elfin voice in her pointed ear.
Vortigurn focused her almond-shaped eyes upon those of
Kieran’s. He was straddling her, and was smiling grimly in
the darkness. “I only want you to come with me so I can
show you something,” he whispered. Vortigurn was able to
see him slightly in the surrounding darkness of the dome.
She could see that he had removed his leather jacket and
was now wearing only his headband, breeches, and his moccasins. “Come,” he urged, his smile betraying his intentions.
Vortigurn was unable to prevent him from lifting her
up, since her long bout of dragon-ness had left her weary
and unable to shift shapes. But this condition was only temporary, and if she could just hold out long enough to learn
of the male elf’s intentions, she believed that she was in no
real danger. So she allowed herself quietly to be led through
the open door of the dome, Kieran’s hands still covering
her mouth and pinning her arms behind her back.
Once outside, Vortigurn was allowed to pull her arms to
her sides, although Kieran’s strong arms still held tightly
onto her shoulder. He led her away from the dome, toward
the sand dunes that she had fled to earlier. From outside
she was able to see the dome’s exterior. It was rough and
dull, as if it was hewn from the very rocky foundation of the
continent itself. It was unusual in the starlight, its perfect
crescent-shaped expanse standing out against the dullness
of the sand dunes around it. Kieran pulled her along with
him further and further away, much to her alarm. When he
finally stopped, he pushed her down to the ground, where
she sat, looking suspiciously at him through narrowed eyes.
“What is this that you wanted to show me?” she asked,
making no attempt to hush her voice. Her accent gave her
words a strength that they might not othewise have had.
“You may speak as loud as you wish now, female,”
laughed Kieran, falling to his knees in front of her. “But
first I must ask you some questions.” He fell to his hands,
127

DARK BECOMING
his arms and chest arching over her as he lered hungrily
into her face.
“Ask,” she spoke, quieter now. She was wary of the male
elf, not knowing what to expect and daunted by his unwanted presence.
“How is it that an elf, a lovely one such as you, came to
be the daughter of a blind human?” he asked, still wearing
the smile upon his finely-chiseled face. She could tell by
the way he sneered when he said “human” that the word
was distasteful to him.
“I...” stumbled Vortigurn, “I was adopted,” she answered, still staring into his hypnotic eyes. “M-my real parents were killed, and he found me in the swamp... saved my
life. He raised me as his own, and I came to know him as
my father.” She tried to pull herself away from his presence, but he only followed her, crawling on his hands and
knees as she creeped on her hands and feet, until he cornered her against a large boulder.
“What reason do you have for traveling with these other
humans?” he asked, a foul grimace marring his otherwise
handsome features.
“That is my own business,” she mumbled, trying to avert
her eyes. He was straddling her now, kneeling in front of
her, his arms folded across his massive chest.
“Mm-hmm,” he muttered, feigning concern. “I have one
last question for you,” he whispered in a mock accent like
hers, propping one hand against the stone behind her head.
He looked deep into her elfin eyes, and awaited his query.
“Have you ever been with another elf, Vortigurn?” he asked,
slowly undoing the strings that held up his breeches.
Vortigurn looked down at his waist, her own body aroused
by the thought of what Kieran was intending to do. But she
fought her primal urges and struggled forth a reply.
“No,” she said, trying to pull away from him. “I haven’t,
and I do not intend for tonight to be my first experience.”
She narrowed her eyes to slits, and added, “Not with you.”
Kieran’s leather pants were undone now, and fell to the
128

DARK BECOMING
ground about his knees. Vortigurn courageously averted her
eyes from his midsection, and tensed her body for the assault she knew waited her. Kieran was panting now, and
tore at her scant fur tunic. He had pulled the animal skin
off her shoulders, and his hands were probing portions of
her body that she had always considered private. Her
breasts responded to his rough touch, firming in anticipation while she tensed in resistance.
Biting her lip, Vortigurn stifled her screams of protest,
and before she realized what she was doing, her knee had
jerked up, smashing upward between his legs, sending him
sprawling on the sand. He rolled over the fine sand, moaning in pain and clutching his groin. “Wench!” he cried, trying to rise, a mad look in his eyes. “I’ll...”
“You will do nothing further!” she hissed, throwing a
handful of sand into his face. Kieran spat out the sand and
grabbed at his eyes, the sand filling them and burning.
Vortigurn pulled her tunic back over her shoulders and ran
back to the camp, sobbing quietly all the way.
The next morning found the entire group fully refreshed
and rested. Vortigurn was still somewhat tired, to the curiosity of Saris and the others, but she explained this away,
telling them that her stint as a dragon had cost her more
than she expected. She avoided looking at Kieran, who, too,
was also inexplicably tired. The two elves made much ado
about the others forgetting it, and their weariness was soon
overlooked. Koldin suspected something amiss with his
brother, but could get no answer out of him.
Galden suggested that Nisqué take along some of the
shellfish for later, but the girl laughingly informed him that
such morsels would quickly expire and begin to stink should
they bring some along. Galden then wordlessly continued
packing his satchel, reflecting upon the many times when
his leadership had been questioned.
Once they had all gathered their belongings together and
splashed their faces with the fresh water Nisqué had boiled
for them, cooled substantially overnight, they set out once
129

DARK BECOMING
again on the quest. This time on foot. No horses shouldered
their weight, nor could Vortigurn assist in their progress
just yet.
Their journey was much slower now than it had first
been, as Baringer constantly—and to his annoyance—reminded Galden. Nisqué did her best to keep up with the
others, not wanting to be yelled at for lagging behind. The
girl would hold her skirts up with her hands and daintily
traipse along with the others, sometimes behind, sometimes
along with. Galden was surprised to see that Saris was at
no time lagging behind the others, and that in fact he and
Vortigurn were striding along with him as he and Baringer
led the way across the barren plains of the Gaelwinn peninsula.
Yes, Galden thought, he was actually glad that Nisqué
had insisted upon coming with them. She never once complained about the rigors of the travel even though everyone
could see how she struggled and tried to keep up, and in
fact was a boon to them. She cooked excellent meals out of
nearly nothing at all, hauled her load along with the others,
and actually was... Galden was struck as if by lightning by
the thought that maybe he felt something for the waitress
form Kurlingforde. She certainly was not as enchanting as
Vortigurn, and had no special powers, and in fact was a
rather plain looking type of pretty. But she was near his
age, and she seemed innocent enough. And her spirit looked
to be nearly indomitable. Yes, Galden would have to get to
know her better. If he could get past Baringer. Baringer
treated him like a younger brother, and he already was treating Nisqué as a younger sister. An annoying one. One that
he felt he had to protect.
Zeb had been having some trouble with the burden upon
his hunched shoulders, so by the suggestion of Baringer,
who lent him a leash that he used occasionally to keep Po
from sailing off in unknown lands, the troll allowed the
goblin out of the bag, fastening the strip of leather around
his scrawny neck. Indignant though he was at the poor treat130

DARK BECOMING
ment he received at the hands of the troll, Baringer knew
nevertheless that the imp was glad to at least be free of the
confines of the sack, and told him so. Ganasta fully denied
any such notions, and before long had struck up a heated
conversation with the raven, who hopped about comically
as he croaked to the goblin in the birdish tongue.
For some reason that Galden did not look much into,
Kieran had volunteered to carry Galden’s, Zeb’s, and
Nisqué’s satchels along with his own, and plodded along
glumly next to Speedwell. He no longer stared at Vortigurn
with his slanted eyes, but only whispered few occasional
phrases to the unicorn and to his brother, who would frequently lag back to put a comforting hand on Kieran’s shoulder and speak to him. At other times Koldin would walk
alongside Nisqué who, it was obvious to the others, had
become his new friend. The others shared mingled feelings
for the elf-mage, but most were accepting, and the little fear
they had for his mage side was calmed by the fact that he
had somehow acquired compassion in his upbringing. The
dome he had erected for them the night before was
immensely appreciated by all who slept within its protective confines.
Unbeknownst to Galden and the others, except for
Saris who did not question it, Vortigurn had removed the
long knife she had secreted within the folds of the cloak that
she had worn on the first night fleeing from the tavern,
which now lay folded and compact inside the travel-bags
upon the unicorn’s back. She hid the knife inside her fur
tunic, the cold metal held close to her skin attached to a
thin leather strap she fastened it to her leg with. Though
she had no real need for it, being able to change her shape
at will, it offered her added protection, and she felt safer
with it.
Relying upon Koldin and Nisqué to show them the direction in which to travel, the adventurers eventually passed
through several small townships whose populace informed
them that they were indeed traveling westward toward the
131

DARK BECOMING
coast. Across the ocean that separated the continents lay
the land of Erz, their final—or so they thought—destination. Some of the towns contained obelisks, although most
were defunct and some destroyed. One of the towers that
they had come across had been converted into a hospitality
house, complete with a restaurant, rooms for rent, and prostitutes of several—yes, several—genders. Baringer and
Kieran appeared highly intrigued by the structure, but
Galden and his associates prodded them onward, expressing that they certainly were free to stay at the place, but
only if they were willing to give up the support and protection of their entourage.
The progress was little each day as they trudged across
the land, but they had Koldin’s moderate magic, Saris’ healing abilities, and the other various talents to aid them along.
They arrived at the coast of Gaelwinn in only three weeks’
uneventful journey.

132

DARK BECOMING

darkness arrived...

Interlude:

R

egal and poised, the princess of Erz maintained her dignity as she
entertained the various and sundry visitors vying for her hand in
marriage. The selection was... it left much to be desired. Since
the years of Queen Senna’s departure, and the departure of her father
and her aunt, she had been left to rule what remained of the kingdom—
her younger brother having long since shunned his royal birthright.
Crown Princess Ganydronne Galdenne, all of fifteen years old, was
not handling the situation well.
The tapestries had been sold or given away years ago, when she was
but a small child. The townspeople took what they wanted—she did not
stop them. What did she care for the trappings of royalty now? What
dignity was there to maintain when the remaining royal was forced to
compete for food with her counselors, courtiers, and the very peasants
who fought hardest? She was at the mercy of her people, and now more
than ever before she depended upon the advice of the few dignitaries
that deigned to remain in the royal household.
It is said, among the people, that the gifts of the gods sometimes
overlook a generation. That what whims granted any special benefit to
one person might completely overlook his or her children. But
Ganydronne was lucky. She inherited Queen Senna’s gift of long life.
Of course, a fifteen year-old girl had no way of knowing that. The scrapes
133

DARK BECOMING
that healed nigh immediately, the cuts that sealed themselves up and
disappeared within a day’s time, the broken leg that the visiting physician could not detect upon his arrival... all of those were just Princess
Gany’s fortunate life. How was she to know that she would spend countless years losing her mind, her youth, her beauty, her home, and that
rare dignity that she guarded so precious?
The castle was dark, the halls empty, the stones damp and mossy
already, despite the efforts of Lord Ketamon, reduced to housekeeping
when his upbringing had taught him otherwise. Ketamon was kind to
Ganydronne, and she appreciated it. It was to him that her thoughts wandered as her feet did the same, losing herself within the marble halls
once brightly lit now darkened with sorrow and lonliness. Her fingers
traced a familiar trail along the wall. She was lost—in her thoughts,
though her feet and hands knew their way. No torches nor elegant candelabras illuminated the hallways any longer. The fuel had long since
burned up, and what little remained had been appropriated by the populace. Ketamon always told Princess Gany that her smile was bright
enough to illuminate his every need, though he could tell she stopped
believing him long ago.
Lord Ketamon was in his thirties, a striking figure with his dashing
good looks and slender frame. Flowing dark hair joined with a beard
that still he managed to trim neatly, despite there being no other courtiers remaining to impress. With her father gone, and no other parental
figure in her life, Ganydronne looked to Lord Ketamon as father, brother,
friend and lover; the last being in the lurid dreams she visited each night.
A husband had been betrothed to her—or, rather, she to him—but no
one enforced that familial promise, nor worried about repercussions from
neglecting it. She allowed herself to fall into passionate kisses with him
every night, her fresh, smooth lips caressing his full red lips. She closed
her eyes and touched the wall that she had touched so many times before, beginning to wear it smooth from years of bearing the weight of
her musings. In her fantasy, she brushed her fingers through his thick
locks, letting it fall as she combed her hands out, then scratching gently
with her fingertips along the back of his neck.
A tear trickled down her cheek. Was it a tear of sadness? Happiness? Loss? Disappointment? Ganydronne fell to her kness, pulling her
hand down the wall as if she were painting it. Painting a long, red streak
134

DARK BECOMING
of red paint down a white canvas; blood staining the white purity of her
soul as her thoughts stained the purity of her mind.
Where was Lord Ketamon right now? She would disregard the proprieties of elegance, she would ignore the standards of courtly behavior,
and throw herself in his arms and the two of them would fall down in a
passionate kiss, and then... but her youthful mind did not know what
happened then. It would be a full five more years before she discovered
what happened then, and she would not find it as romantic and alluring
as her mind made it out to be... wanted it to be. She just wanted to be
held, to be cherished and admired, to be wanted and provided for.
Ganydronne realized that she was hungry, though it could just be a
momentary pang. With a start she realized that she had not actually eaten
anything in... in two days! Two whole days; yet there she stood, healthy
and robust. Knealt. She was still kneeling. Kneeling on a floor covered
with greasy dirt, ruining the skits of her dress.
A dress darkened with stains, and torn with tatters, missing a sleeve
that had been replaced with a shawl. A shawl that covered silken white
skin that bore no bruises, no scratches, no sallow sickness. How long
had she been there kneeling? She blinked her eyes sluggishly, wanting
to clear her thoughts. She shook her head and looked up at her surroundings. The marble walls were still there, still sweating with condensation. And she was cold. The shawl did little to ease her chill, and
with a sign of resignation Princess Ganydronne arose and retraced her
steps back to her private chambers.
A rotted chair had fallen to the floor, and though she traveled these
halls daily, she could not bring herself to clear away the debris. But
could not Lord Ketamon do that? He did so much for her already; she
dared not appear impetuous and ask of him something more. Besides, he
was so tired lately, and spent a lot of time in the guest suite, resting. No
visiting dignitaries used it anymore. It was no imposition. Goodness,
she hoped he would not remain ill for much longer. There were things
needing to be done, and as a lady, a princess no less, she could not be
expected to do them herself.
Perhaps she would look in on Lord Ketamon, and she might see if
he needed anything. A glass of water perhaps? A smile to light up the
room? Where was the food kept in this place anyway? Now, try to remember... the last time she ate, it was... a plate of mushrooms... and they
135

DARK BECOMING
were not cooked. They were cleaned though, probably by Lord Ketamon.
Why had he not cooked them, too? No matter. She had eaten them, and
they must not have been that awful. Or if they were, her princessly
dignity would not have allowed her to be sick from them. Much of the
people remaining in Erz were sickly, and many had... died. Come to
think of it, many of the courtiers had died.
Princess Ganydronne wrinkled her brow delicately, pursing her lips
and pausing in her path. What happened to her parents now? Did they
leave on a trip? A vacation perhaps? Why, then they might just return
any day now, and she would have to make sure that they were properly
fêted! Oh indeed! She must make plans. Lord Ketamon will be in charge
of the meal. All the courtiers must be in attendance, for her parents
were... they were the king and queen, weren’t they? That’s why she’s a
princess, of course!
Ganydronne spun in her tracks, and ran to the throne room, ready to
decree that all in attendance must remain for the banquet. The cooks
must be notified! There was a meal to plan. A royal party, with all trimmings deserving of royalty.
But the throne room was empty. As empty as the courtyard, save
for the man she had seen skulking about several days ago. Right about
the same time as the last of the tapestries had vanished. Blinking her
eyes, Ganydronne realized that there was no coincidence involved. That
man had taken the tapestry! Why, the thief! Ketamon would know what
to do. The guards must be assembled and that tapestry retrieved. That
tapestry was woven by her grandmother... or was it her great-grandmother? It was a family heirloom.
And thankfully it was still right where she stood, where she had
Lord Ketamon move it to—for safekeeping. Why, she was looking right
at it? How could that man have stolen it if she could see it right before
her very eyes?
Now what was she so upset about? She was going somewhere, but
she did not recall why, or even where she was headed. A total void filled
her mind. What was she doing? She had to know. Gany fell to the floor,
covering her head with her arms. Her eyes were wide with fright and
confusion. How did she get there, in front of the tapestry? How did the
tapestry suddenly reappear? Why couldn’t she remember anything? And
were was Lord... what was his name? The man who... who brought her
136

DARK BECOMING
food, and who had been visiting with her. The man in the cloak who
appeared in the courtyard. That was him, wasn’t it?
And this infernal silence! It was so loud, it was deafening. Deafening silence. And the smell was unpleasant. Her face was pressed against
the floor, and the dirt smeared against her forehead. Her hair hung in
front of her face; long and greasy, tangled. Crying softly now,
Ganydronne wished she had a comb. And a chamber maid to take care of
her, to get her some clean clothes, and wash her hair for her, and comb
it, braid it when she was ready to go to bed. Like Maleka had done.
Where was she? The princess was in need of her, and Maleka was nowhere to be found.
That was it. That was what she had been searching for. Who she had
been searching for. Maleka. Sweet, gentle Maleka. She would help her
find something to eat, surely she would. She probably had some candles
too. It would be nice to actually have some light. She could admire the
tapestry better if she had light. The castle was full of tapestries, and
their beauty and intricacies were lost without people to appreciate them.
Princess Ganydronne raised her head and noticed that the castle was
empty.
“Lord Ketamon!” she shouted, surprising herself. Her voice echoed
around her, startling some creatures that scuttled about in the dark recesses of the building. Ganydronne pushed herself up and began to walk
down the hallway once again. She turned into an open doorway and beheld the once majestic library. Piles of papers and books were heaped
around the room, littered with trash and debris. Many more of the books
had been appropriated as fuel, forever taking with them the histories
and art that lay within their pages. The smell of mildew and stagnant air
assaulted her senses, and her eyes stung from what ever was drifting
about the room. Not dust. Mildew. Her lungs burned and her sinuses
stung. She hastily stumbled out of the room and back in the dark hallway.
Her mind snapped back to... the visitors. They had come to ask for
her hand in marriage, hadn’t they? But her betrothed was... away. No, her
betrothed was Lord Ketamon, and her mother, Maleka, the royal cook,
was preparing a wedding feast. But she was a princess, and her mother
was the queen. Maleka was the queen? No, no, no. She’s off on a trip
with her father. How she wished she could remember his name; his face.
137

DARK BECOMING
Ah, the guest quarters; the suites reserved for visiting dignitaries
and their entourage. Servants’ quarters were further down the hallway,
near enough to be ready if they were needed.
And there was the door to the main bedchamber. Princess
Ganydronne giggled into her hand, smiling coquetishly as she turned
the door knob. Wouldn’t Lord Ketamon be surprised to see her? Oh,
would it not be so much fun to startle him and wake him up? He should
be awake by now! But she must be silent... silent as a mouse.
She gently pushed the door open. It creaked terribly against its rusted
hinges; hinges that had not been used in months, if not years. But she did
not hear it. She stood on her toes, and looked across the room at the
prone form lying motionless on the bed. Giggling merrily, she tiptoed
over to it, and gently prodded the shape under the covers.
Nothing.
“Wake up, Ketamon,” she whispered loudly, giggling more. She
pulled the coverlet back and smiled, shaking the skeleton until the jawbone fell off. But he would not wake. He would not wake. Giggling and
shaking, she cointinued to wait, but he would not wake.

138

DARK BECOMING

a book of
life
Chapter 11
Valza’in was frantic with worry. Senna had been gone
from the cell since he woke up that morning, and only
Broceliande and Garid were there to be with him. Where
had she been taken? What was going to happen to her? To
him? The ghosts had been no comfort to him. He did not
understand much of the words they tried to speak to him,
and the few that he did comprehend meant nothing out of
context. He had searched all over the cave they were in, even
going so far as to shine a candle into the deep crevice that
ran across the far back of the dungeon. But she was no where
to be found.
Broceliande and Garid tried to tell him that the queen
had been taken to another cell during the night, but they
were unable to make him understand. They and the guards
had tried to wake him, but he was under such a deep slumber that their efforts were in vain. The lingering effects of
his sickness still affected him. Where he was normally quick
to wake on the slightest sound, nothing had worked.
After he had calmed down and stopped running around
the cave and yelling indecipherable animal cries, they again
tried to communicate to him what had happened, using
139

DARK BECOMING
hand, facial, and body gestures along with tones of speech
to make him understand. The boy tried valiantly to understand, and finally did when Garid mimicked the guards escorting Senna out by re-enacting the scene with Broceliande.
Valza’in heard footsteps from beyond the cell door, and
to this he ran, banging his clenched fists against the ancient wood. “Ma!” he screamed, the only word he knew to
refer to Senna. If she was anywhere near, she would hear
him, and somehow get to him.
While Val worried himself over Senna, the two ghosts
conferred with each other near the back of the small cave.
Though both had been relatively young when they were
struck down, they had both accumulated a wealth of wisdom and maturity in their many years of floating around
the Obelisk as ghosts.
“What could have been so abrupt and necessary that
Senna did not foresee it?” asked the girl-ghost, floating in
front of Garid, her wispy hands worriedly pulling at her pale
tresses.
“I don’t know,” replied Garid. “All I know is that she’s in
the second cell down, with that fat woman that they just
threw in there. I thought Loris and Pouldin were our allies.
Now I’m not so sure.”
“But what if she is needed there?” insisted Broceliande,
trying to find a positive aspect to their situation. “What if...”
“Then they wouldn’t have pulled Senna away in secrecy!”
he declared, pouting his lower lip.
“It was not as if she was taken in secrecy,” whispered
Broceliande, not wishing to disturb Valza’in any further.
“They tried to wake Val up.”
“But not hard enough,” rebuked Garid.
“Maybe they didn’t want to scare him,” she suggested.
When her statement was met with a silent glare from her
fellow ghost, she threw up her hands in exasperation. “Come
on then, why doesn’t one of us just go to her and ask her
what’s happening to her?” She blinked vacantly, imploringly
staring at her ghostly friend. She knew full well why not.
140

DARK BECOMING
“Because she told us to watch Val, stupid,” retorted
Garid, rolling his eyes. “She said not to follow. You heard it
as clearly as I did.” He sighed and blinked at her. “You go,
Broceliande. I’ll stay here with Val.” The younger ghost
floated over to Valza’in, who was sitting crouched in front
of the door, whimpering through his tears. “We’re still here
with you, Val,” spoke the ghost soothingly, extending his
hands to pat the sixteen year-old’s back. Val turned his head
to look at him, then returned to banging on the door with
his fists.
“Please Val,” begged Garid. “You mustn’t do that. You
don’t want to attract any undue attention!” He reached out
an ethereal hand to pull Val’s from the door. Val turned
around the face Garid, and slumped against the door,
streaks of tears upon his grimy face. He looked despairingly
at Garid, who could only smile comfortingly to his friend.
Being only partially substantial, he could offer little more
than his presence.
Broceliande floated swiftly through the adjoining cell
to the north of Senna and Val’s. There were two people
confined in it, three if you considered the corpse that had
been rotting in the rear for three months now. This dungeon was smaller than Senna’s and not as tidy. In fact, it
stank with wretchedness, and the ghost had no real desire
to linger there. The huddled prisoners stared in fear and
crouched in a far corner, watching as she passed.
Once she sifted through the walls, a strange sight met
her eyes. She saw Senna, the young woman, and the two
guards huddled together on the floor of the third dungeon,
all of them talking in hushed tones. The ghost’s arrival
startled them, and frightened the young woman.
“I told you not to come!” she said, almost angrily. She
pursed her lips and frowned momentarily. Senna explained
to the woman that Broceliande was a friend, and introduced
the frightened and sweating woman to her. Senna then explained to the ghost the situation they found themselves
in, much to Broceliande’s delight and wonder.
141

DARK BECOMING
“Come now,” insisted Loris to Pouldin and Senna. “We
must bring her into your cell. She will be safest there, and it
is the cleanest dungeon. I think it’s safe now.” They all
helped hoist the woman, a large belly now visible upon her.
Broceliande smiled with anticipation, floating along gingerly behind them. Whatever contingent of castle guards
were present in the lower levels were sure to have headed
up-level again by this time. They had waited for this very
moment.
“Go back to Senna’s dungeon with her,” ordered Pouldin
to the ghost. He was familiar with her, and had no qualms
about conferring with the departed. Meekly, she and the
queen dashed down the dark hallway, standing anxiously
in front of the oaken door. But Senna made no attempt to
escape. She had no desire to. The two guards lugged the
laden woman between them to the door of the cell, and
quickly unlocked it, permitting Senna and Broceliande to
dash in. Luckily no other guards were around to witness
their blatant disregard for procedure, for which Loris and
Pouldin were eternally grateful. Other prisoners were too
damaged or frightened to pay any attention to the goingson outside their dungeons.
Valza’in was standing happily in front of the door as
Senna and the others passed through it. His smile of welcome was quickly replaced by one of wonder and curiosity.
Who was this new prisoner, and why was she being carried
by the two guards? He had never seen someone in her shape
before, and was intrigued by her presence.
“Can you take care of her?” asked Pouldin of the Queen,
concern wrinkling his brow. Senna nodded, and the two
guards quickly vacated the cell, closing the door silently
behind them and locking it securely. As Senna turned to
the young woman, who was now moaning faintly, they were
interrupted by the door reopening, admitting Loris.
“I forgot to give you these,” he whispered, carrying to
them a wicker basket filled with soft blankets. His fellow
guard followed closely behind, carrying with him a metal
142

DARK BECOMING
pail filled with clean, warm water. “The gods be with ye,”
whispered Pouldin, smiling anxiously at the inmates. Loris
grasped Pouldin’s hand and smiled nervously at him, then
dropped it quickly when he realized what he was doing.
Pouldin turned his face away and stepped through the cell
door. Then the two guards disappeared a second time, leaving the door locked and shut.
“Garid,” ordered Senna as she pulled out some of the
blankets and spread them on the floor, “you and Val go over
to the corner and stay there. Talk to him or sing, or something. Just keep him over there. Wait for me to tell you when
to bring him back.” She helped the young woman to pull
her heavy body on top of the blankets, and then turned to
Broceliande. “Shield us from their view,” she said, indicating Val and Garid with her finger. “And sing that lullaby I
taught you. Softly.”
Broceliande sang the soothing tune that Senna had lulled
her to sleep with many a time long ago. She billowed out
her ghostly dress and hair, creating a white curtain against
the curious eyes of the two boys.
“Sing louder now,” urged Senna, herself sweating along
with the girl as her moans became groans and cries of pain.
Val curiously moved toward them, but Garid’s gentle touch
was solid enough to hold him back. Broceliande filled the
entire subterranean level of the Obelisk with her enchanting voice, hauntingly filling the ears of all who heard it, lulling them into peaceful serenity, and blotting out the cries
of the new mother. Her ethereal wailings soon became a
sheer avalanche of sound, shattering thinner glass objects
in the lower dungeons, dangerously close to summoning
other guards.
When Broceliande finally finished singing and lowered
her dress and hair to their normal proportions, Valza’in
cautiously crept over to where his foster mother and the
young woman sat. As he neared, he saw that the young
woman no longer cried out in pain, though the beads of
perspiration still clung to her forehead. But what really
143

DARK BECOMING
attracted his attention was the gurgling baby Senna cradled
in her arms, wrapped in one of the blankets the guards had
brought for them.
“Is this how I began?” he wondered, though not with
the words and language of the spoken. The wailing thing in
Senna’s arms calmed, lulled by the presence of the Queen
and her warmth. Mesmerized, Val stared at it. Senna nodded and gestured with her eyes; to him and then to the baby.
He tentatively reached out to touch, and was exhilarated
when the baby grabbed his finger. The grasp itself was
oblivious—he was grabbing at anything to test his own fingers, and the baby let go and grasped again. Val felt dizzy,
as if the dungeon were spinning about his head.
“Are you ready to take him?” asked Senna to the woman,
who nodded wearily. With trembling fingers, the young
mother opened up and removed the side of her tunic, allowing her child to feed hungrily as Senna placed it in her
arms. Valza’in watched enrapt, quiet as a mouse as he
witnessed the astonishing sight. When the baby had finished suckling, it settled back in its mother’s arms and fell
into a fitful sleep.
“Come,” whispered the young mother to Valza’in as he
stared at her and her newborn child. Understanding the
word as a gesture to come near, Valza’in crept over to her
while Senna removed some of the bundled up blankets and
threw them down the crack in the floor. Val reached out a
trembling hand to softly touch the sleeping child’s head.
The baby flinched slightly at his tender touch, but remained
asleep. Val gently rubbed the baby’s bare head, smiling in
awe as he did so, marveling at the faint, silken wisps of hair.
“Valza’in,” Senna spoke softly as she returned and sat
next to him. She put her arm around him and held him close.
She pointed first to the mother and then to her child. “This
is Thirluaine, and her new son Kaldorne.”
Valza’in looked into his mother’s eyes, smiling brightly.
“Ma?” he asked, indicating Thirluaine. Senna nodded her
head, hugging her son. The unspoken communication was
144

DARK BECOMING
at last clear.
It was only then did Valza’in see the long flowing black
hair of the mother, and the pointed ears and slanted eyes
that she shared with her son. She smiled gratefully, having
learned that imprisonment in this deepest, darkest dungeon
was by far more desirable than any other cell in the bowels
of the Obelisk.

145

DARK BECOMING

of desire...
and waiting
Chapter 12
Galden was hard-pressed at first to pay for his entire
entourage. The captain of the sailing ship, the Crescent
Moon, demanded the payment for all seven of them before
they could set foot on it, and for the unicorn as well. Galden
was glad that the big man did not notice the raven that
Baringer concealed in the bundle of cloaks he was carrying,
nor the goblin that Zeboblonuk had threatened to remain
still or else!
“Or else what?” sneered the goblin surlily from within
the bag.
“Or else you die, imp,” replied the troll simply and without emotion.
But Galden’s woes were eradicated as Koldin produced
enough gold pieces from his own money purse to make up
the difference that he owed on his fellow passengers. Galden
really felt that the half-elf was trying to win over the affection of the others in their group, and it was working. Koldin,
however, only wanted them to like him for himself, not for
what he could do for them. He insisted that paying for the
voyage was the least he could do for his gracious saviors.
He smiled inwardly, knowing that the gold pieces were in
146

DARK BECOMING
actuality animal droppings that he had magically transformed into viable—but temporary—tokens of currency.
The ship was a veritable hotel in its own right, huddled
masses of people crowding its ancient wooden deck, waving to people who crowded the harbor, who in turn waved
and shouted back at them, creating quite an insufferable
din. The ship itself was a miracle of engineering—being
made of ancient timbers reinforced with various materials
that gave it the look and feel of a patchwork leviathan.
Galden and his companions had a hard time getting to
the pier as a group, for various merchants and urchins
pulled at their bodies and clothes wanting to sell them something or pick their pockets, or both. The ship they were able
to view from far off, standing tall among the others of its
kind as it floated in the water, waiting for its masts to be
hoisted and its anchor raised. Winds still blew on Harlus,
stirred by the same magical forces that gave the planet its
semblance of life.
Galden had another problem to worry about. Somehow
Kieran, to Koldin’s utter vexation, had separated himself
from the others once their odyssey had been paid for. Galden
would not stand for such impertinence, especially since he
and Koldin shelled out so much payment for everyone.
“Where is your brother?” he loudly demanded of Koldin,
forgetting that the half elf was his ally, and did not take
kindly to being yelled at.
“Calm yourself,” warned Koldin, the laughter in his voice
trembling on the edge of a hiss. “I am not my brother’s
keeper.” He slapped his hand on Galden’s shoulder, giving
it a reassuring squeeze. “He will be back soon enough. He
cannot stand to be separated from me for long.” He smiled,
his one uncovered eye twinkling merrily. “Perhaps he has
found himself a restaurant and is filling his thin belly. Do
not expect him to bring any food for us.” Koldin laughed,
joined by a few hesitant snickers from the others. “He does
not know how to be considerate. I am a poor teacher, and
my attempts to teach him did not work well.”
147

DARK BECOMING
“Come over here,” soothed Nisqué, noticing his disappointment at the failed mirth of his joke. “Let’s chat.” Koldin
joined the talkative girl, the only one who seemed to be completely unafraid of him, and the others as they ascended
the plank to the ship. Before they could even set foot upon
the vessel, a shout was heard from below on the pier, and
they turned back to see Kieran racing toward them, a velvet
gown hanging on his arm and a silver pendant and chain in
his hand. “Vortigurn!” he called up the elf girl as he followed them up the boarding plank. “I have some gifts for
you.” He shoved past the others, annoying them with his
disregard for their persons. “Gifts suitable of an elvish
maiden as yourself. You deserve...”
Vortigurn turned her icy eyes upon him as Kieran
nudged her gently from behind. She surveyed the bearer
and the gifts silently, waiting for him to continue.
“I bought these things for you back at the harbor,” he
said politely, extending the light blue dress and the jewelry
to her. She let go of Saris’ arm, whom she was leading, and
accepted the gifts graciously, painting a smile upon her face.
“Thank you, friend Kieran,” she spoke softly, avoiding
eye contact. “I will wear these on the ship tonight.” Kieran
tried to touch his hand to her face, but she pulled away,
disappointing him just when he thought he had redeemed
himself to the only other full-blooded elf in his presence.
Her movements were not lost upon Baringer, who had been
watching the male elf carefully.
Saris turned around and harrumphed sternly, sucking
angrily upon his lips. Vortigurn re-inserted her arm into
his, carrying the gifts in her other arm. “Come Father,” she
soothed, pulling him along.
While the adventurers located the three rooms they were
to share, Baringer led Speedwell to a special on-board stable
for any traveling steeds. Though the unicorn was not used
to traveling and being put up in various stables, she did not
protest, and snorted contentedly after Baringer had set some
feed in front of her stall and left her for his room.
148

DARK BECOMING
The cabins were small and dingy, having been used too
many times and with traces of past residences still living
upon the walls. The heavy and ancient wood and metal
of the ship creaked and groaned beneath their weight,
constantly threatening to collapse beneath them but
never doing so. Indeed this was a living legend of the deeps,
a leviathan of bygone ages long past its prime.
“So this is what we’re living in for the next few days,
huh?” asked Baringer of his two roommates. Nisqué and
Galden were assigned to share the room with Baringer. The
big man wandered around the small room and then sat upon
the small bed provided for him. There were three such cots
in the cabin, one singular and another double-deck set.
Galden and Nisqué shared the double-deck cots, Galden
preferring to sleep on the top bunk while Nisqué graciously
and thankfully accepted the bottom. Baringer’s bed complained under his weight, but held up, so he lay back upon
it, throwing his hands behind his head.
“I don’t like it,” complained Nisqué, standing with her
hands defiantly on her hips. “I can’t stay in this... this room
for an entire week!” she exclaimed, pouting. She picked at
the sheets on the cots and sniffed them cautiously. Despite
her statement, she reached into a satchel and pulled out a
powder that she sprinkled on the two beds.
“You can and you will,” spoke Galden, noting her actions, “If you want to stay with us. Koldin and I paid a lot
for our trip, and I’m not going to have our good money
wasted. As it is now, I don’t have any left, and who knows
where Koldin got his. I’m just thankful he did.”
“Oh, Koldin paid for me?” spoke Nisqué, calming down
and smiling inwardly. “I didn’t know that he helped pay.
That’s different...” She walked over to Baringer on his cot
and gestured at him. “Up,” she ordered, shooing him off.
She repeated her actions on his cot, and even shook out the
flat pillow. “At least it’s clean,” she muttered. “Somewhat.”
Galden, jealous for what reasons he could not fathom
blushed and leaned back to lay on his cot, bumping his head
149

DARK BECOMING
against the headboard of the small bed. “Ouch!” he grunted,
rubbing the spot on his head where the bump would eventually rise.
Zeb, Koldin, and Kieran shared a room as well, with the
silenced goblin still concealed in the burlap sack slung over
the troll’s shoulder.
“Do you intend to let the goblin out of the bag?” questioned Koldin of the troll as the three explored their cabin.
“No,” answered Zeb curtly, tossing the bag violently to
land with a jarring thump in the corner.
“Hey, idiot!” screeched Ganasta’s voice from within.
“Watch where you’re throwing me!” He thrashed about in
the bag.
“That was a nice little performance on the dock,” Koldin
said to Kieran as he and his brother sat side by side on the
bottom of the two bunks. “What was that all about? Do you
and this Vortigurn have anything going on behind our
backs?” He rubbed his brother’s back heavily, and pulled
Kieran’s head closer to his own. “Is there something going
on that I... that I should know about?” He sniffed, almost
like an animal, at his brother’s head.
“No,” whispered Kieran meekly. ‘’Nothing.” Pulling
away, the elf settled his elbows on his knees and hunched
his shoulders, drooping his head to stare at the floor.
“Mm hmm...” Koldin rose and nodded to Zeboblonuk
and Kieran. “I’m headed off for the deck. I need some fresh
air.” He took Kieran’s raised hand in his own and squeezed
it, oblivious of Zeb’s distaste. Their relationship was their
own, and they cared not what others thought of it.
“You will return soon?” asked Kieran.
Koldin smiled. He headed out of their cabin and strode
quietly through the hallway, passing the third cabin that
contained Saris and Vortigurn. Unable to fend off his burning curiosity, the half-elf leaned his ear against the door,
listening to the room’s inhabitants.
“And furthermore,” ordered an unfamiliar voice, “I will
not have anyone sleeping on the top bunk, nor the bunk
150

DARK BECOMING
beneath it. I sleep on the top. You two may share the single
bed.” The voice was female, and was deeply resonant.
Koldin smiled, amused by the rantings of the old man
and his daughter’s unwilling roommate.
He mounted the steps that led up to the deck of the fourmasted ship, avoiding the hardworking crew, staying out
of their way as they bustled about their work keeping the
ancient ship afloat and on course.
The sky above was deepest black, the stars of evening
just beginning to glisten above the moist clouds.
“So you two think you can just stand there and laugh,
eh?” demanded the angry woman, her face flushing crimson with rage. “I’ll show you who you’re dealing with!” The
red-haired warrior drew a sword from its scabbard attached
to her belt and lifted it above her head.
Before the strange woman could do any damage,
Vortigurn assumed the shape of a dark knight, complete
with the glowing eye-sockets and the rusting armor. The
sight so startled and frightened the woman that she dropped
her sword to the floor and backed up against the bunk-beds.
“Have mercy!” she pleaded, her eyes wide in terror.
Vortigurn reassumed her elfin-shape and laughed
merrily at the spectacle. Although Saris could not see what
had occurred, he sensed the woman’s fear and then her
embarrassment at being caught off-guard.
“So, you can use the bunk beds,” growled the woman,
sheathing her sword and carrying her belongings to the
single cot where she threw them angrily.
“Lady Azurad,” spoke Saris kindly, extending his right
hand to greet her. “May we take advantage of this opportunity to introduce ourselves. My name is Saris, of Valinshae,
and this is my daughter Vortigurn. You are right in that
you had not told me your name. I am an empath and a seer.
I knew it.”
“You must be batty as well as blind, old man,” snickered
the woman. She had short, fiery red hair, and wore the
clothes of a warrior of Balluirc, the badlands in the north of
151

DARK BECOMING
Gaelwinn. “Your ‘daughter’ is an elf.”
“Nevertheless,” spoke Saris, still smiling genially, “she
is my daughter.”
“So then,” Azurad spoke, relaxing on her cot as she held
her left knee to her chest, “are you headed back to
Valinshae?” She smiled broadly at Vortigurn, who was busy
examining Kieran’s gifts. “A special event? A... wedding?”
“No,” replied Saris, coming to a seat on the bottom bunk.
“My friends and I are on a quest for the Sphere of Knowledge. You will be joining us.” He did not smile. “It will be a
difficult journey.”
“And how do you know that?” laughed Azurad, slapping
her other knee in amusement. “And how in Mannedor’s
name do you propose to get to the Obelisk of Darkness without the dreaded Ullix killing you first?”
“We are many and we are strong,” answered Saris, his
good humor fading. “There are others of our quest party in
the next three cabins, and we have a unicorn above in the
stable. We will make it there, and you will help us. There is
no reward for the trials and tribulations we will go through,
other than the knowledge we shall gain, and the fact that
we shall free ourselves of the black oppression that Harlus
is currently afflicted with.”
Azurad, for that indeed was her name, and she did not
argue that point, blinked, her breathing slowed. Finally, she
turned to address Saris.
“If there’s no booty, you can forget about it. Azurad fights
for no man without pay.” With that statement, the woman
lay back upon her cot and closed her eyes. “I am tired now,
and you will not bother me as I sleep. Comprehend?”
“She will join us, won’t she Father?” whispered
Vortigurn to the old man after they were sure Azurad had
fallen asleep.
“Quite sure of it, Vortigurn. She will be a valuable asset
to Galden and his quest. I only hope that she is wrong about
us not getting there. I cannot see that far.” He knotted his
brow in frustration. “I see... pain... for her, as well.”
152

DARK BECOMING
While the old man sat quietly on the bed, Vortigurn tried
on the gown and the pendant that Kieran had bought her,
all thoughts of their meeting on that one dread night pushed
from her mind... so that Saris would not be further hindered
by knowledge of the incident if he accidently read her
thoughts.
Up on the softly lurching and swaying deck of the ancient vessel, Koldin was joined by Baringer and Nisqué, who
had questioned at the half-elf’s cabin and were told of his
current whereabouts on the ship. The two had been ousted
from their cabin when Galden fell asleep on his bunk. The
rocking motion of the ship and the day’s events at the harbor had served to tire the young man, and his cabin-mates
left, not wanting to disturb him.
“So then, Koldin,” called Baringer heartily to the halfelf as he leaned upon the railings of the boat, staring with
wistful apprehension at the dull, wide ocean all around
them, “we heard you had come up here for some fresh air.
Find any?”
“Baringer, Nisqué, gracious saviors,” Koldin spoke, bowing his head at the two arrivals. “What brings you two up
here? And where is friend Galden?”
“He fell asleep, and his snores were loud enough to wake
the dead, so we had to leave, but we were followed by some
mysterious men in strange suits, so Baringer and I had to
fight our way up here!” embellished Nisqué, spreading her
hands in wonder.
As a sibling would a younger sister, Baringer slapped
the girl on the back of her head and then put his arm around
her protectively. “Galden was tired and we didn’t want to
keep him awake... and cranky,” Baringer corrected, smiling amusedly at the giggling girl beside him. One of the
crewmen of the ship walked hastily past them, carrying a
large board on his shoulder, nearly upsetting them.
“Come over to the prow,” suggested Koldin to them,
heading off for the front of the ship. Nobody stood at that
empty part of the deck, and it gave them an ideal place to
153

DARK BECOMING
converse privately.
“So what are you thinking about?” asked Nisqué of the
somber elf-mage as they leaned against the wooden railing
of the ship.
“I’m glad you’ve chosen to be my friend,” Koldin mused,
not entirely ignoring her query. “So many other people fear
and hate me for what I am, and few care about who I am.
Nisqué I know is a friend. Baringer, what do you think of
me?” He turned to face Baringer, for the first time speaking directly to the man.
“Well,” started Baringer, looking complacently at the
placid waters, “at first I didn’t know what to think of you.
Then I feared you. Now... Well, I still don’t really know, but
I don’t think you scare me anymore.”
“That is sufficient for me,” Koldin murmured, sinking
once more to a relaxed position on the railing. “I’d like to
have your trust too, Baringer. For what I am about to tell
you may be difficult to accept.”
Nisqué put her hand comfortingly on his shoulder and
urged him to speak. “What is it?” she asked, genuinely concerned for her friend and what he had to tell them.
“I fear my brother may have done something foolish or
even harmful to our friend Vortigurn.” He looked directly
at them as he spoke, his eyebrows straining concern on his
forehead.
“In what way?” asked Baringer, curiously returning the
elf’s stare. “What did he do?” His muscles tightened as he
bristled with anger.
“I cannot be completely certain, but judging from the
way he’s been acting toward her and the rest of us, I’d say
he may have forced himself upon her—or tried to. I don’t
know whether he did or didn’t, but now he has been acting
very apologetic to the girl, and that is the only thing I can
come up with... knowing him the way I do.”
“Vortigurn wouldn’t have let him do that,” mentioned
Nisqué, pointing out the fact that the girl was not defenseless. “Vortigurn is a shape-shifter. She probably changed
154

DARK BECOMING
into a monster or something and scared him off.” Her reasoning was sound.
“Perhaps,” agreed Koldin, resuming his view of the
ocean, “but Vortigurn has been acting rather distant and
cold to him, and that adds to my suspicions.” Winds
whipped his black streaked hair about his face and into his
eye.
The three of them were silent for some time, not knowing what to say.
“I don’t think I’ll tell Galden,” stated Baringer after a
moment’s pause, “or the others. She didn’t tell us. It’s not
our place to say anything. We’re not even sure it happened.
What made you tell us, Koldin? I mean, why did you decide
to trust us and not, say, Galden... or Zeb?”
“Nisqué was the first of your company to make any
attempt at getting to know me, and you happened to be with
her when you two came up on deck just now. I only wish
the best for my brother, though he is an insensitive lout,
and extremely piggish. I love him deeply, more than anyone can know. I trust that you two will keep this knowledge
within you, and not burden the girl with it. I just needed to
speak it to someone.”
“I understand,” said Nisqué softly, setting her chin on
the half-elf’s shoulder and peering out at the ocean with
him.
“As do I,” added Baringer, laying his large hand on
Koldin’s back and following their sights. The night was
uneventful, as had been many of the days. But they all had
a goal now to look forward to, and that they most assuredly
did.
They were soon joined by the troll and his sack, who
had chosen to abandon the sulking elf to the liquor he had
brought along with him.
“He’s that way again,” muttered Zeb as he hurled the
sack to the floor, arousing the goblin’s wrath yet again.
That way was drunk. And Kieran was not pleasant company when he was drunk. The troll had enough courtesy to
155

DARK BECOMING
take the goblin with him. “Get that fucking vermin away
from me!” the elf had growled as Zeb left. “Why do you keep
him anyway?”
Koldin hushed the others when he spied Vortigurn and
Saris on the deck of the ship, obviously seeking them out.
“No more of this talk,” he whispered, waving so that
Vortigurn could see them. Soon the railing was crowded
with their party, and they did their best to stay out of the
way of the ship’s crew.
“Ought’n’t someone check on Kieran?” asked Nisqué
after a while, forgetting her admonition to not speak of him.
“I mean, I think I saw him... getting sick over the railing...
ealier.” She remembered her promise, and trailed off, hoping to cover her tracks.
Taking control of the situation before anyone could respond, Baringer spoke up. “I’ll check on him.” He squeezed
Nisque’s shoulder and nodded at Koldin. “After all,” he
thought to himself, “he can’t hurt me.”
The door to Kieran’s cabin was ajar, so Baringer let himself in. He could see Kieran lying on the single cot, with a
half-empty bottle in one hand and two rolling slowly on the
floor as the ship swayed. The elf was nearly unconscious,
but began to stir when Baringer entered. “What... do you
want?” he sputtered, squinting his eyes to stare at the
visitor. “Filthy... human...” he drawled.
Baringer was nonplussed and turned his head to survey
the room. “We were concerned about you. I’m just here to
see that you’re all right. You should go to sleep.” He remained where he stood, watching Kieran lift himself up on
his elbows and stare at him. He had taken off his leather
vest and his shoes. The elf’s hair fell in front of his eyes, and
he presented an almost feral appearance as he stared back.
“Close the door,” he growled. Baringer considered the
command, and tilted his head curiously. He closed the door
quietly, locking the chain after the latch had clicked shut.
He turned again to see Kieran clumsily unlacing his
breeches with one hand, still holding onto the bottle with
156

DARK BECOMING
the other. He approached the cot and sat beside him, brushing the hand away. Silently he pulled the strings loose. He
then took off his own vest, and stood to pull his own breaches
off. Kieran hungrily reached out and shoved the trousers
down, then pulled Baringer to his face, burying himself in
the human’s arousal.
The party on the ship’s deck was locked in conversation,
and it being their first night on the ship, were unable to
relax enough to want to sleep. Baringer and Kieran engaged
themselves slowly, then more violently; Baringer riding the
elf as he twisted and writhed beneath him. Hearts beating
faster and faster, their sweat mingled as their bodies joined.
As their bodies moved, Baringer’s hand snaked around
to grasp Kieran’s chest, his fingertips pressing deeply as he
rubbed against the hardened skin. He twisted with his fingertips. The pain caused Kieran to twist around and gnash
his teeth, but Baringer quickly placed his mouth on his, and
kissed him deeply. His hand traveled down Kieran’s midsection until it found the straining hardness, which he
worked to a frenzy as he worked behind him.
Once the throes of ecstasy had dwindled, Baringer arose
from the bed and surveyed Kieran. He turned him over to
lie on his back, and ran his hands along the elf’s body, from
his face down his neck, across his chest and stomach, and
down to the rigidness between his legs. The elf was not
spent, but had passed out from the drink and the exertion.
“Your brother treat you this good?” he muttered, pulling
the sheets over the prone form. He dressed himself and
unlatched the door, striding out into the hallway. Part of
him had hoped the others would be there to be aghast at
his actions, but the hallway was strangely silent.
Except for the troubled whimpering and mumbling of
another, tormented by nightmares.
Baringer stepped to another cabin door and stood silently outside, listening within. This was Saris and
Vortigurn’s, and he recalled that there was a third; an assigned cabin-mate. When Vortigurn and Saris had joined
157

DARK BECOMING
them topside, neither had described her other than to mention there being an ill-tempered warrior-woman made to
share their cabin. He sighed quietly, leaning his hand agains
the door frame.
The door opened suddenly, startling him. A blade was
pressed against his throat and the cabin’s lone resident
hissed angrily. “Who are you?” she demanded through gritted teeth.
She was bare from the waist up, and even wore boots,
though her tread was soft enough to go unnoticed by the
man listening at her door.
Though the lines upon her face told of age and experience, her torso—the supple breasts, the lean midriff and
the muscled arms—bespoke of one whose touch left little to
be desired.
Baringer could not take his eyes from her, despite the
blade pressed close to his throat now. Still aroused from
his tryst with Kieran, Baringer’s eyes lustily drank in her
form. His breath came in shortened pants now, and his
hands tingled as he spread his fingers out.
“Answer me, fool! Are you mute like the old man is
blind?”
“The... uh.. the old man... he’s a friend of mine. My
name’s Baringer.” He reached up to carefully push the blade
away from his throat, and she relented. He could tell her
breathing was labored now. Her body sensed his own
arousal, though oblivious of its origins. Regardless, Baringer
would have been just as aroused seeing her as he did, even
had he not enjoyed the company of another beforehand.
“Baringer,” whispered Azurad. She pulled him into her
cabin, and this time it was he who did not resist.
The sex came hard and fast, different from the drunken
melee only moments before. Her fingernails raked tracks
across his back as he plunged deeper and harder into her
heated wetness, the bed straining against their efforts,
creaking its resistance angrily at each thrust. The skin of
her abdomen was taught, and felt smooth and hard beneath
158

DARK BECOMING
his rough hands. The flesh of her breasts gave his groping
hands little resistance, and as he bit down on the pink tightness of her nipples both gasped hard.
Azurad arched her back as Baringer grasped her roughly
about the waist, pulling her closer. His fingers squeezed the
flesh of her rear as their bodies slapped noisly against each
other. With a grunt he withdrew and spilled his seed across
her undulating stomach. Azurad fell back on the bed, running her hands down her stomach and across her breasts.
Panting, Baringer—still on his knees—sat down and leaned
back on his elbows.
“We are not done, my warrior prince,” growled Azurad,
raising herself. Before he could rise, she pressed her lips
against his abdomen and ran her tongue across his belly,
down to his fresh arousal. But this she passed over, continuing to bite and nibble at his inner thighs, until he could
control himself no longer and erupted a second time.
Fully in control now, Azurad rose from the bed and
pulled her trousers back on. For good measure, she pulled
a tunic over herself and roughly grabbed Baringer’s shed
clothes. These she silently crumbled together and flung at
him as he was rising shakily from the bed. Baringer was
spent, and blinked from weary eyes at her.
“I’m joining your quest,” she stated, though he continued to blink in confusion. “It was the old man. He told me
that much.” She grabbed his arm and pulled him to a standing position and led him to the door of the cabin. “It’s better than flinging myself into the waves anyway,” she
mumbled under her breath as she pushed him out into the
hallway. And this time there were at least three pairs of familiar eyes to see him in his naked glory. And this time he
did not feel proud of a conquest, nor did he feel any shame.
Only embarassment.
The weeks passed slowly, almost to the point of standstill, the nights flowing into the days, the days back into the
nights. The odyssey lasted much longer than was planned,
159

DARK BECOMING
spanning over first one, then two, then three weeks. The
companions got to know the woman Azurad, and her tale.
It seems the warrior woman from Balluirc had been a
mercenary for the majority of her thirty-four years, and had
grown tired of the business. It was a dangerous and often
thankless job, and Azurad was no richer now than she was
when she first started. Only Saris suspected her reasons for
being on the boat, but said nothing contrary to her explanation. The meager funds she received in payment for her
job served only to fund her needs, like food and shelter. Her
idea that being a mercenary would make her wealthy had
long since been lost, and she was now headed toward the
continent of Monshera, in hopes that job opportunities
might be a bit more lucrative there. She readily consented
to join them in their quest, but under one small condition.
She told them how she had been in quest parties before,
and many times her advice and intuition had gone unheeded, often leading to her comrades’ deaths. Azurad
would accompany them only if they paid attention to her
input and allowed her to act as a guide. Saris had been in
the land for a large portion of his lifetime, and with Azurad’s
knowledge of the land’s layout, Galden and the others
readily agreed to her terms.
Once Azurad learned of their own respective stories, she
surprisingly did not balk at joining such a group of misfits,
but instead her determination grew, believing that they
honestly did need her help and guidance. And somehow that
old man had known when they first met that she would join
them, a common story among certain others of the party.
Azurad particularly admired Baringer and Kieran the
elf, even though he tried his best to stay away from her. The
two men were the closest she had seen to true warriors in
quite some time, and even if they did not have the skill, she
thought, they certainly had the physique. Oh, she was certain of that, having seen Baringer’s first-hand. She saw
enough of Kieran’s immodesty to appreciate his as well.
Kieran insisted that he was a true warrior, but Baringer only
160

DARK BECOMING
jokingly questioned her as to when the last time she had
slept with a man had been. It was common knowledge—
though unspoken—among the party that the answer to that
was “last night.” Yes, she might grow to like this gathering
of gargoyles. It might just help her reputation, and they
never know, there might just be a monetary reward waiting for them at the finish of their quest. She hadn’t really
planned on throwing herself to the waves anyway, did she?
And since she shared her cabin with the old man and
the elf-girl, Kieran had come by many times looking for the
girl, who always seemed to know when he was coming, and
who always quickly vacated the cabin at these times. Azurad
noticed that the old man seemed to know the elf’s mind,
and since he had read hers, too, to find her name, this was
not surprising to her. The first few times the elf came by
looking for Vortigurn, he had left dejected and saddened,
leaving behind the small things he had brought for her, like
the occasional seashell or beads. Eventually he lingered
behind, half in wait for Vortigurn, half to chat with Azurad,
whom he recognized to be a fellow warrior. His conversation was minutely little at first, but eventually the two
became acquainted and shared stories of their past experiences with great vigor. It eventually came out that the two
shared other experiences; those with their traveling companion. At these times, old Saris would insist that they take
their conversations outside. One time when they were leaving the cabin, Azurad thought she caught a glimpse of a
large, burly man entering the cabin, though Kieran did not.
She knew that he was Vortigurn in disguise, but since the
girl did not seem to want to speak to Kieran, she did not tell
him of her “discovery.”
Koldin, on the other hand, had grown quite fond and
close to Nisqué and Baringer, who would spend their evenings on the deck of the large sailing ship, occasionally
joined or bothered by other passengers. When more than
six people would congregate on the deck, the captain or various crew members would shoo them back below deck. But
161

DARK BECOMING
then Koldin, Nisqué, and Baringer always stayed up, now
common sights to the crew men, who treated them with
respect and were not hindered by their presence.
Galden spent a lot of time in the stable with Zeb, Po,
and Speedwell. They seemed to be the only people who could
be considered outcasts, or rather abnormal, even though
Galden was as painfully normal a human as one could be.
At the times when he would join the troll and the animals
in the solitude of the stable to discuss matters, Zeboblonuk
would release Ganasta from the bag and keep him secured
to a leash. Then the five of them would gather around a pile
of hay and talk about their qualms, neither of them really
paying attention to each other. All of them, especially
Galden, felt lonliness and dejection to some degree, and the
company they kept seemed to make it worse.
It was one especially dark and cold night when Galden
was disturbed from his sleep by a cold hand shaking him
awake. He was on the top bunk, so could not fathom why
Baringer or Nisqué would bother to reach up to wake him.
The room was dark, and he could not make out the shape
beside him, although he soon realized it was neither of his
roommates.
“Sshh!” hissed the miniscule figure seated upon the edge
of his bed. “There is no need for alarm.” As Galden’s eyes
grew accustomed to the darkness—all of them had long since
gotten used to the swaying of the ship upon the swells—he
was able to make out the outline and a few features; enough
to recognize that the being who sat before him was none
other than Ganasta the goblin.
“Good greetings to you,” spoke the goblin as he perched
on the side of the bunk. “I bet you’re asking yourself just
now how I got out of that dreadful bag and up here on your
cot, eh? I’ll tell you, I will. It wasn’t any problem at all, mind
you. I could’ve gotten away from that stinking troll long ago
if’ I’d wanted to. Be sure of that. I just never wanted to, you
know.” The imp pulled a small pipe from his trouser pocket
and lit it up, puffing small circles of smoke from his mouth.
162

DARK BECOMING
“What do you want?” murmured Galden sleepily. “You
woke me up.”
“No! You’re jesting me! And how long did it take you to
figure that out, master Galden? You must be some scholar
or something like that! Great Gods, I never met anyone as
smart as you!”
“What are you doing here?” Galden insisted, cranky and
bothered. He sat up on the bed, making creaking noises that
threatened to wake the others in the room.
“Now, now, master, you don’t have to get upset. I only
come in here to let you know that I can be of some use to
you on your quest, that’s all. But if you don’t want to listen
to what little old Ganasta has to say, that’s all right and fine
with me. I’ll just be on my way now.”
“Wait,” growled Galden, clutching at the goblin’s thin
arm. “Tell me now or I’ll let Zeb know that you’ve escaped.”
“And done it many times before, too, I’ll have you know,”
added the goblin impishly. “But since you’re so persuasive
with that hand of yours there on my fragile little arm, I’ll let
you know. I can talk to the little people that still are left in
that continent you’re going to... Monshera you call it, right?
That’s not the name it had in old times, but who cares right?
Well, I happen to know some of the folks there, and we’re
on a kindly term. So I was thinking that if you could convince that troll friend of yours to let me free, I could talk to
them.” The goblin cocked his eye at Galden, smiling hopefully.
“Why don’t you just escape and leave him?” asked
Galden.
“’Cause then I wouldn’t be really really free, you know?”
replied Ganasta. “I want to be truly set free before I bother
to tell him that I could’ve left long ago already.”
“All right,” sighed Galden, wanting to return to his
slumber. “I’ll let him know.” He was too tired to try to
reason out the goblin’s logic, and had long ago lost interest
in why he was captured in the first place. Closing his eyes
in resignation, Galden wanted nothing more than to sleep.
163

DARK BECOMING
“Thank you kindly,” chirped the goblin, hopping off and
landing on the floor soundlessly. “Good night then, master
Galden.”
“Goodnight, goblin,” murmured Galden, already drifting back to his dreams. He gave no pause to how the goblin
was going to open the rickety door and close it, without
making a racket. The goblin did not.

164

DARK BECOMING

of hope...
Chapter 13
“Loris! Pouldin!” shouted Senna as she stood facing the
door. There was no answer to her call, so she repeated it.
Not wanting to attract any attention and danger to her growing family, the ageless queen stopped her cries and sat back
in her chair.
“Why are you calling them, Senna?” asked Thirluaine
as she fed her baby. Kaldorne was growing big for his age,
but still remained as cute and cuddly as when they first met
him. “You did not tell me why you are calling to them.”
“I need a knife,” Senna replied, looking angrily at the
ceiling.
“Why do you need a knife?” asked Thirluaine, pulling
the shoulder of her dress back up. Kaldorne snuggled
against his mother’s breast and fell asleep. She handed the
cooing child to Valza’in, who sat nearby, and strode over to
Senna. Thirluaine had easily come to trust the wild boy with
her baby. He was like an older brother or even a father to
him, and loved him nearly as much as she did. In fact,
Kaldorne was the object of all Senna’s family’s affections,
from the ghosts to the guards. “You’re not going to do something foolish are you?”
165

DARK BECOMING
Senna looked into the elf’s eyes, but said nothing. “No,”
mused the elf, “I didn’t think you would. “
The inhabitants of the cell turned to the sound of a key
in the door, opening slightly as Pouldin called in to them.
“What do you need?” he whispered urgently. “Hurry up!
We’re expecting the inspectors here any minute now!”
“I need a knife,” whispered Senna eagerly. “May I borrow yours?”
“My knife?” blurted out the guard, nearly raising his
voice. “Good heavens, Lady, I cannot...”
“I only need it for a few minutes,” pleaded Senna, gazing fondly into her friend’s eyes. Her eyes pleaded for her
what her voice could not, and Pouldin handed her the knife.
“Don’t do anything stupid, because Loris and I cannot
help you if you do.”
“I know,” replied Senna curtly, closing the door quickly.
It was locked from outside, and Senna quickly walked over
to Thirluaine.
“Dear,” she said, pulling her long hair in front of her,
“could you hold onto this for me?” The elf complied obediently, though she was confused.
“Are you going to cut your hair off?” she asked, rolling
the tresses around her hand and elbow.
“You are correct!” replied Senna eagerly, and cut her hair
off at the nape of her neck.
“Good gracious!” gasped the elf-mother, abhorred by
what she just witnessed. Though elves knew that humans
did not value their hair as much as they did, the cutting of
anyone’s hair was torturous enough for them. Senna pulled
the roll of hair from Thirluaine, and handed the knife to
her.
“I need yours now,” she spoke simply, extending her free
hand to hold the elf’s hair.
“What?” gasped Thirluaine, hardly believing her ears.
“Senna! This is not the time for joking! You must be delirious! I cannot...”
“I can foresee the future,” informed Senna nonchalantly,
166

DARK BECOMING
“and I have foreseen that you will cut your hair, because it
is a vital part of our escape and salvation. Now, arguing will
only prolong the time when you will cut your hair, which
will do no good, so just cut your hair and give it to me.”
Thirluaine looked confusedly at Val and then back at
Senna. The ghosts were in the corner of the cell, whispering to each other. They looked at the elf and nodded their
heads in unison. “All right, then,” she cringed, handing her
elfin long hair to Senna. She slid the knife behind her head
and winced as it cut through the thick locks. With a chopping noise it cut through her tresses, and came out the back,
pulling a few stray hairs with it. She winced. “Ouch.”
“Wonderful!” exclaimed Senna, taking the valued hair
into her hands. She bundled the hair into a ball and set it
on the floor next to her chair. Then she retrieved the knife
from the stunned elf-woman and strode to the door. Calling Garid to her, she said, “Take a peak outside and see
what’s going on. If they’re alone, I can knock on the door. If
they’re not, we’ll have to sneak the knife to him.”
“Why not just wait until this inspector’s gone?” asked
the ghost, scratching his head.
“Because it might be one of the weapons on him that
the inspector will look for. And he will find it, because I’ve
foreseen it. Now go!”
Garid dashed through the door, fading to nothingness
as he did so. No sooner than he had left he returned, shaking his head. “There’s another man out there, and he’s looking over Loris, and Pouldin is standing right next to him.”
“Curses,” muttered Senna, looking downward at the
knife. “Can you get this to him somehow?” she asked, handing the knife to the ghost.
“Yup!” Garid brightened, anxious to prove to her the new
escape route he had discovered for them. For quite some
time he had been trying to convince them that the crevice
in the back of the cell led to an underground river that eventually flowed to the surface, but they refused to try out his
theory, not denying that they did not believe him. The little
167

DARK BECOMING
ghost grasped the knife firmly and flittered through the floor
of the dungeon, down the crack, and out of their sights.
“Broceliande,” whispered Senna. “Come over here. Let
me know what is happening. The ghost glided over to the
door and stuck her face through it.
Pulling it back in, she reported to Senna. “That inspector man is standing in front of Pouldin now, and he’s saying something to him. Very formal. He’s talking a lot.” She
looked back out again, and then continued, “Now he’s patting Pouldin all over.” She looked out once more. “His shoulders.” Another glance. “His chest.” Another. “His waist.”
Senna hoped that Garid would get there soon, but then the
problem arose of how he would get the knife to the guard.
To their surprise, a low rumble rocked the earth around
them, catching the surprise and attention of everyone in
the dungeons, including the inspector. In that moment of
confusion, Garid instantly appeared and slid the knife into
Pouldin’s leg-sheath. He then dashed into the dungeon,
panting as if he were breathing heavily, which he, being a
ghost, obviously had not.
“Done!” he sighed, mopping his brow with his sleeve.
“You don’t sweat, idiot,” chided Broceliande with a hint
of laughter in her voice.
“Yes I do!” insisted Garid.
“That’s fine,” shooed Senna, ushering the two figures
back into their corner of the dungeon. “Now hush up and
let me get to work!”
As the prisoners of the dungeon watched, and sometimes
were made to help, Senna first separated and tied several
strands of her and Thirluaine’s long hair together, creating
a long, fine thread, which was rolled into a ball sometimes
by Thirluaine, Valza’in, Broceliande, or Garid. The ghosts,
as Garid had earlier proven, were quite proficient at making parts of themselves tangible enough to carry or hold
something, and Senna made good use of that ability; though
the task more often than not fell upon Garid, who had no
problem with tangibility as compared to Broceliande.
168

DARK BECOMING
With the combined lengths of both her and the elf’s hair,
she eventually had a huge ball of thread to work with.
“Did you just tell me that so I would cut my hair off?”
asked Thirluaine after the long task had been completed.
Senna looked complacently at the elf, her smile answering for her. “You did cut your hair, didn’t you?” asked Senna.
Thirluaine groaned in despair, putting her hand to her forehead in anguish while the others tried hard not to laugh at
her distress.
“You still have not told us what you are going to do with
the hair,” muttered Thirluaine as she felt gingerly at what
used to be her long tresses. The hair she had left was cut off
at the neck, leaving her with a short boyish head of hair.
Ner neck felt stiff and sore during the days following; from
no longer having to support the weight of her tresses.
“Why,” answered Senna, who felt no such discomfort,
“I’m going to make the strongest rope in the world!” Taking an amount of hair at a time, Senna began creating three
separate threads by tying the ends of each batch together.
These strands she had Thirluaine, Broceliande, and —once
she taught him how—Valza’in roll up into balls. Finally,
Senna sat down on the floor close to the very heart of the
dungeon and began braiding the three strands together.
First one, then the second crossing over that, then the
third crossing over the second, and so on, the rope grew
quickly in front of their eyes. Senna braided the hair rope
for hours before Thirluaine offered to help. Then after she
had done it for quite some time, Val insisted upon learning
how to do it, and Senna taught him, after which he added a
great length to the rope.
After her two assistants had both toiled for days on the
rope, half of it was finished, and it was already nearly twohundred feet long, according to Senna’s judgment. It might
have been longer, since her own feet were somewhat less
than twelve inches, but that was sufficient for her. The braiding continued for another two days before all three working together came to the ends of the balls of hair and had to
169

DARK BECOMING
stop. At this point, Senna tied the end of the rope into a
tight knot and then showed them how to undo the knot so
that more hair could be added later.
“Why would we want to make it longer?” asked
Thirluaine, stroking the soft nape of her neck where her
hair used to be.
“For any reason you can think of,” replied Senna with a
wry smile. “Now we have a great tool for our use when the
time comes. And it is near.”
“This time that you keep speaking of,” started the elfwoman as she hoisted Kaldorne into her arms from
Valza’in’s, “what exactly is it? Are you planning to escape?”
“No,” replied Senna, still smiling. “It is the Time of Reckoning. It is the time when we shall be rescued from this
dungeon, when the candle will snuff itself out, when the
Obelisk of Darkness and Ullix with it shall crumble to the
ground. Thirluaine, it is the time when the sun will be made
whole again!”
Valza’in commandeered possession of the rope, rolling
it and re-rolling it and carrying it with him as he pretended
to be a hunter in a great jungle, or a mighty king in his castle.
He served to greatly amuse the other tenants of the dungeon, and he in turn basked in their enjoyment. At times he
would create a cradle out of the coiled rope for Kaldorne,
and line it with a blanket that the guards had left behind.
And when Loris and Pouldin discovered their creation, great
was their admiration over the workmanship and length of
the cord.
Shortly thereafter, much to their ignorance and while
Valza’in and the elves were asleep and the ghosts were out
prowling the town for some excitement or news, Senna was
abducted from the dungeon... this time for good, leaving a
distraught adopted son, a worried mother and her child,
and two angry ghosts who could not locate where she was,
no matter how hard they searched the Obelisk for her.
Loris and Pouldin were also of no assistance in locating
her whereabouts, having no knowledge at all of when, how,
170

DARK BECOMING
or why she had been taken from their supervision. The
ghosts, with steely determination, overcame their fear of
ascending above the ground level of the Obelisk to search
for her. After all, they could wander the township, and that
was aboveground. But the Obelisk was different. What they
did find was as interesting if not as nerve-wracking as their
search for their matriarch. They now fully viewed the
horrid creations of the evil wizard; mismatched body parts
cemented onto each other, horribly misshapen and distorted, carrying on some unknown business as they staggered and cavorted frighteningly about the different levels
of the candle-tower. The candle itself Broceliande and Garid
caught sight of; a huge mass of melted wax covering the
entire floor of the Obelisk, a heavy rope wick in the center
of it, steadily burning downward towards the base of it. All
around the candle were these Ullix-created monsters, but
they were unable to find Senna or the dreaded mage.

171

DARK BECOMING

a book of time

Chapter 14
The port city of Tullmore was different from the port
they had departed from. It was populated, as they expected,
but not so densely as the previous. The other people who
had undertaken the journey along with the adventurers
went off on their own respective ways, easily blending into
the small crowd of people who began to line up on the pier.
After weeks on the seas, there was money to be made from
the weary travelers.
Baringer had retrieved Speedwell from the stable, and
although the other animals that had been holed up in there
were rather gaunt, the unicorn—as always—looked to be in
perfect health. Azurad led the way through the narrow and
wet streets of Tullmore, followed closely by Kieran, who
pointed things out to the warrior woman and asked her various questions in his hushed voice. He in turn was followed
by Koldin, Nisqué, and Baringer, Galden, Saris, Vortigurn,
and Zeboblonuk. Po fluttered his wings, shaking out the
sea-air, and flew overhead, his cawing boisterously out of
place in the rather sullen town.
Koldin was snickering quietly as they walked along the
cobbled streets, and was joined by Saris, who commented
172

DARK BECOMING
wryly to the mage, “Yes, the captain will be discovering the
unusual smell of his money till right about this time.”
“I know of an inn nearby with good food and lodging,”
informed Azurad to her new companions as she trudged
along the muddy streets. “The innkeeper knows me, and
we’re pretty good friends. We should have no trouble with
lodging tonight.”
Before too long she led them into the open door of a small
tavern, only two storeys in height.
It was empty, save for two scruffy men sitting at the bar
and the fat innkeeper standing behind the counter. She was
busy writing notes in a small booklet when the large group
entered.
“Goodness gracious!” exclaimed the chubby woman, her
round face glowing bright red in her happiness. “Azurad!
You haven’t graced this humble inn in three years!” She
instantly threw open the swinging door to the counter and
dashed through to throw a loving bear-hug around the warrior-woman’s shoulders.
“Quite true,” laughed Azurad, trying to ease the ecstatic
woman from hugging her so tight. “I’ve brought some
friends,” she told the fat woman, her hand sweeping around
the room to encompass her comrades. After introducing
them—“That one,” she pointed out in a whisper, indicating
Baringer, “is especially fun to be with”—to the innkeeper;
Selene was her name, who insisted upon giving each of
them, including Kieran, a hug; Azurad informed her that
she would finally have some paying customers in her inn
that day.
“Paying... customers?” stuttered Selene, fanning herself
with her booklet as she reassumed her position behind the
counter. “I think I feel faint!” She threw her arm over her
forehead, looking heavenward.
“You’re over-acting, Selene,” growled Azurad as she
reached into a pocket in her cloak to remove a small bag of
money. “This ought to cover me and three others.” She
turned to Galden and the others, raising an eyebrow.
173

DARK BECOMING
“Don’t look at me,” shrugged Galden, looking at Koldin.
“Perhaps our friend here...”
“But of course,” smiled the half-elf, striding up to the
counter. “If I may,” he asked, indicating the bag. To the nod
of Azurad and the innkeeper, he removed one of the coins
from the bag and placed it on the counter. “Now, then,” he
said, removing one of his gloves to reveal his clawed, scaly
hand, “please pay attention to what I am about to perform.”
He passed his mage-hand in circles over the coin, back and
forth, clockwise and counterclockwise, until it began to glow.
Then he paused and looked up from his work. “How many
gold coins do you wish to have, Madame Selene?” he asked.
“Why, it would cost all of you ten, but I could really use...
er...”
“How about fifty?” asked Koldin, smiling amiably at her.
When she nodded, emphatically at that, he tapped the
counter five times with his clawed ring-finger, then clenched
his hand into a fist and banged on the counter another ten
times. To their great surprise and delight, the one coin he
had picked out became five, then those five became fifty;
each time bouncing noisily and expanding as the fist hit the
countertop. Koldin put his glove back on and grasped
Azurad’s bag of coins with it. “I suggest you hold onto these,
Lady Azurad,” he said, handing it to her. “We may have need
of it later.”
“Are these real?” asked Selene after she had overcome
her bedazzlement. She picked up one of the coins and bit it
between her teeth.
“Those had better be real,” whispered Azurad to the
mage, growling softly as she did so.
“As real as the first,” answered Koldin glibly. Selene
immediately held out her apron and swept the coins into it
with her other hand. “Be back shortly,” she chirped, jostling her fat body into her office, which sat behind the
counter. They heard the coins as they fell onto another table
inside, and then she reappeared.
“Sit down!” she laughed. “Make yourselves comfortable!
174

DARK BECOMING
Tonight you are the most honored and esteemed guests of
Selene’s Tavern! Anything you want is on the house!” She
ushered them with wildly waving hands toward the stairwell. “Any room you want!” she said, pointing upward.
“They’re all empty! Take your pick! Come back down when
you’re ready, and I’ll have dinner for you!”
The sight of a brilliant white unicorn standing in the
center of a tavern was an interesting one, comical one might
say. Zeb and Po had lingered downstairs while the others
trudged up the low flight to deposit their belongings in the
first few rooms they came across. Fortunately enough for
them, Selene, though not having many customers in many
months, had always kept the water in the washbasins clean
and fresh. “Old habits, you know,” she said to herself daily.
“Never know when someone’ll come in.” There was enough
of the water in Tullmore anyway, and at least it kept the
hefty woman busy, if not financially sated. After a refreshing splash of water in the face for many of them, they came
back downstairs.
Koldin, the first to arrive, noticed that the two men were
still seated at the bar, though they had stopped talking now
and were glaring suspiciously at him.
“Well, now,” one of the men spoke up surlily, “what have
we here? Looks to me like an elf!”
“Worse’n that, mate,” snickered the other, “He’s an old
elf! Look at that grey hair. Probably couldn’t even protect
‘imself if we accidentally beat him up! And we’d only do
that if he didn’t give us some of that coin he’s got.”
From her vantage point behind the counter some feet
down Selene looked up from her frying pan and winked at
Koldin. She looked at the two men and then back at him,
pointing her thumb downward. Koldin easily understood
her clue, but said nothing.
“Look’a him,” slurred the first who had spoken, stumbling off the bar-stool and swaggering toward the half-elf.
“He’s not even movin’! Scared stiff, he is!” The swarthy bar
patron swung his large fist at Koldin, but the elf-mage
175

DARK BECOMING
ducked beneath the blow. The man stumbled past him, falling against a chair and table set, and made a horrendous
racket as his body met the furniture. The second wiped his
mouth with his sleeve, setting his mug of ale down on the
counter with a jarring clang. “That’s my pal there, ya
crummy elf!” He spoke the last word with a derogatory slander in his slurred voice. Koldin saw that this one was not
going to make the same mistake as the first, and he looked
to be much larger than his friend. Koldin was about to
remove one of his gloves and dispose of the menace in the
manner he most detested, when a thick cast-iron frying pan
came sailing through the air to land upon the unsuspecting
man’s thick cranium. Koldin deftly whipped his hand upward to catch the handle of the ricocheting pan , and held it
as a shield before him. The man stood for a moment, still
staring at Koldin through his glassy eyes, then fell with a
resounding crash to the floor.
“They never paid their tab,” pointed out Selene smugly
as Koldin returned the pan to her possession. She pursed
her lips as she gripped the pan in her hands. The sight of
the large innkeeper holding the weapon over her shoulders
and smiling so adorably was too much for Koldin, and he
burst out laughing just as his companions descended the
steps to join him.
“Pray tell,” began Azurad, “what are you laughing about?
Beating up those two slime-urchins is no big feat.”
“For you, maybe, Lady Azurad,” said Koldin with a flourishing bow, “but not for two unskilled in the practice.” He
then turned to the innkeeper, who was still holding the pan
on her shoulder. “Please accept my gracious thanks, Lady
Selene,” he said with a smile, grasping one of her hands in
his and kissing it gently on her fingers. “I was sure the end
of my days was here. If it were not for your bravery...”
“Oh my,” she blushed, waving away his chivalry, “it was
nothing! It’s about time those two louts got some hard
knocks. Tell you what, though,” she hinted, winking at the
gathering in her tavern, “you can repay me by tossing them
176

DARK BECOMING
out into the street. I don’t need their kind in here, and thanks
to your elf-friend here,” gesturing to Koldin, “their tabs have
been more than taken care of.”
Selene set down her pan and joined the others in hoisting the two unconscious men from the parlor of her establishment and sending them packing out the front door.
Nisqué joined Selene at her stove, and together with Azurad,
they were able to prepare an excellent feast. Everyone,
including Selene, gathered around the massive table in the
tavern’s center and enjoyed the repast.
Later that night. as Zeboblonuk Fenozizuk sat glumly
in the darkened tavern with Po and Ganasta to keep him
company, the old troll reflected upon his recent adventures,
and the one that led into his current situation.
He, Kieran, and Koldin were old wartime companions
from the battle between the elves and the humans many
hundreds of years past. Of course, he had gotten over his
grudge and long since accepted humans as his equals. They
were only soldiers in their respective armies, after all; doing their duty. But Kieran, in all his two-hundred and fifty
years of age still held contempt in his heart for the “lesser”
beings. That was another story for another time. Zeb told
his meager audience of how the three of them had teamed
up after the battle to find adventure and excitement as wandering mercenaries, and of how they had gotten a job with
an old hag named Ganydrone or Gnydronne or something
like that... that promised them riches beyond imaginings if
they could get her an old rune staff from the mountain
regions. They were certainly willing to do so, especially with
the cash deposit she had given them, promising the rest
upon success. Ganasta easily recalled how the three of them
had come upon him while he was sleeping beneath a rock,
and how Zeb had unfairly insisted upon capturing him. Zeb
insisted that it was in no ways unfair, and that in fact the
goblin had been trying to pick their pockets. Po just
squawked angrily that they continue the story.
177

DARK BECOMING
“There’s not much after that, raven,” sighed the troll,
grabbing Ganasta roughly about his scrawny neck and
inserting his kicking and cursing body into the burlap bag.
“The old hag was insane anyway, and we all agreed that the
quest was futile. We would just take the money she gave us
and go onward. We were beset by the Dark Knights and
their shadow-dragons soon afterward, and forced down into
that gully where you and your friends found us.”
Po hopped from one foot to the other and flapped his
wings to get the troll’s attention. “Kieran!” he croaked,
almost sounding like a child laughing. “Bad elf!”
“Not really,” said Zeb, staring off blankly at the ceiling.
“He just had himself a hard life. His parents, his wife, his
children... All were taken from him and killed back in the
war. He’s been really confused and angry ever since.” He
paused a moment, and added, “His relationship with his
brother... it doesn’t help much either. But you can’t seperate
them. That’s unhealthy, I think.”
And at the top of the stairs, too quiet to be heard,
Vortigurn frowned sadly to herself and scurried back into
her room. Though no one else thought to put merit into
these misfits’ conversation, it taught the elf-maiden a great
deal. Pity and understanding melted her heart.
The next morning after all of the companions had breakfasted to their hearts’ and bellies’ content, the messenger
boy that Selene had sent out to retrieve the town crier
returned, dragging the straggly individual along with him.
“There’s a good fellow,” smiled Selene, popping a shiny
coin into the excited boy’s hand. “Now be off with you. I
don’t want you idling around here bothering my guests.”
The boy scampered out of the back door of the tavern, slamming the door shut behind him.
Turning to the tired-looking man, Selene offered him a
mug of steaming ale. “Now then,” she said to him as he sat
down and looked suspiciously at the companions, “my good
friends here need some information from you. And since
you’re the most knowledgeable person in town, naturally I
178

DARK BECOMING
suggested they speak to you.” When she noticed the man’s
hesitation to cooperate, she pulled another coin from her
apron pocket. “There’s a nice little payment in it for you.”
The man snatched the coin out of her hand and prepared
to stand. A threatening glance from both Kieran and
Baringer, who stood behind Selene with their arms folded
menacingly across their chests, set the man back on his seat,
and he looked sheepishly at Selene. “What is it they want?”
“We’d like to know where the castle of the Queen Senna
used to be,” answered Galden for the fat barkeep. The crier
turned to him and sneered.
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
“I think you do,” interjected Koldin, removing one of
his gloves to expose his scaly and clawed hand. “I could...
convince you to remember.”
The man took one look at the horrific hand and paled
noticeably. “’Twas up north, in the town of Kurz. Hardly
anyone’s up there anymore. Just a few old people who want
to keep their land... That’s all! Honestly!”
“Fine then,” Selene brusquely said, waving the thin poltroon from her presence as if he were a mere fly. “You may
leave now. And enjoy that coins I gave you, crier!” she
finished with a sarcastic tinge to her otherwise jolly voice.
“Now then, mateys,” she said to Galden and his friends,
brightening her smile, “will there be anything else I can get
for you?”
“Only more information,” politely answered the young
man to whom she spoke. Galden looked around at the varying faces of the entourage, from the fat and ugly of Zeb to
the dainty of Nisqué, the statuesque of Azurad and to the
handsome of Baringer. “Can you direct us to Kurz?”
That very day found the motley group of two animals,
two little folk, three elves, and five humans trudging at a
fast gait along the rocky road that led north to the fabled
Kingdom of Kurz. Koldin had been kind enough to conjure
up another hundred pieces of gold for the immensely satisfied and grateful barkeep, while Azurad confined the large
179

DARK BECOMING
lady to secrecy, and revealed to her their quest. The trustworthy and loyal woman that she was, she jotted down their
conversation on a page of her register book, ripped it out,
and stuck it underneath a loose floorboard. She was very
kind and liberal-minded about not complaining when they
discovered a souvenir left by Speedwell. Since the floor of
the tavern was the only suitable place for the unicorn to
spend the night, she had no other place to bestow her gift.
Baringer apologetically removed the untidy present outside
and swept the floor as best he could. Selene, however, paid
no heed to the smell, cleaning it up with a mop as she jingled
the coins in her pocket with her chubby fingers, giggling
merrily all the while. “I’ll take a pile of horse shit—unicorn
shit, sorry—anyday, if it comes with all this gold and good
company. Please come back anytime! All are welcome here.”
The road was a long and tiresome stretch, as the travelers soon discovered. There were few, if any, townships in
this cold and dark area, fewer still of the familiar obelisks
that dotted the countryside of Gaelwinn. The two they came
across had no towns built around them, and they were, like
the others, completely barren. They did however provide
temporary shelter for the weary journeymen and women,
and the few odds and ends they were able to dig out of the
scattered rubble and wax within were worth the stay. Kieran
no longer found it necessary to solely carry a bow and his
quiver of arrows, since he unearthed a near-perfect spear
from the rubble of the first, which he easily mastered. The
rust that corroded the point of it was easily removed,
revealing a formidable weapon. Galden had long since
convinced Zeb to free the goblin, to his great discomfort
and the goblin’s great glee. Ganasta proved his loyalty to
his newfound comrades, however, and stayed with them.
At the first obelisk, like Kieran, he discovered a huge battleaxe, which he wielded as if he had always done so. Galden
even found himself a weapon. A straight and sharp sword
was found underneath the huge metal disk that made one
of the year markers of the melted candle. Some of the wax
180

DARK BECOMING
had fastened the disk to the ground, but after drafting
Kieran and Baringer to assist he acquired his sword. Azurad
and Zeb were easily able to show the young man how to
handle it, and soon the novice felt comfortable enough to
wield the weapon in a battle.
Saris, Azurad, and Ganasta now led the troupe, the impish goblin constantly laying small rocks and twigs in the
troll’s path to make him trip, of which Zeb never came to
expect, no matter how many times the goblin did it. Saris,
by reading the others’ thoughts and emotions, easily was
able to point out certain landmarks and directions of travel,
and with Azurad’s and Ganasta’s able assistance they found
they were on the correct route. The map in Galden’s old
book corroborated their progress.
At one point of the trek Ganasta demanded that they all
stop for at least an hour.
“What is your reason, goblin?” demanded Zeb, still
annoyed at him. “It had better be a good one.”
“Sshh!” Ganasta held his finger to his lips as he scanned
the countryside with his immense eyes. “There are wee folk
in these parts,” he whispered, winking at the troll.
“I won’t believe you for a second,” bellowed the troll,
advancing upon him with is fists raised. “You little...”
His sentence was cut short by what looked like a small
bug whizzing about his head. It ran smack dab into his
bloated proboscis, silencing Zeb instantly. “What in the
world?” he growled, peeling the flittering creature from his
nose.
“Leave me alone!” rumbled an impossibly deep and resonant voice from the small creature. It appeared to be no
larger than the troll’s thumb, but it was an exact replica of
an elfin girl, with the gossamer wings of a butterfly and the
antennae to match. The deep and manly voice that emanated from the little creature’s throat was louder than Zeb’s
own, and quite enough to startle the entire cast. “What do
ya want with me, you big oaf!” she demanded, flailing out
her tiny fists and kicking as he held her by her wings.
181

DARK BECOMING
“I told you there were wee folk around here,” smugly
asserted the goblin, puffing out his chest and smiling
broadly at him. “Now I suggest you let her go before she
kills you.”
“Her? Her!” laughed Zeb, highly amused at the goblin’s
supposed jest. “She couldn’t hurt a fly! Why...” For a second time in those few minutes Zeb’s boisterous speech was
cut short by the actions of the little creature. He had made
the mistake of bringing her closer to his face so as to see
her better. The tiny thing took advantage of her situation,
planting a punch upon the troll’s nose that sent him flying
backward several paces.
“I told you so,” sneered Ganasta as she flittered over to
him to alight upon his outstretched hand. He turned amiably to the creature and began conversing with her in the
strange tongue of the wee and little folk, the two of them
buzzing back and forth like bees. As they concluded their
tête á tête, Ganasta presented his cohort to the rest of the
gathering. “May I have the honor of introducing my friend
to my most esteemed companions?” he asked, bowing to
Galden.
“Go ahead,” Galden acquiesced, returning the goblin’s
courtly bow. He had picked up on the goblin’s courtly manner in the presence of one who must be of regal bearing.
This pixie must be someone important.
“I now have the honor of presenting to you the gracious
and most lovely Tsingee Yingee Snordeap Knorrdouff.”
“But you may call me Tsingee, for short,” boomed the
awful voice from his hand. “All that is, except for you,” she
continued, glaring angrily at Zeb, who had regained his footing and now came stumbling back to rejoin his fellow
adventurers. “You may call me ‘Mistress’ Tsingee, if I let
you call me at all.”
“Pardon my rudeness and ignorance,” faltered Galden,
taking great care not to insult this pint-sized powerhouse,
“but exactly... er... what are you?”
“Why, silly human, I’m a lutina!” she replied happily
182

DARK BECOMING
emulating an excited little girl. “I can sing, too! You want to
hear me?”
“I don’t think we are deserving of your gracious serenades this night,” spoke up Saris, extending his own trembling hand. Tsingee gingerly jumped from Ganasta’s to his,
and bounced impetuously upon it.
“That’s okay,” she rumbled. “Maybe later on.”
“D-Does that mean you’re coming with us?” queried
Galden, his voice on the edge of uneasiness. He looked at
Saris, who nodded sagely.
“Of course, simple human!” laughed the jarringly deep
voice of the little faerie. “You don’t think I’d let such weak
and idiotic people such as you face Ullix alone, do you?”
Baringer stepped forward to retort the lutina’s comment,
but Galden laid his hand upon his friend’s chest, halting
him. “Don’t try it,” he warned, still smiling nervously at the
mysterious wee folk. “So then,” he addressed Tsingee, “I’ll
bet you’re familiar with these parts, right?”
“Of course, stupid backward human,” laughed Tsingee
in her volcanic tone. “I know every road, every mushroom,
every tree around!”
“Trees?” blurted out Nisqué incredulously. “You mean
those things still exist?”
“Only the dead ones, foolish human,” replied the faerie.
“But since you are so kind, even though you are all impeded
and simple, I will go along with you, and tell you where to
travel, okay?”
“Oooookay,” exhaled Galden, drawing out the word
hopelessly. “We’re headed for Kurz.”
“Kurz?” erupted the jarring voice. “What inna world do
you want up in that dirty old shit-hole of a kingdom? Not
even gnomes bother to go there, and those shit-eaters go
everywhere!”
“Pardon me, your grace,” peeped Ganasta, “but some of
my very best friends are gnomes.”
“Well, pardon me for mentioning that, goblin!” She spat
out the word goblin as if it had a foul taste to it. “Enjoy
183

DARK BECOMING
visiting your friends for dinner, do you?”
“I’m very sorry for saying so, but...”
“That’s all very fine and interesting,” cut in Galden, “but
if you’ll please, could you lead the way to Kurz?”
“Fastest, easiest, or shortest?” returned Tsingee.
Galden stared blankly at the small faerie, not knowing
how to answer. Of course, the fastest route would get them
all to the Dark Obelisk earlier, but then, it might not be the
shortest. Of course, wouldn’t those two be the same? And
the easiest route might not necessarily be the shortest or
the fastest. His mind was muddled with the three different
possibilities, as were those of his fellows.
“Um... What would you recommend, your grace?” he
asked of the lutina.
“Why, nobody’s ever asked me which way I’d prefer,”
spoke the mollified creature. “Well, you’re in luck! They all
happen to be the same road. There’s not many of you bothersome humans around these parts to clutter up the space,
and hardly any of those unsightly black towers. Lucky for
you simpletons that I’m here to help you out. You somehow made the right decision by letting me lead you, which
is not common among dumb things like you. I approve, and
will grace you with my presence.”
“Thank you kindly,” mumbled Galden. “Now, if you don’t
mind, let’s be on our way.” He bowed uncertainly at the little
faerie, who returned the gesture, and the ever-growing assemblage continued on their way.
It was quite some time before most of them, but not all,
became accustomed to the pixie’s deranged voice. They were
grateful to the creature, as she apparently knew full well
where she was going. Oft times she would lead them off the
worn road and into the fungal underbrush, but the complaints and objections of the rest of the group would veer
them back onto more reasonable paths. Ganasta, although
he was reverent to the little creature, seemed not to
be entirely afraid of it, if not simply being courteous to her.
He would at times call her various names and slurs, and
184

DARK BECOMING
the lutina would in turn curse at him, but no blows were
exchanged. There was a mutual respect that transcended
convention.
“She’s really harmless,” whispered the goblin to Koldin,
who happened to be walking beside him. The goblin leaped
to the half elf’s shoulder, and continued talking to him. “But
only if you don’t touch her wings. She’ll bite your nose off if
you touch her wings. Literally!”
“I thank you for the information,” whispered Koldin
back, smiling broadly with his news. “Shall I pass that along
to the others?”
“Not all of them,” replied Ganasta, stifling an impish
giggle. “Especially not Zeb. Maybe the humans, but we can
let the others believe what they want.” He then hopped off
of Koldin’s shoulder to dance in front of them on the road.
Koldin straggled back a few paces, whispering the fact
that the faerie was full of hot air to various members of the
party. Giggling merrily, for this was the first truly amusing
occurrence to befall them in a long while, they passed the
interesting tidbit back and forth amongst each other, purposely leaving the troll and Kieran out of the secret.
The hours they spent on the road turned uneventfully
into days, and, passing the nights under vacant mushrooms
or in deserted huts and even towns, they progressed speedily towards Kurz. The infrequent passersby that they came
upon during the trek said few words about the land to the
north, only that it was rarely ever visited. They were more
interested in their own wanderings to pay much attention
to them, although one or two were intrigued by the oddities among them.
Towards noon of the twelfth day, they stopped a wandering peasant. She was all too happy to speak to them,
apparently having no one else to talk to.
“Pardon us, madam,” said Baringer, working his charm
on this singularly haggard member of the female gender.
He held out his hand, and kissed hers guardedly as she laid
185

DARK BECOMING
her hand upon his. “Could you possibly direct us to the Kingdom of Kurz?”
The haggard old woman blushed noticeably beneath her
ragged cowl and straggly hair. “Of course, young man. It’s
right over yonder, past that hill.” She pointed her wraithlike finger northward, indicating a small mound with a deadwood forest atop it. “I’ll take ye there if ye want. I have no
one else to help me along, so I might as well help you folks.
Ketamon doesn’t help me anymore. He’s so lazy. Come on,
don’t tarry, follow me. Yes, I knows the way. You all just
follow me and I’ll take you where ye want to go. Old
Gnydronne doesn’t mind at all, no sir!”
Koldin stopped dead in his tracks, putting his hand upon
his brother’s chest to stop him. The troll needed no cause
to halt, and the three passed a look of worry among themselves. Kieran paled, and Koldin closed his eye in disappointment. “What is she doing here?” he asked. “On this continent?”
“This is where we met her, isn’t it?” demanded the troll
in a harsh whisper. “I forget...”
“No, this is not the place,” hissed Kieran angrily. “The
hag employs magic to hound us. We have betrayed her and
now she seeks the return of her investment.” He lowered
his face and glared ahead at the doddering old woman who
was leading Baringer by the hand. “I don’t like her touching him, either,” he thought to himself, his hot jealousy
boiling beneath his skin.
As the muddled old peasant rambled on, her followers
snickered mirthfully behind her back, twirling their fingers
beside their heads.
“She seems to be a little touched, if you ask me,” whispered Azurad into Vortigurn’s pointed ear. The elf, very
rarely doing so, smiled, and nodded to her.
During the stroll, Gnydronne offered both her tale and
some mushrooms she had gathered to the travelers.
Her story was somewhat sad, but her steadfastness to
hold onto her land was admirable. Over the years, she had
186

DARK BECOMING
lost her entire family... either to death or desertion. She was
not sure. Someone named Ketamon still lived with her, as
they understood, but must be an awful lazy lout to abandon
her to do all the work she did. Aside from him, she alone
remained to lay claim over the few muddy acres of mushroom fields. Many people thought perhaps that she had lost
her mind along with her family, but she insisted that her
lunacy was all a cover-up. “Keeps the real loonies away from
me, you know.” She looked Galden up and down, pinching
his arm as she did so. “You look familiar,” she muttered,
spitting to the side. “My son, that miscreant... he looked
like you. Where is that child?”
“You’ll be rewarded for your efforts,” mentioned Saris
politely to her. Try though he might, he could not read much
of her mind; as mucked up as it was. He scowled in aggravation, knowing that even the most ruined mind was an
open book to his seeing.
“Why, thank you, little boy,” replied the old woman with
a smile. “I already know.” She winked at Saris and at the
others.
Walking steadily over the hill, they soon were able to
see a vast countryside below them, encrusted with thick
forests of dead trees, all infested with mushrooms. A squawk
from above from their raven harbinger turned their attention skyward.
“Kurz!” croaked Po, circling above them. “Due north!”
And lo, the companions beheld the abandoned castle of
the eternal Queen Senna. There it stood, the large rocks of
its walls still standing, a sentinel of its past glory to all who
might see.
Koldin, Kieran and Zeb trailed behind as they followed.
The old woman either did not recognize them, or chose not
to. Regardless of the reason, they chose not to make their
presence obvious to the daft creature.

187

DARK BECOMING

of despair
Chapter 15
Thirluaine did not know what to do. The woman who
practically became her mother these past few weeks down
in the dungeon had been taken from her, her child was teething, the ghosts were coming apart with worry, and this boy...
this young man whom Senna called her son, was so
despondent that his emotion actually hurt her.
At first Valza’in pounded on the door, screaming the
word “Ma” at the top of his lungs. Then he would run madly
about the dingy cave, dragging the rope Senna had made
behind him. After a while he gave up the theatrics, preferring instead to mope quietly in the farthest, darkest corner
of the dungeon, the rope and the rag-blanket Senna had
made constantly clutched in his hands.
Broceliande and Garid had given up quite some time
ago in their search for the queen-mother. Broceliande now
devoted her time to aiding Thirluaine in comforting
Kaldorne, whose newly emerging teeth did not sit well with
him. Her gossamer fingers massaged his gums, though she
could not make herself substantial enough to be of much
good. Garid no longer tarried with them anymore, preferring to keep a vigil at the base of the candle on the ground
188

DARK BECOMING
level, the common ante room for the Obelisk.
The elfin mother did not know what to do, or how to
handle her situation. So she just stayed with them in the
dungeon, her only attentions devoted to mothering her
infant. Luckily Loris and Pouldin were still considerate
enough to supply her with warm water and decent food for
both her and Val, and Kaldorne too. The guards missed their
friend as much as the prisoners did.
Ever since she had become a ghost, Broceliande had
looked upon Senna as her mother. Even before she was
raped and killed on that dreaded night. Before she had been
thrown into the dungeon, she lived with her parents, a wood
chopper and his wife, in a great pine forest in a nearby town.
Life was hard for her, toiling all the time at various chores,
and her mother did not make things easier for her. Indeed,
the woman spent most of Broceliande’s teenage and young
adult years bedridden with some illness that slowly ate away
at her frail body. Broceliande was never allowed to go near
her mother, and forbidden to go anywhere near her locked
room. Only her father would bring in the woman’s food and
drink three times daily. He would make sure to feed and
tend to his invalid wife, then heartlessly leave her, paying
no regard to the traces of intelligence left in her eyes. How
Broceliande wished she could be there with her mother, to
comfort her and look into those soulful eyes.
But with the cataclysm came death and destruction all
around, and the trees that her father had built his livelihood upon slowly were harvested for fuel. And later on
Ullix’s henchmen, sent out to retrieve willing and unwilling slaves for their master, captured her and her father,
and—to her utter horror—parts of her mother, too. Her
father struggled valiantly to ward off the foe, but was killed
instead. Broceliande had fainted then, but later learned that
his body too was taken apart and loaded with her mother’s
and many other people’s body parts to be taken to the Obelisk. Broceliande herself was thrown into a dungeon for a
plaything of the guards. Fortunately for her, she met Senna
189

DARK BECOMING
there, and the guards, caught up in their heinous work, paid
little attention to her.
Senna immediately took the frightened and shaken girl
under her wing, caring for her every need, and becoming
for her the mother she only wished she had.
They spent nearly three years together before those
guards mercilessly beat her up, tore off her clothes, and
sated their sexual appetites with her defiled body. Only
when she no longer struggled, when she lay lifeless under
their sweating bulk, did they stop, throwing her useless body
into the crevice that cracked along the back of the dungeon.
Broceliande had called out Senna’s name many times at
first, but then ceased, focusing all her attentions on fighting the marauders.
Even after her death, Broceliande struggled against the
blackness that tried to engulf her. She seethed with anger
for both the guards and for the foster mother that did not
raise a finger to help her. She fought her way back to the
dungeon, almost being forced there by some will other than
her own. It was there that she learned from Senna that the
queen was powerless to prevent her death, and knew it,
therefore holding herself back from the carnage, lest she
risk it upon herself. Broceliande and Senna reconciled in
time, and the ghost stayed with her ever since. She was
trapped within the city walls, the dark evil of the Obelisk
preventing her from straying past them.
Thirluaine listened to Broceliande’s story attentively as
Kaldorne slept fretfully in her arms. She wondered how in
the world such a frail girl such as Broceliande could withstand such torments, even going so far as to come back to
the place of her horrible death.
Broceliande also told her what she knew of Valza’in, and
of Garid. The little boy had been thrown to the dungeon
several decades later, and met a similar fate. The two had
become fast friends, sharing many things in common,
especially their current states. They were the only two ghosts
they knew of in all the town. But now Garid avoided being
190

DARK BECOMING
with his friends, eluding her as she made attempt to find
him. Broceliande gave up trying to speak to him, too, eventually.
“When is this Time of Reckoning supposed to happen?”
asked Thirluaine of the ghost as she concluded her tale.
“I only know it is soon,” replied the ghost, staring wistfully at the ceiling. “Five years ago, Garid and I asked around
and found out it was the year four-hundred ninety-five.
Senna mentioned something about the day occurring five
years later... this year. Maybe it’s already begun.”
“Perhaps,” replied Thirluaine, looking sadly at Valza’in
as he crouched silently in the corner. “Do you think he’s
gotten any sleep lately?” she asked of the ghost.
Broceliande shook her head. “He just sits there, playing
with that rope of his. He’s got that blanket, but all he does
is hug it.”
“Well,” declared the elf, standing up and brushing off
her bottom with a free hand, “Kaldorne and I are going to
visit him. Will you join us?”
“I don’t know if he’ll let you...” started Broceliande, rising somewhat off the floor.
“I just don’t care,” she stated through gritted teeth, bustling herself over to Val. He looked up, his cried-out eyes
red and with his weariness plainly evident in them. But he
did not try to move. “Val,” spoke Thirluaine softly.
“Kaldorne. Tired.” She pointed at him, then her baby. The
simple communication was all Valza’in needed to set down
the cord and extend his arms. Thirluaine deposited
Kaldorne into them. By now he had woken, and was crying
from the pain of his newly-formed teeth.
“Sshh,” comforted Valza’in, blowing softly into the
baby’s ear. He held him close in his arms, rocking the infant gently as he hummed the old lullaby that they used to
sing so frequently. He stuck his finger into his mouth,
sucked it clean, and then placed it into Kaldorne’s, gently
rubbing the baby’s gums. Kaldorne soon resumed his sleep
in Val’s arms, a sight which constantly served to bewilder
191

DARK BECOMING
his mother. She always had such a difficult time soothing
him to sleep, but his uncle Val had no trouble at all.
And soon Valza’in joined the baby in sleep, with
Thirluaine sitting beside them crying softly, and the ghost
hovering silently above.

192

DARK BECOMING

the book of revelation

Chapter 16
Questionable circumstances were all that the initial
adventurers had to guide them on their quest. For some
reason the old blind man Saris knew that he and his adoptive daughter, and Nisqué, and the many others, were
destined to go on the journey with them. But how? And was
the elf-girl really his daughter? Those two were the most
mysterious and intriguing members of the party, albeit the
simplest and quietest. Maybe their simplicity and silence
were part of a ruse so as to not draw any attention to them.
Yes, it certainly was a good time to have a conversation with
those two.
Senna’s castle was found to be empty and quite deserted,
but various books and scrolls told them what they wanted
to know, and Gnydronne did know a lot about the region’s
history. She told them all she had to know; about Senna
and her castle, about Senna’s descendants, about her own
life, and things too unimportant to make mention of. They
could tell from her scattered wits that she was not really an
ancient princess of Erz, that Senna was not really her grandmother, and that she was merely crazed with some disease
that addled her brain. Poor old woman.
193

DARK BECOMING
The castle itself housed a great many artifacts that
caught the attention and wonder of the adventurers. The
woven tapestries that hung in tatters on the stone and mortar walls, the rich chairs and sofas that now were rotted and
covered with dust, and the other many things of royalty that
now were things of peasantry lent the old castle a very
sad ambiance... One of past glory now ruined. And one of
shame and sorrow over the circumstances that led to its
demise.
Speedwell’s hooves clattered noisily as they entered the
great anteroom of the castle. The huge oaken doors had long
since rotted in the moist and humid climate of the land,
and were pushed out of the way with ease, falling into mulch
on the ground outside.
After having discovered that their quest was only still at
its beginning, or perhaps more likely towards the middle,
from the literature they found, the various members of the
entourage set out on their own ways to explore the vast
castle and to discover any mysteries and treasures that
might have been left behind or missed by vandals and scavengers. Much of the contents had been plundered ages ago.
“Ketamon is probably sleeping again,” muttered the old
woman as she waved her hand over her head and waddled
off down a hallway. “He was always such a lazy little boy.
Never respecting his poor old mother, always trying to look
out for my little boy.”
“I thought Ketamon was her husband,” mumbled Nisqué
to Baringer. They watched the old crone stagger into the
darkness. “Maybe I ought to look after her,” she said. She
smiled at Baringer and Galden, and trotted after Gnydronne.
“I’ll keep an eye on her. Don’t worry.”
“Be safe. Don’t wander far,” called Galden after her.
“I will. I promise.”
And this gave Galden and Baringer the best opportunity to interrogate Saris and Vortigurn.
The two companions confronted them as they were resting upon one of the few pieces of furniture that had been
194

DARK BECOMING
spared the ravages of time. They were in one of the chambers that lined the second floor, above a great and wide
winding staircase. Most of the artifacts remaining in this
room were in better condition that the rest, although these
too were aged and worn.
Shoving the rotted boards as far as they would go,
Baringer closed the large door behind them as they entered,
as Saris had expected them to.
“I have been awaiting this,” spoke the old man, remaining on the sofa. “I was growing concerned that you might
put off these questions of yours until you quite forgot them.”
“So you know why we’re here,” said Galden, brushing
the dust off an armchair across the room from them and
sitting upon it. Baringer found another and did the same.
They both pulled the chairs forward and began their talk.
“Of course, my friends. I am an empath. I can feel emotions, I can read thoughts, and I can heal both the mind and
the body. I have known of your suspicions from the day we
set out in the rain from the tavern where we first met. I
have known of the quest even before you discovered Senna’s
gown in your attic.” Galden blushed hotly at this, and ducked
his head. “Our meeting was no coincidence, as you may well
have discovered.”
“So what is it really?” asked Baringer, setting his chin to
rest upon his fist. “What’s going on?”
“Our story is not a long one,” stated Saris. “Vortigurn
and I come from the empire of Valinshae, north-west of
here. Your ancestor, Senna, was a contemporary of mine.
She and I were the two people sought out by Mannedor, the
ancient and dead god of life and wisdom... of humankind.
Senna he found, but I... Well, the demon Ullix found me
first. He knew that Senna and I would pose a formidable
threat to his regime of destruction and control, so it was his
desire to eliminate us.”
The old man stood, and walked about the room. “What
do you know of science? Of gravity and physics; of electrons
and molecules, of interstellar travel and transwarp technol195

DARK BECOMING
ogy? Nothing, I’ll wager, yet those are but the smallest of
universal concerns. Do you know that the sun exploded? Of
course you do. It is the stuff of legends and bedtime stories.
Do you know, also, that a universe cannot rotate in orbit
about a dead sun? Of course not. Do you know that our
world, Harlus, only exists to this very day because of the
unexplainable force called magic? No, you couldn’t. The
concept is too alien to most minds; to mine even, sometimes. I cannot explain how magic works like I could explain to you the laws of photosynthesis; but without a sun,
I’m afraid it would still be impossible to believe.”
With words that staggered their minds, the old seer regaled them with laws of science, rules of physics that they
believed were true, but could not understand. “It was the
mage Ullix—the demon—who remained to keep the planet
alive. With the death of each mage, their magic went to him
and he used that power to control and to... to save. But we
are all prisoners of his salvation.
“He blinded me and turned my skin this dark color you
now behold. With this brand I was to be forever ostracized
and banished from my land. Mannedor, with his dying
breath, bestowed upon me the gifts of sight beyond sight,
and empathy... gifts that Ullix’s curse could not take from
me; nor did he even know of them. But alone I could not
stand a chance against Ullix’s power, as could Senna. I have
been forever searching for her, and I know that together we
shall defeat him.”
He reached his gnarled hand to grasp Vortigurn’s shoulder, and she lovingly placed hers upon it.
“I found Vortigurn as a child, abandoned in a dying
forest. There is no mystery about us. We are genuinely
concerned with finding the lost queen of Kurz and defeating Ullix.”
“So then,” began Galden, intrigued by Saris’ tale, “who
is this Ullix that no one can defeat him?”
“Why, I thought you knew!” declared Saris, puffing out
his cheeks indignantly. “Ullix is the god of evil and death!
196

DARK BECOMING
One of the pantheon of Norbinda. He alone survived the
cataclysm that destroyed all his fellow gods!”
•••
Much to the relief of Kieran, Koldin and Zeb, old Dame
Gnydronne became a faint memory once they left the castle.
From Kurz, they made their way determinedly into the
country of Monshera, skirting past the great Monshera
Desert where Senna had allegedly buried the orb of wisdom, and to the township of Ineguile. The obelisk that had
once dominated the lives of Ineguile’s inhabitants was
nonexistent now, a vast, blackened empty space smoldering from the bonfires that the townsfolk lit there every night.
When asked why they upheld such a pagan ritual, the
populace replied that their bonfires served as reminders and
as warnings of the past domination that clamped down upon
them, and of a symbol of hope... Hope in that the fire symbolizes light, the lost and last vestiges of a sun that no one
could remember. Burning mushrooms made much smoke.
Galden, Baringer, Saris, Vortigurn, Nisqué, Speedwell,
Po, Kieran, Koldin, Zeboblonuk, Ganasta, Azurad, and
Tsingee passed through this town as they did the others in
their path, staying only long enough to refresh their supplies and catch up on rest.
As they traveled northward, toward the far north and
coast of Monshera, the weather became colder and wetter,
patches of ice covering the ground in spots, and requiring
heavier garments and protection for the travelers. Po no
longer was free to soar in the skies above, and had to be
concealed beneath the heavy furs of his master. Speedwell
was covered with several blankets and had strips of cloth
wrapped around her legs to keep the biting cold from stiffening her muscles. Ganasta and Tsingee, however, needed
no protection from the climate and sauntered about as gaily
as ever in their simple wee folk garb.
The port-side city of Ballinstone disclosed to them a
simple fishing village, with a few ice-encrusted ships docked
in the frigid waters of the Droilinn Sea. It was stormy above
197

DARK BECOMING
the icy waters, and waves crashed against the docks and
piers that made up the edge of the wharves. The one boat
that looked to be seaworthy was scheduled to cross the large
strait between Ballinstone and the city of Streatour the very
day they arrived, foul weather or not. The next was scheduled to depart when hell froze over. When they were told
that by one of the ship captains that congregated in the
taverns on the wharf, their decision was made to brave
the angry swells and sail to Streatour.
Koldin concealed his wizardry within the folds of his
cloak, producing the fares for all of the entourage to ferry
with the ship. They were then ushered below deck into a
confining space that luckily provided room for all gathered.
The voyage was a thankfully quick, but also rocky and
violent one. Storms battered and tossed the ship to and fro
across the ocean, and more than once various passengers
were enlisted to assist in sailing the agitated vessel. Billowing seas washed over the strained and creaking deck of the
boat, sending unfortunate lackeys into the churning brine.
At one point of the journey they almost neared land,
although it was not the port city of Streatour. Ill-fated
circumstance tore them away from the coast, though luckily still headed for Streatour. With some trying struggles
they were finally able to make it to their destination, sadly
with some casualties.
Galden and his companions were none the worse for
wear, and departed from the hapless wreck that once was
able to call itself a ship. That was its last journey across the
strait. The old vessel would finally be allowed to retire to
the watery depths once it was stripped of equipment and
crew.
Buying new supplies and clean, warm clothes to replace
the ones that became sodden with the brine that washed
into their living space, they set out once again for the Obelisk of Darkness, now only a few days’ journey ahead of
them. The cost of such supplies was prohibitive, and only
through the grace of Koldin’s magic were they afforded.
198

DARK BECOMING
Saris became more agitated now, and nervously spoke
to them of the horrors that they might face in this desolate
region. He also informed them of the need to free Senna,
and join forces with her to finally confront Ullix. But to do
that, they had to infiltrate the dark tower, remove her from
it, and then attack anew the Obelisk, this time retrieving
the orb of knowledge and dealing a hopefully fatal blow to
the evil that resided within.
People were few and far between in this harried land,
and progress was slow against the biting winds and torrid
rains and snows that fell upon them. At times the darkness
combined with the precipitation prevented them from seeing too much of a distance in any direction, and they constantly had to call out to each other to make sure none had
been swept away or taken from them. Constant stops were
called for, to regroup and rest.
And toward the end of their travels, they came upon the
city walls of the Obelisk of Darkness. And for some strange
reason, it did not snow there. It did not rain there. It was
not windy there. It was not as bitingly cold. Galden and his
friends found the city to be nothing out of the ordinary at
all. Except for the fact that it was oppressed, and that they
could feel the domination that the one remaining survivor
exuded. The one last obelisk of time stood, looming above
them, like the accusing finger of a confessor demanding
punishment for their trespasses. The height of it was grand.
It beckoned to them even before they saw the township.
Their heavy gear was thrown off, reverting back to their
lighter original garments, and they set their wintry clothes
together in the camp they made on the outskirts of the city.
They then made plans for infiltrating the Obelisk, and
rescuing Senna. Perhaps if they established communication with sympathetics within the domination of Ullix they
could locate her whereabouts and free her, verifying in the
process her very existence. And this they set out to do.
Galden, Baringer, Nisqué, and Azurad disguised themselves as commoners, slinking around the city in search of
199

DARK BECOMING
any who might be able to answer the unsettling questions
directed at their master. No one they came across was willing to answer anything, and many of them harshly rebuked
their queries, leading them to believe that this method of
operations was not going to yield any fruits.
Until they met Maibin.

200

DARK BECOMING

of aid...

Chapter 17
“Damn it all, Galden!” muttered Azurad as she hugged
the dirty shawl about her shoulders. “You and your stupid
ideas! I don’t like this at all! We should just attack the Obelisk and be done with it!”
“Saris said that...”
“I don’t care what that old man says! Since when do you
place all your trust in him anyway?” retorted Azurad,
cutting off Galden’s reply. The two of them, along with
Baringer and Nisqué had been trudging through the streets
of the small city for nearly two days now, their faces already
becoming synonymous with the other beggars. They had
confiscated some raggedly clothes from a trash heap outside the city and used these to conceal their true identities,
and had been wandering through the town in search for any
leads at all.
“With all these people knowing that we’ve been asking
about Ullix and Senna, I’m surprised we’re still alive and
walking,” worried Nisqué as they traipsed along the dirt
street.
“They’re afraid to tell him,” said Baringer. “Everyone’s
afraid of him. That’s why they’re not telling us anything.”
201

DARK BECOMING
“Even when you use your special persuasion on them,”
nickered Nisqué to Baringer, much to Galden’s chagrin.
“Look, now,” insisted Azurad. “We’ve covered nearly the
entire town, so why don’t we go back to the camp and start
the charge?” The warrior-woman was not in the least
enjoying this excursion, preferring violence over subterfuge.
“One final house,” sighed Galden, pointing to the last
shack that squatted somberly at the end of the street. “Then
we can go back.” Azurad shrugged indifferently, and
huddled her shoulders, pretending to be old and decrepit.
The others followed suit, and advanced upon the door of
the hovel.
Nisqué rapped soundly upon the battered mushroomwood door. It was quickly opened by a plain-looking young
woman. She allowed merely a crack, and peered at them
from behind it.
“What do you want? I have no money, and there’s not
enough food to go around. Why don’t you bother someone
else?”
She was about to close the door, when Baringer stuck
his foot in it, preventing her.
“My turn,” he whispered to the others, winking slyly at
them. He removed the old brown cloak he had been wearing with a flourish and stood tall before the startled lass.
“Pardon the intrusion, fair damsel, but we are in need of
assistance.” He placed his hands upon the door, pushing it
open. “If I may?” he asked, allowing himself in.
“What do you want with my mother?” cried a child’s
voice from behind the flustered young woman. They all
turned their eyes upon a little boy who had run out from
hiding to stand before his mother.
“Please, leave us!” pleaded the woman. “I have too much
to lose! Begone with your questions! If Ullix finds out...”
“You know of us?” asked Galden, astonished and assured
that their actions were not very subversive at all, as they
suspected.
“I’m sorry to have disturbed you, good lady,” Baringer
202

DARK BECOMING
huffed, turning abruptly around to leave. “Maybe you and
your stupid people want to live under that Hooded One’s
tyranny. That’s perfectly fine with me!”
The three others followed him away from the house,
glares of disgust and disappointment upon their faces.
“Wait,” called the woman to them in a small voice. She
opened the door further, motioning them to enter. “Please,
I am sorry for treating you so rudely. If you can help us, I
will do anything I can.”
The morning sun broke upon the horizon, its rays surging outward to embrace the pink and orange cloud-filled
sky, awakening the birds to their merry chirping and
dances, and bringing light and warmth once again to the
world even as it burned her eyes into blindness. That was
the dream Maibin told them that recurred every night for
the past five years. She told them so many things since they
had set foot in her house; all her inhibitions lost as she let
forth all her insecurities and knowledge that cluttered the
far, dusty reaches of her mind, enlightening them to all the
facts she knew.
“And I felt I had to tell you all these things,” she said,
holding onto her five-year old son in her lap. “But if the
Hooded one ever finds out what I’ve done, he’s sure to come
after Pouldin and me... And Pouldin’s father, too.”
“And just where is Pouldin’s father now, anyway?” asked
Baringer, smiling at the boy, who stared at all four of them
with widened eyes of wonder.
“His father is a dungeon guard inside the Obelisk.
Pouldin here shares his father’s name. He...”
Galden and his companions had jumped during her
speech and were looking excitedly at each other and the
startled mother.
“Dungeon guard, you say?” asked Galden excitedly. The
coincidence of finding Maibin and learning of her husband’s
duties was too amazing. “The woman we are looking for is
supposedly locked up in the dungeons! Do you suppose
203

DARK BECOMING
there is any way that we could get your husband to let us in,
or somehow sneak her out?”
“He’s not my husband,” she murmured in reply. Galden
apologized, and allowed her to continue. “Are you talking
about that old woman who’s always taking care of the other
prisoners?” asked Maibin, sneaking another glance at the
door, which she had made sure to be firmly locked. Galden
nodded vehemently, as did the others. “Pouldin’s always
talking about her and her family every time he visits me. I
think she just adopts anyone she talks to. Pouldin’s sort of
her ‘adopted’ son, too. Just like Loris, Pouldin’s best friend.
They talk to her every day. He tells me that she and her
friends sing songs down there, and that she even has a few
ghosts with her.”
Galden, Baringer, Nisqué and Azurad were astounded
with the good news. In one moment their hopes were verified, and their spirits soared. Senna was real! Their efforts
would have been in vain if she were not, but she existed!
They could hardly hold in their enthusiasm as they pumped
the woman for anything she could relate to them about
Pouldin and Senna. She in turn revealed to them how
Pouldin was allowed to visit with her once a week, on behalf of their son, and that he always brought news of the
enchanting queen. And Maibin expected Pouldin that very
day.
In the silence that permeated the small house the six
people waited nervously for the telltale rapping of knuckles
upon the flimsy door of her scant domicile.
Maibin served them some cool water from an earthenware pitcher that sat upon the nearby kitchen table, one of
the few furnishings in this small home. The water served to
lubricate their parched throats, but did not calm their agitation and expectancy. Maibin fidgeted constantly, noticing as they waited various things that needed to be tidied
up or straightened out.
“Please sit with us,” admonished Galden firmly.
Every sound could be heard, from the sparse animals
204

DARK BECOMING
that prowled the empty city streets to the infrequent person scuttling by on his own business.
And they heard the soft knock that finally awakened
them from their stupor.
“That’s him,” breathed Maibin triumphantly. She rushed
to the door, followed by her son, while the four strangers
stood somberly within the shadows of the poorly lit hovel.
The front door opened to admit a tall, well-built individual. He had shortly cropped blond hair that matched the
gold inlay that decorated his iron breastplate. He wore
strong iron-mesh leggings and a tunic of the same material
underneath his ornate chest-piece. Maibin closed the door
swiftly behind him and locked it securely.
“Maibin,” he sighed, holding her in his arms. He squatted down to embrace his son, but noticed their reticence.
He rose slowly and peered about the room, whereupon his
eyes landed on the four shadowed figures.
Upon sight of the intruders his hand went immediately
to the scabbard on his belt and withdrew the sword concealed within.
“What are these people doing here?” demanded the man
of Maibin, who stood behind him with their son.
“I let them in, Pouldin,” answered the woman before any
of the companions could answer. “They’re here to speak to
you about the woman in the dungeon.”
Pouldin narrowed his eyes to slits, still brandishing the
sword in his hand. “What business do you have with the
Queen? No one outside of the city walls knows of her existence, and fewer still care about her.”
“We care about her,” spoke Galden solemnly. He
stretched his arms outward to encompass his three companions. “These good people, and many others awaiting us
outside the city limits, care for the only hope that our world
has for freedom. They’re here only on their faith that the
Queen can save us; nothing more, nothing less.”
“I have long known that the little mother is very powerful and mystical, but I knew nothing of her being the world’s
205

DARK BECOMING
salvation,” retorted the big man, still apprehensive with
them. Maibin clung to his arm and their son held onto his
leg.
Maibin’s pleading eyes seared deep into Pouldin’s mind.
“Please, listen to them. They only mean to help. They may
be the only hope we have!”
“Listen to us,” ordered Azurad, standing up and advancing upon him. She tossed off her beggar’s rags and revealed
her true and formidable appearance. “We have among us,
in our camp beyond the township, a great many powerful
beings. One of them is a contemporary of Senna, and it is
only through the two of them that we can restore our world
to its former glory. Your Mage Ullix holds not just you prisoner, but he dominates the rest of Harlus as well. Help us!
Help us free our precious world from his evil grasp!”
Azurad’s speech stirred something deep within Pouldin’s
soul, a feeling he dared not allow himself to feel before in
his entire life. For the first time he felt a desire to be free, a
goal to accomplish, a dream to follow. And this, combined
with further conversation with the four rescuers, lured him
into their dangerous world of hope.
Azurad, Galden, Baringer, and Nisqué related to him
their individual and collective tales, and their plan to free
Senna. He in turn informed them of the queen-mother’s
disappearance and of the other inhabitants of the cell, and
of Loris, his guard comrade. Most certainly these good
people would be willing to aid them in their quest. He did
not hesitate to join them as they departed the small house
for their camp. Maibin and their son accompanied them, at
the urging of Pouldin, and Galden assured them that they
would be well protected at their camp.
Arrival at night. The perpetual night that enshrouded
the decimated world. But their arrival was expected. Their
compatriots had set up a well-fortified camp just beyond
the edge of a small forest near the city but far enough removed as to be unnoticed in among the tall mushrooms of
the forest. The huge mushrooms provided both concealment
206

DARK BECOMING
from sight and cover from the elements; their immense caps
providing a vast canopy, while the thick stalks provided a
dense barrier against intrusion. Kieran and Koldin had done
the majority of the clearing work, removing with both brawn
and blade, as well as sorcery, certain fungal obstacles to clear
a space for their temporary encampment. Vortigurn then
assumed the form of a dragon and burned with her flame
the open area to ensure that no unwanted pestilence might
bother them. The removed mushrooms were utilized as well,
their stalks intertwined about the circumference of their
camp and the caps became construction material for their
settlement. Within the first few hours of arrival they had
set up a strong camp, and then set about accommodating it
for dwelling. Zeb, Ganasta, and Tsingee set out in search of
any of the wee and small folk that might frequent the area,
but were unsuccessful in their search. Saris and Vortigurn
prepared meals for the others, and the elf-brothers were
constantly at work at strengthening the walls of their camp
and honing the blades of their weapons. Po was enlisted to
be on lookout, and was perched every once in a while on the
various mushrooms at the edge of the forest. Speedwell had
no task set out for her, and watched the proceedings with
slight interest, blinking her long eyelashes as she watched.
When Galden and the others arrived with the three
townspeople, they were met by Po at the edge of the forest,
who then led them to their hideout. They were then briefed
on the situation, causing great concern in Saris, who worried about Senna and their hopes for success. Her current
presence was a great concern among the invaders, who—
now that her existence had been readily verified by the
dungeon guard—relied upon her aid to overcome Ullix’s
threat. They decided that they simply must find the queen,
no matter what the cost.
Maibin and her son Pouldin were taken care of; situated in a primitive structure made of mushroom bark and
Koldin’s magic. As time was growing close to when Pouldin
was to return to his post, preparations had to be made in
207

DARK BECOMING
haste, no time allowed for any delays. Koldin fashioned iron
manacles from surrounding stones at the campsite, utilizing his mage ability to transform the stones into the angry
chains. Created by Koldin’s own magic, they needed no keys,
since he could release them when he wished with merely a
snap of his fingers. Once they were all shackled up together
by the long chain, the next task was to transport such a large
number of beings to the fortress of the Hooded One. It was
Koldin once more who supplied the solution. Releasing
Kieran and Baringer from the chains, he covered them with
the illusion of outfits resembling that of Pouldin. He then
placed the illusion of a burly war-horse over Speedwell,
upon which Pouldin rode into the city, his “companions”
prodding the unfortunate “prisoners” along behind him. Of
all those who had set out to the Obelisk of Darkness, only
Saris, Nisqué, and Po remained behind with Maibin and
her son.
“Amazing,” thought Saris aloud as the rest of the group
set off for the Obelisk, “how a simple notion I placed in
Galden’s mind to discover the truth about his heritage could
lead to the vanquishing of our worst enemy... And freedom
for our world!” He mumbled something that the barmaid
could not hear, and she turned to walk away... but her curiosity was piqued. “Your time has come, my brother.”
Nisqué, disregarding his whispered murmuring, fed the
fire with the small pieces of mushroom-wood, and Po
huddled silently on the cap of a nearby mushroom.

208

DARK BECOMING

of loss

Chapter 18
Much was the surprise of the populace of the village that
surrounded the Obelisk at the spectacle that they beheld
passing through the streets of their town. Even greater still
was that of the squadron of soldiers that flanked the single
entrance to the Obelisk. A large group of prisoners consisting of humans, elves, a troll and a goblin was lead toward
them by three Obelisk soldiers, the one recognizable to them
as Pouldin astride a swarthy war-horse. The guards instinctively raised their weapons in preparation for intrusion,
although Pouldin waved at them and spoke.
“My companions and I are returning from our rounds
gathering prisoners,” he lied, hoping that the dim-witted
men might follow their ruse.
“Pouldin,” spoke one of the guards, joining the others
as they lowered their weapons. “We were under the impression that you had just gone into the city to visit your woman
earlier today. And where then are the others who were supposed to capture these infidels with you?”
“They have been killed,” sighed Pouldin, mockingly. He
then changed attitudes, chiding them like children, “Hadn’t
you heard, men? We were all called to duty to join these
209

DARK BECOMING
unfortunate men,” here he gesture to the disguised Baringer
and Kieran, “in overcoming a strong sorcerer who threatened to prevent them from doing their duty! If it was not
for me and the few others, we would have lost these prisoners as well as the poor men who were slain! Have you no
shame? Let us through right this instant, or your punishment will be terrible!” He scolded the bewildered guards
sufficiently enough to lower their guard and allow them safe
passage into the black tower, while those remaining outside worried about incurring the wrath of the omnipotent
demon that was their king and savior.
Once inside, the intruders did not breathe easier.
Indeed, they had only just left the safety of the outside world
and entered the unknown horrors of the Obelisk.
Pouldin gestured them to be quiet as he dismounted
Speedwell. He then led Kieran and Baringer to drag the
others in their shackles behind them down to the lower
levels of the dungeon.
They passed unharassed through the ground-level of the
keep, passing by guards and soldiers at their various
duties. Fortunately for Vortigurn, she had transformed
herself into the form of a brawny, hairy woodsman; otherwise she would likely have been labeled for purposes other
than slavery.
The lower levels were ten times bleaker and darker than
those above, each one yielding horrors and foul revulsion
worse than the level above. Prisoners that were not
conscribed to toil for the Hooded One were left to rot and
die in these cells, the stench of their deaths permeating the
very rock walls. Wails of torture, torment and neglect
resounded through the vast halls of dungeons, and screams
of pain and anger mixed terrifyingly into the horrid
cacophony.
“What infernal magics dug these foul tunnels?” muttered Kieran, uncharacteristically awed and nervous.
It took quite some time to reach the lowest level, especially with Speedwell having to carefully navigate each step
210

DARK BECOMING
of the stair-cases in order not to tumble down them. Once
arriving there however, they were met by another guard.
This individual had a shortly cropped beard and hair, and
wore an outfit similar—but darker—to Pouldin’s. He looked
upon the menagerie with great interest, and then questioningly at his fellow guard.
“Why in the world have you brought more prisoners
down here?” he demanded of Pouldin and the two others,
whom he assumed to be guards as well. “Why... why are
you even here? Now?”
Pouldin pressed his finger to his lips, indicating stealth,
and motioned for Loris to unlock Senna’s dungeon. Loris
complied, although greatly perturbed and intrigued. He
pushed the door inward, and Pouldin and his followers
quickly rushed inside, dragging Loris with them. Once
within, Koldin removed the disguises and shackles from the
others, immensely surprising the inhabitants of the cell.
Valza’in, Thirluaine, and Broceliande jumped in surprise, while Kaldorne wailed in his mother’s arms. Motioning for everyone to calm down, Pouldin hastily explained to
everyone tightly assembled inside the small dungeon who
did not know what was going on. Worried looks passed over
the faces of the cell’s inhabitants, and they instantly broke
into a babble.
“This is treason,” worried Loris, fretting. He had his
hand on the dungeon door and constantly peered out in the
hallway. “We’ll be killed!” he hissed at Pouldin angrily. “Or
worse...”
Broceliande spoke up, interrupting him. “Good people,”
she said, addressing the strangers, “we respect your plan,
but Senna has been abducted from us, and we cannot find
her. Nor can I, as well as another ghost that resides with us,
leave the city walls, for we are trapped here just like the
prisoners.”
“Senna we shall have to search for once we have freed
you,” replied Galden. “Our friend Pouldin here has assured
us that you would be willing to join us in our quest. Rescu211

DARK BECOMING
ing Senna’s family is one step closer to rescuing Senna herself. She is the key to all our freedom from Ullix.”
“As desirable as that sounds,” interjected Thirluaine. “I
cannot place my child in such danger as this plan would
involve. Were it not for Kaldorne, I would gladly battle along
side you.”
It was at this moment that Kieran and his companions
noticed that the one who had just spoke, and her baby as
well, were elves, despite her shortly cropped hair. “Great
stars!” gasped Kieran in revulsion, nearing Thirluaine.
“What happened to your hair? It is so short! What have these
monstrous humans done to you?”
Thirluaine pointed to Valza’in, who was crouched fearfully behind her. “It was woven along with Senna’s hair into
a rope. She said that we would need it. I have no idea how
or why, though.” She cast another distressed look at her
baby, who had calmed down considerably once the others
did. “I just cannot allow Kaldorne to be hurt...”
“I can save him,” said a voice from above them. All heads
craned back to witness another ghost float downward to
them. This was Garid, as Broceliande was haste to explain.
Once the large group of people had entered the dungeon,
he could no longer remain in seclusion and rejoined his comrades. “Remember that tunnel I said I’d found in the crack?”
he asked the guards and Thirluaine, pointing to the crevice
in the back of the cave. “I can carry him through it, and
outside of the castle. He’s small enough for me to bring him
through.”
Thirluaine paled noticeably at his suggestion, trembling
with concern. “But we throw all our trash and refuse... down
that crack! It’s... It’s...”
“Possible,” sighed Broceliande. She looked apologetically at the elf woman. “I followed Garid down there once.
What he says is true. There is a way out to the surface. It
goes down only a short way, and then it turns upward, and
opens up at the base of the Obelisk, in a crack at its foundation. If you want,” she added, “I can accompany them, just
212

DARK BECOMING
to make sure everything goes smoothly.”
“Me too!” growled a horrendously deep and rumbling
voice. Out from underneath the goblin’s cap flew a tiny
faerie, fluttering her iridescent wings in the dimness. Galden
introduced the lutina as Tsingee, and grimaced morosely
as the tiny creature rumbled its horrid voice in a greeting
to the startled prisoners.
“Please keep it down; be silent!” admonished Loris, peering out in panic at the dungeon hallway.
“And I will free you from your imprisonment,” came a
soft voice from among the companions. Koldin stepped forward to greet Broceliande. “I am part mage,” he informed
her. “The bastard son of the demon that has imprisoned
you here. If you but take my hand once we depart the city
limits, I will free you both from his eternal bondage.” He
neglected to inform them of the anguish they would feel,
deciding it would not be prudent to do so.
It was settled then, that the elf-child would be taken by
the two ghosts and the lutina, along with the goblin, through
the waste-chute to freedom, and the other inhabitants of
the cell would accompany their rescuers in finding Senna.
Thirluaine caringly wrapped Kaldorne in several blankets,
and Koldin tapped the babe’s forehead, inducing a peaceful
sleep upon the child. Then, with Thirluaine handing her
child to Valza’in, and then he to the waiting hands of the
two ghosts, Kaldorne was borne through the air of the cell,
followed closely by Tsingee and Ganasta, and then down
the dark tunnel that evolved from the crack in the floor.
Wiping away a tear of worry and gulping hard, the elf
then turned to the others, and, setting a stiff upper lip, announced that she was ready to fight her way out.
Valza’in, who had taken an instant liking to Vortigurn,
was standing now with the elfin girl, trying to communicate to her his intention to join them with his opulent eyes.
Vortigurn, after finding out that this handsome young man
spoke nothing she could understand, looked back into his
eyes, registering and reciprocating his feelings toward her.
213

DARK BECOMING
At a gesture of haste from her companions, Vortigurn
turned her back to Valza’in and, placing his hands upon her
waist, dropped to all fours, perplexing her new friend. She
pulled him down to sit upon her back, and once he had done
so, changed herself into a large wolf, her lupine figure supporting Valza’in’s weight with ease as she trotted swiftly
after the others. Grasping the situation quickly, Valza’in
sank down upon her back, holding tightly onto her shaggy
fur, his rope coiled and slung over his shoulder.
Loris and Pouldin led them out of the dungeon and into
the dark corridor, and up the stairs to the floors above. At
each level, starting with the lowermost, the two guards
unlocked the cells as quietly as they could, cautioning the
prisoners to remain silent, and informing them that they
would not be able to protect them should they decide to
escape. Many did, however, as they had hoped, allowing for
them a diversion to catch the other guards’ attention. Their
sacrifice was a necessary evil, as Koldin assured them over
and over. The small group of heroes then mounted the last
subterranean staircase to emerge upon the ground floor...
Where a small battalion of soldiers awaited them, led by a
tall woman dressed in a simple lavender gown.
“No!” cried Loris, shielding himself with his arms. “It’s
the Lady Avalzanet! All is lost!”
An explanation of his outburst was not necessary to
inform the others that this woman was the right-hand
henchwoman of Ullix—a powerful sorceress in her own
right. A burst of magical energy came flying at them from
her outstretched hand, scattering them about the waxstrewn floor of the Obelisk.
“You foolish intruders will not leave the tower alive,”
hissed the woman, her hands raised and glowing above her
head. “Prepare to offer your pitiful souls to the god of death!”
She let loose with another burst of furious power, nearly
searing them to a crisp before they dashed out of its path.
Swords raised, they now had to face the onslaught of both
the armed guards and the evil witch. As Baringer dispatched
214

DARK BECOMING
one of the guards, he tossed the fallen soldier’s sword to
Thirluaine.
“Can you use this?” he cried, eluding both a sword thrust
and a fireball at the same time.
“Easily!” exulted the elf-woman as she sliced into the
wall of soldiers with the blade, spilling enemy blood around
her. A mother foremost, she was a warrior first, and no
stranger to bloodshed and swordplay.
“Loris and Pouldin!” growled the sorceress whom they
called the Lady Avalzanet. “How disappointing. Though I
am not surprised that such valued servants of our lord
should choose to fight against our might. Haven’t you been
coddling the prisoner for all these years? I fear I have no
other option... than to kill you.” She strode uninhibited
amidst the battle toward Pouldin, who stared affixed in his
spot at the tall woman. She raised her hands in preparation
to annihilate the stunned guard when Loris hurled himself
upon his friend, knocking him away and taking his place.
“Not this day, foul witch!” he cried, thrusting his sword
into the surprised woman’s chest. Gurgling blood and
clutching at the blade, Avalzanet collapsed and fell to the
floor. With her last erg of strength, she grasped Loris’ legs
in a death grip, sending waves of magical power through
his body. Before the horrified eyes of all gathered, Loris exploded, sending blood, bone and flesh spattering all over
them.
Recovering from the shock before the others, Koldin
removed his eye-patch. He directed his sight upon each of
the guards, the beam of mage-fire slicing through their bodies, rending them in twain as it sliced through them.
Shouting to the others to make haste in leaving the
tower, Koldin pulled at Pouldin, who was rooted to the floor,
staring in disbelief at the two boots that remained of his
friend, clutched in the hands of the unconscious Avalzanet.
Koldin succeeded in dragging the stunned guard along, and
they all headed speedily for the entrance, where they met
no further resistance... yet.
215

DARK BECOMING
Galden was about to bring up the rear, when a notion
sprouted in his mind. “Hold it, Baringer!” he ordered his
friend. “Let’s take this woman with us. Maybe she can direct us to Senna! As a hostage!”
“What, man?” sputtered Baringer, staring in disbelief
at his blood spattered friend. “Are you mad? Come on!” He
grabbed Galden’s arm and pulled at him.
“No!” Galden said, pulling away and squatting down to
regard the large woman’s body. “Saris can keep her at bay
with his powers! Don’t ask me how I know, I just do! Come
on!” The foreign notion fairly burned in his mind.
The two men, carrying the unconscious form of
Avalzanet between them, brought up the rear of the fleeing
companions, emerging out into the stagnant air of the city.
Running at full pace along the main street of the town, they
passed bewildered and frightened townspeople, who dashed
inside their homes, slamming and locking their doors and
windows behind them. And still no resistance.
At the edge of the city, they were met by the two ghosts,
the two wee folk, and Kaldorne. Po was circling above, agitatedly flapping his wings in distress. Thirluaine scooped
Kaldorne from Broceliande’s arms into her own, discarding the soiled blankets as she followed the others out across
the desolate mud field to the forest beyond.
Koldin alone did not follow them immediately, as did
the two ghosts.
“Take my hands,” he whispered urgently to them after
he tore off the gloves that concealed his deformed hands.
Something about their scaly features made Broceliande and
Garid recoil. “Hurry!” he ordered, grabbing their immaterial appendages in his own.
Instantly, waves of remembrance that the two ghosts
had suppressed came cascading down upon them, recalling how the disembodied figure of Ullix had grasped their
hands in his own the instant they died, confining them in
death as he had in life to the boundaries of his domain.
Those same hands—or hands like them—were again upon
216

DARK BECOMING
their own, and the pain of memory was excruciation supreme to them.
Koldin began pulling the wailing spirits after him, their
surreal figures distorting and flickering dangerously as they
passed through the enchanted barrier that had for so many
years entrapped them. Kieran stopped his flight to look back
upon his brother. The deafening wails tore at his soul, but
fear for his beloved brother tore at his heart. “Brother!” he
cried out in alarm.
Koldin had almost succeeded in pulling them past the
barrier when an arrow came slicing through the cold air,
heading straight for and embedding itself deep within his
throat.
Screaming in agony, Koldin fell backward, pulling the
two struggling ghosts finally out of their prison.
“Koldin!” wailed Kieran, dashing back to his expiring
brother. He put his hand on Koldin’s chest, then pulled it
back with a jerk.
“No, my brother,” gurgled Koldin as blood drooled from
the corners of his mouth. “Go... now... with our friends. Your
duty is with them now. Leave me to my d-death.” Koldin
raised his trembling hand to point in the direction of their
camp. A beam of white light emanated from his finger,
shooting toward the area. “Go now. The camp is protected
from... detection. It is my last... act. Be good... brother... I
love...” His last words slid from his throat as both his elfin
and his mage eye closed, releasing his spirit to soar the heavens.
Yells of anger brought Kieran back to his senses, and he
joined the two ghosts as they sped for the forest. Too late,
he remembered to bring Koldin’s body with him. There was
no turning back now, for the surviving squadron of guards
had already swarmed upon Koldin’s lifeless body, plundering his clothes and dragging it back to the Obelisk with them.
“No! Bastards!” he screamed out, massive sobs wracking his body as he ran. His vision was blurred with the salty
tears that obliterated his sight and coursed down his face.
217

DARK BECOMING
“Koldin! B-Brother, no...” His words tore from his throat,
burning.
A hand reached behind his arm as he stumbled; a hand
that bolstered him and prodded him to keep running.
Vortigurn, her own face streaked with tears, pulled her elfin
comrade with her as they tore after their friends to the safety
of the mushroom forest.
Once Kieran, Vortigurn and the ghosts had arrived at
the camp, a dome of white energy sprouted from a sphere
floating in the air above them, completely concealing them
from their enemies’ pursuit. Falling to the ground in exhaustion, they turned to see their pursuers coming upon
their abode.
Too tired to run any further, they wielded their arms,
prepared to do further damage to the enemy ranks. But to
their utter amazement, the soldiers passed through their
enchanted camp; like phantoms they continued on through
the forest, materializing again once they emerged on the
other side of the camp.
“Where’s Koldin?” questioned Nisqué once they had
overcome their fear. She looked imploringly at Kieran as
he crumpled to the ground screaming. She stared wide-eyed
at the ghosts. Tears welled in her eyes and her lips began to
tremble. “Where’s...”
Kieran slapped his hands against his head. Hands that
were covered in his brother’s blood; hands that tore at his
hair in anguish as he cried pitifully. Baringer tried to comfort the elf, but Kieran swatted him away, jutting his elbow
into him. Nisqué’s eyes spilled their despair as she realized
the fate that befell her friend. “No,” she whimpered in a
small, small voice, swooning backwards. Galden caught her
in his arms, and she crumpled within them, sobbing hysterically.
Pouldin embraced his family in his strong arms, having
removed the blood-stained armor. Valza’in and Vortigurn
were sitting on the ground, their backs against a mushroom
stalk, arms embracing each other as they stared around
218

DARK BECOMING
them like frightened children. Azurad busily began cleaning herself and Pouldin’s armor, as well as offering water
from the stream that wound around one edge of the camp.
The warrior inside her was steeled to the brutality of warfare, and she had seen worse; but the reactions of her companions tore at her heart, and she had to busy herself to
prevent from crying as well.
Baringer, unable to comfort Kieran, joined Saris in toiling with the heavy form of Avalzanet. She was not fat, but
her great height and immense bone structure weighted the
woman down. The two gave up on trying to move her, and
Baringer straddled the sorceress while Saris placed his
hands upon her forehead.
“This woman has been mesmerized... confounded,” he
whispered incredulously as he healed with his other hand
the wound in her abdomen.
“What does that mean?” asked Baringer, still holding
her down even though she did not move.
“This woman... this child... has been put under the spell
of our adversary,” grunted the old man, placing the first
two fingers of both his hands upon the sides of her head.
She wore a tight skull-cap that came down past her ears in
the back, but this lavender cap did not prevent Saris from
probing her mind. “I can free her from Ullix’s control. She
will then be of great assistance to us. It is she...” he continued, lowering his voice to a murmer just audible enough
for Baringer to hear it. “She is the final member of our
quest.”
A small group of the companions gathered around Saris and Baringer, watching intently as the old man’s hands
glowed upon Avalzanet’s head. The woman began thrashing in pain, struggling now to free herself from Saris and
Baringer. The latter held her down, preventing her from
writhing out of Saris’ healing hands.
A black cloud began to emerge from the woman’s opened
mouth instead of the scream that she had started. It coalesced into a hideous, demonic form, leering at them
219

DARK BECOMING
angrily before it was dispelled from their encampment by
Koldin’s final protective spell... sucked up to the orb from
which the dome sprung, and then out to dissipate in the
winds. The woman instantly stopped struggling, and instead
opened her eyes to look into those of Baringer’s.
“Goodness,” she sighed dreamily as she gazed amorously
at the young man astride her supine body. “What good luck
have the gods brought me?” Her smile withered as she
looked about her. She began to tremble in fear, and clutched
at Baringer’s wrists. “Where am I?”
Apparently Avalzanet and the Lady Avalzenet were two
entirely different people; the prior being suppressed by the
presence of the latter. Hasty explanations were made. “The
last I remember I was sitting with my grandmother in her
hut. Now this?”
Once the woman was allowed to rise, she was surprised
to find herself in the sorcerous garb she now wore, and even
more surprised to find that she had been duped by Ullix
into becoming his henchwoman.
“But that’s impossible!” she blurted out as they informed
her of how long Ullix had been in power. “Why, it was just
sunrise when those soldiers came upon me... I...” The realization of the time lapse came instantly upon her. She looked
upward at the sunless sky, a tear of misery trickling down
her cheek. “Y-you mean there is... no longer... a sun?”
Hundreds of lives were lost at the hands of her alter ego,
and it was a concept not to be borne by her newly freed mind.
She simply could not accept that she had been responsible
for any carnage, especially at the levels that her memory
slowly began to recall bits and pieces of. Mentally, she was
still an innocent girl, despite physically being a woman. Saris
knew that he needed to reconcile her two lives if she would
be any help to their army at all.
Nods from the others confirmed her fears, and she
looked at Pouldin. “And I... I... I k-killed his friend?” she
blubbered, falling to her knees. Pouldin glared at her, no
sympathy at all registering upon his finely chiseled features
220

DARK BECOMING
as he stared unrelentingly at her, clutching his son close.
And so the night passed in gloom. Kieran glumly sharpened the blade of his spear and each of his arrows continually, over and over again, and not even Azurad nor Baringer
could bring him out of his depression. Even though they
had won a small victory, the battle had only just begun.
Eventually the group of would-be saviors fell into
troubled sleep, interrupted at times by wails of anguish from
Kieran, or grunts of anger as Pouldin thrashed about in his
nightmare. Only Saris and the fairy-folk remained awake,
conversing in hushed whispers with the Lady Avalzanet as
she revealed to the healer the exact position of Senna and
Ullix, and of the candle.
And in his Obelisk, in a simple room on the very ground
floor that they had fought the battle on, Ullix grinned contemptuously at Senna as she sat silent upon a stool. Her
hands were bound behind her, and her feet were tied to the
stool, which in turn was mounted to the floor by years and
years of wax build-up... from somewhere within the Obelisk. Though she wore no gag, she was silent, and did not
look at the demon before her.
A knock on the metal door of the small room coerced
Ullix to open it, admitting a sentry.
Bowing low before the demon, the man spoke in a trembling voice. “Great Mage. We have another body for you. I
think that you will...”
Ullix pushed the guard away with his hand, hurling the
man against the wall where his body slumped lifeless to the
floor.
Ullix left the room, finding lain before him on the ground
the lifeless form of his bastard son, the half-elf Koldin.

221

DARK BECOMING

a book of days
growing shorter
Chapter 19
Baringer gazed with smiling eyes upon Galden and
Nisqué approvingly, scratching at the stubble that had
amassed upon his chin since their departure from
Kaelmorde. The two were lying in each other’s embrace as
Baringer awoke that morning, as were Vortigurn and the
young man from the dungeon. Baringer was intrigued by
this boy. Wild as he was, he seemed to possess a wisdom
and innocence that people his own age had already long
since lost. Somehow Vortigurn shared that innocence, her
childlike frame and delicate skin nestled softly upon
Valza’in’s lithe body. Baringer, late sleeper and early riser
that he was, had witnessed Kieran cry himself to sleep with
the protective and uncharacteristically gentle arms of
Azurad cradling his head in her lap. What a strong woman
she was, and how capable to change her mien like that. And
Pouldin and his small family were all huddled together under a mushroom cap at the edge of the camp. Baringer assumed that the big man was already awake, but he made no
sign to prove it to the adventurer. Perhaps he did not wish
to awaken his family so early. Zeb, Ganasta, Tsingee, Po,
and Speedwell had been awake for quite some time now,
222

DARK BECOMING
and it seemed that the troll and the wee folk never did need
any sleep at all. They and the two animals were alertly keeping watch at the edges of the camp, their keen eyes taking
everything in... from the smallest gust of wind to any wild
animal that might happen to pass through Koldin’s protective field.
The others began stirring now, awakening from a much
deserved rest. Thirluaine was roused by the hungry cries of
Kaldorne, and allowed the child to feed before the others
could be disrupted from their slumber. Galden and Nisqué
followed suit, with the young barmaid hastily pushing herself away from Galden in embarassment. She immediately
fidgeted about the dwindled fire, renewing it, and cooking
various breakfast foods over it in her handy frying pan. She
was soon joined by Vortigurn and Valza’in, who had never
before seen such a wondrous cooking utensil. Pretending
as if she knew nothing of the previous night, Nisqué tried
to put on a cheerful face, showing the boy how she cooked
the meals, and allowing him to help. Ganasta and Tsingee
had gathered for them some eggs from the town, using their
stealth and abilities to amass quite a plentiful amount.
Nisqué commented aloud that the two imps must have
either enchanted the chickens or frightened them into laying so many. Either way she was able to prepare for them a
plenitude of omeletes, adding to them certain spices she
had in her pack along with various mushrooms and tubers
that the goblin and lutina had also gathered during the
night.
“Mind you, I realize how very considerate that was of
you... to think of everyone else.” Nisqué winked at them,
causing Tsingee to huff in indignation and flutter off angrily.
Once their hunger had been sated, they sat in a circle
about the fire to discuss their plan of action.
“We know that we can no longer sneak into the Obelisk,
since Pouldin is now known as a traitor,” spoke Galden. He
gulped, pausing to ensure his words were formed correctly.
223

DARK BECOMING
“I, um... therefore propose a direct attack upon the Obelisk, which is by now carefully guarded. That’s obvious.”
“It is?” questioned Azurad, glancing menacingly at him.
“And what makes you the expert?”
“With what happened yesterday, they’d be stupid not to
erect a stronger guard. It’s just common sense. Besides,”
he retorted impudently, “I’m the leader!”
“What?” gulped Azurad, drawing her eyebrows into an
angry knot. “And who made you that leader? I thought we
were all in this together! As equals!”
Galden tried to sputter a protest, when Saris raised his
hands in a gesture of silence. “I asked Galden to lead us,
and indeed he has led this quest from the very beginning
until now,” he informed the entire gathering. He lowered
his arms and replaced them to their inert position on his
lap. “And now, we must all work together as equals, as
Azurad says.”
“You chose me?” questioned Galden, his perplexity gripping his mind like a vise. “But... How?”
“I placed all the notions of this quest in your mind,
Galden,” replied the blind man, his face a blank register of
no emotion. “I made you read the book in your parents’
trunk. I caused you to hold Senna’s gown against your skin.
I brought you and your friend Baringer to us in the tavern.
Those whom we told you were following us were Ullix’s
henchmen, sent forth to prevent us, and inevitably you, from
achieving our goal. In short, I have guided your every move.”
Turning to face Zeb and Kieran, the old man continued.
“The dark knights pursued you because you betrayed a
member of the Royal Family of Erz, one of the direct bloodline of the Queen. The Crown Princess Ganydronne. Yes;
Princess. Once you came into contact with her, you were
tainted with the same magic that Mannedor blessed her
family with. There was no removing it, so continued contact with a scion of the Queen could do no further damage.”
“A scion... of the Queen...?” repeated Kieran slowly, looking about the group. His eyes rested upon Galden, recalling
224

DARK BECOMING
what Saris had said about the book and the gown. Galden
was blushing hotly, and had closed his eyes in aggravation.
“This... human... is...” He shook his head in revulsion, not
bothering to finish the sentence.
Galden was devastated by Saris’ speech. Up until now
he had thought of himself as the one in control, making the
difficult decisions and leading them past the obstacles in
their path. I’ll prove it to you, he thought to himself. I’ll
prove that I’m a leader. You’re wrong...
“I’ve no doubt of that,” said Saris with a smile, reading
his thoughts. “All our actions were in preparation for your
growth and victory. The scion of the queen is blessed by
Mannedor. Please,” he then said, “let us continue with the
plans. I do believe you were suggesting an attack upon the
Obelisk guard?”
Galden, quite shaken from his hard lesson, continued
speaking, his confidence returning to him as he witnessed
the nods of approval from his compatriots. With input from
the warriors and those privy to the Obelisk’s interior, a plan
was agreed upon by all gathered, including Azurad, who only
meant to question his leadership, not his ideas.
“I am a soldier,” she stated, “and I demand that my commander be a leader; not a child hoping to be one.” She nodded in his direction and clasped her hands before her face
in a salute of obeisance. “I will follow your command.”
A nervous pause followed her statement as everyone
peered at each other. Unable to stand the nervous tension,
Nisqué mimicked the salute and added, “I will, too.”
Their action set off a cascade of salutes from everyone
involved, not the least being Kieran, who clasped his hands
in salute but spoke nothing.
The last to join was Baringer, who had been sitting with
his friend, leaning back on his arms. “I’m not saluting you,
you arrogant ass,” he muttered, watching the raven flutter
about the mushroom tops. “I wouldn’t be here if I didn’t
believe in you. I don’t need to prove that to you with any
military salutes. You’ll always be my retarded friend.” He
225

DARK BECOMING
winked at Galden when he saw his friend balling up his fist.
“My best friend,” he added hastily, smiling absently. “But
still an idiot.”
Her memories restored by Saris, the Lady Avalzanet had
revealed to them the locations of Senna and Ullix, as well as
that of the five-century candle. She imparted to them the
importance of that calendar, and that its final flame marked
the end of an era. Saris had been able to restore the years
she had spent as the demon’s familiar, helping her to come
to terms with all that had passed when she was under Ullix’s
sway. She was all too eager to reveal what she knew to the
others, hoping in some small way to be penitent. Though
Pouldin felt no warmth toward her, the others accepted her,
questioning her as to what era was to end with the final
sputtering of the candle’s wick. To that she could not reply,
saying only that the Hooded One only spoke of the great
importance that time held.
“At... at times, he would be angry about it, and... at times
he was very sad about it, and would retreat for days to be in
the candle room in the center of the Obelisk.” She shook
her head, incredulous at her own memories, experiencing
them anew from the perspective of her previous self. “Sometimes,” she added hestitantly, “sometimes he was happy
about it. I know that sounds strange, but... but he really...
seemed to be looking forward to it. Even though it meant
his destruction. At least, that’s what I believe...”
They decided to head for the room that held the nearlyspent candle and the two powerful beings next, sending
their most powerful warriors in to retrieve Senna while the
others held off any prospective attacks from remaining
guards. With a lack of better strategy, brute force would
have to suffice. Pouldin suggested that he might be able to
convince the soldiers of the army to join forces with them,
but he said that this would be possible only if victory was
guaranteed.
“I guarantee victory then,” spoke Saris. “You can tell your
fellows that Ullix’s sworn enemy has promised that. Tell
226

DARK BECOMING
them that his own brother is waiting to destroy his evil reign.
That will carry enough credence for them.”
Only the crackling of the fire could be heard in the clearing among the giant mushrooms. The fact that Saris considered himself the Hooded One’s sworn enemy implied a
great deal of power. Claiming to be Ullix’s own sibling was
more than any of them could comprehend immediately, and
Galden and his friends wondered what his statement meant.
“Ul... Ullix,” coughed Thirluaine, startled by a cry from
her son, “is the god of death and destruction. According to
what we have learned... what you have told us...”
“And if Ullix is the god of death...” continued Azurad,
taking hold of the elf’s train of thought, “and if you are his
brother...”
“What does that make you?” demanded Baringer, finishing it. His eyes were nearly bulging from his head and a
vein in his forehead throbbed noticeably. His nostrils flared
as he breathed heavily, his confusion being replaced with
fear.
“An old man,” responded Saris in a controlled whisper.
“A very, very old man.” He looked directly into Baringer’s
eyes, mesmerizing him with his own blank ones. “Be calm.
Please.”
Vortigurn clasped Saris’ hand in hers, squeezing it tight.
“You are still my father, are you not?” Her voice trembled,
her accent sharpening her speech.
“I am. I always shall be.”
Avalzanet still retained her powerful sorcerous abilities,
which gave hope to the nervous attackers. In her current
state of mind, however, she did not retain the same control
over them, though her confidence was not shaken. She also
promised to persuade the soldiers to join ranks with them,
but that she had to do so quickly, for Galden stressed that
her assistance was imperative in freeing Senna.
“We’ll need the most powerful among us,” he said, close
to tears. The revelations were coming hard and fast at him,
and his young mind was reeling with the implications. Fear
227

DARK BECOMING
knotted up in his chest. I never meant for it to come to this,
he thought inwardly, not caring if Saris read his thoughts
or not. I’m just a kid... this is too much...
“What did you mean for this to come to?” demanded
Saris, a tint of anger in his voice. “You are here. Accept it
and move on.”
Galden swallowed hard, letting out a sigh. His head
sagged as he looked at the old man.
“My leader,” whispered Azurad, reminding him. It was
enough to strengthen his resolve, and he sat up straight,
gritting his teeth.
It was settled then, that they would carry out their plan
in only an hour’s time, giving their enemy little time to rest
from last night’s onslaught. The guards posed no great
threat, unlike their master. Thirluaine insisted upon remaining at the camp with her son, Maibin and her son,
Garid, who preferred to stay away from the battle, and
Saris, who insisted that he had to stay as well.
“But we’ll need you there with us,” implored Galden.
“You... you’re...”
“No,” replied the old man calmly. “You will need me here.
That is the way it shall be.”
As they were finished with the plotting, they sat glumly
about the fire, staring blankly at one another. Maibin, her
son, Thirluaine, her son, and Saris rose from the circle and
gathered together at the edge of the dome, where the mushroom shelter had been thrown together. Again a thick and
oppressive silence permeated the clearing.
“Why did they take my brother?” asked Kieran, suddenly
breaking the silence. All eyes turned upon him, and then to
the wizened empath, who seemed to know the answer to all
their questions, voiced or not.
“My brother Ullix is the god of death,” replied Saris, unmoving as he sat beneath the huge mushroom cap. ‘“He has
the ability to re-animate the dead. He will most assuredly
pit your undead sibling against you to test your fortitude. Be prepared for such.”
228

DARK BECOMING
“He speaks the truth,” added Broceliande as she floated
above their heads. “The Hooded One has taken many
body parts and put them together to create an army of monsters. I fear that my parents... Or at least parts of my
parents, may well be among them. If those... parts... can
have lasted all these centuries. That is the only thing I fear.”
She looked glumly at the angered elf. “But I doubt he has
taken your brother apart. He only dissects those who have
dysfunctioning parts.” The ghost did not know whether her
speech was reassuring or not, for Kieran now wore a grimly
determined face in the place of the shocked and angry one.
If she could vomit, she would have done so. If she could
have sighed or fainted, she would have.
The waiting was no longer necessary. They all declared
that they were quite ready to engage in battle. Baringer and
Galden had their swords, as did Azurad and Pouldin.
Zeboblonuk carried with him both a short-sword and a
spear, and Kieran wielded his spear and his bow. Ganasta
proudly displayed the large battle axe that he had somehow managed to conceal—impossibly by the others’ judgment—in the pocket of his trousers. Speedwell needed only
her horn and her hooves to do damage, while Po was adept
in utilizing his talons and his beak to tear at the throats of
his enemies.
Vortigurn’s fighting ability went without saying, since
she could transform herself into any and all varieties of
fighting creatures. Valza’in trusted implicitly in his long and
iron-tough rope, his animalistic growls of determination
convincing them that this wild boy from the dungeon would
be an asset to their band of warriors. Avalzanet had already
displayed to them her magical abilities, and needed no proof
of her power... only her accuracy. Tsingee once again used
Zeb as a model to show those unfamiliar with her how she
could send the troll, or any other assailant, hurtling backwards with her hazardous punch. This did not serve at all
to strengthen the ties of friendship between the two, and in
fact made Thirluaine quite sure that there was no love lost
229

DARK BECOMING
between them... but their comical antics were short lived.
Broceliande revealed to them her abilities to enshroud a
large area in her diaphanous body, and that she could wield
a light weapon in a battle now that she had a reason to. Solidifying her hand was a monumental effort of will, but she
did it. Azurad without question immediately produced a
dagger and handed it to the apparition. Nisqué, too, volunteered her services, although Galden doubted her fighting
abilities.
“You’ll see some skulls crack open once they meet the
base of my frying pan!” she exulted nervously, displaying
the cast-iron skillet above her head. “I can hold my own in
any battle! You just wait and see, you... you... you man!”
She lowered her weapon, to the resigned and approving nod
of their leader.
Once again, they set forth from their camp towards the
Obelisk of Darkness.
Emerging from the protective canopy of the fungal forest, they could easily see the entire city spread out below
them; their current altitude being slightly higher than that
of the town. Far in the distance was the northern sea, though
it was too far off to be seen on the horizon.
Large battalions of what appeared to be soldiers were
positioned all around the walled city, within and without,
and another huge squadron was planted in front of the
Obelisk’s entrance. Such was an example of the power
weilded by the corruption that had turned this world black
with night.
With Galden in the lead, followed closely behind by his
close friend and companion Baringer, they trudged imposingly down the hillside to advance upon the first obstacle to
the Obelisk. Their small group against a vast army. It was
hopeless.
It was now that Kieran, Zeb, and Ganasta realized that
they were very much a part of this war, and that their presence had been expected and prepared for early on in the
adventure. As Saris had said, the dark knights and shadow
230

DARK BECOMING
dragons were the undead minions of Ullix, hunting them
specifically. And there before them were these shades of
former human, goblin, troll and elfin bodies, only the skeletal remains of those whose original flesh was too emaciated or decayed to be taken apart and reused by the god of
death. The dark knights astride their shadow dragons
awaited their arrival with the fire of Ullix’s evil burning in
their empty eye sockets. Waiting for these infidels to fall
into their awaiting arms of death.
But Galden and his companions were prepared for these
evils. “Let’s go,” he ordered, breaking into a run. With shouts
of anger, the rest of his companions joined him, their cries
shattering the eerie silence.
They met the horrendous wraiths with swords raised
and determination strong. The swordsmen lashed out with
their sabers, striking heavy blows upon the volatile creatures. More than once crunching and cracking sounds were
heard as Vortigurn turned into a huge dragon and flattened
the emaciated knights under her huge feet. Her fiery
dragon’s breath charred the remains of these beings, roasting them like nuts over the fire. Then weapons such as
Nisqué’s frying pan or Ganasta’s battle axe would make
short work of dispatching these brittle things, sending their
dust and shard remains falling to the ground.
But the dark knights were not without strength of their
own. In numbers far too great to count, they, too, slashed
at the companions with their weapons, while the various
beasts that made up the shadow dragons bit, kicked, and
otherwise fought them as well. Gashes and cuts, scrapes and
bruises were all too common on the faces, chests, arms and
legs of those seeking Ullix’s destruction.
Without warning, a beam of purple light swelled from
the center of their party, and spread outward like ripples in
water. As the light touched the dark knights and their steeds,
the diabolic life animated those shells left them, and they
fell unmoving to the ground, charring the earth about them
and littering the area with the rusted armor and weapons.
231

DARK BECOMING
“You know what to do,” ordered Galden to Vortigurn in
dragon form. To ensure that none of the skeletal remains
could be re-animated after Avalzanet’s death beam cut them
down, they had to be destroyed beyond salvage. As the invaders cleared out, the dragon’s massive scaly feet came
down upon the piles of the dead, pounding them into ash.
By all means, the battle had just begun. They had just
gained entry into the city walls when another ghastly sight
met them. Scattered here and there among the houses and
streets were the torn and bloodied bodies of some of the
townspeople. . . Children and adults alike, with no regard
to age or status. Galden, Baringer, Azurad, and Nisqué recognized with rising revulsion the slaughtered bodies of children that they had seen playing with each other in the
streets, and the older residents of the town that were kind
enough to give them a handout when they acted as beggars.
And now, razed among the carnage, their kindness could
never be repaid.
“I now am forever indebted to you, good people,” spoke
Pouldin to his aghast companions, “for if you had not taken
Maibin and my son with us, they would be as dead as our
neighbors!”
The small group of invaders moved along the street toward the Obelisk looming above them. They huddled together for protection; but the comfort of their company was
also of great import. The winds blew from the north, carrying with them the frigid cold of the frozen sea.
“I d-don’t remember it being th-this c-cold... It’s tt-oo
quiet,” whimpered Nisqué, huddling her shivering body
close to Galden’s. “Is... is everyone dead?”
“I don’t believe so,” replied Avalzanet as she strode confidently at the head of the group. “Ullix needs people to do
the harvesting and other work about the town. He would
not kill all of his subjects. He... he could not.”
“Where are these monsters you told us about?” asked
Ganasta of Broceliande. The ghost shook her head unknowingly at the goblin, but again Avalzanet spoke.
232

DARK BECOMING
“We are but on the edge of the town. I know Ullix, and I
know that he is prepared for our arrival. You can be quite
sure that his monsters are scattered about the houses and
alleys. The closer we get, the more we’ll be faced with.” She
looked over her shoulder at Galden, frowning as she did so.
“Remember—he’s expecting this. He... he wants this.”
“Why should we believe you?” demanded Pouldin in a
harsh whisper, glaring balefully at the sorceress. “You were
Ullix’s right hand woman, and you killed Loris!”
“You should believe me because I am no longer under
Ullix’s enchantment, and because you have no choice!” she
snapped. She was still the young woman who was raised on
a fruit orchard, who attended dances and social gatherings
with her friends; who respected the grandmother she lived
with and knew how to use a weaving loom and cross-stitch.
His harsh words pained her, but she bit her lip. Continuing, she added, “The human guards will be the ones positioned around the Obelisk. Ullix will have done so because
he knows we will try to convince them to join forces with
us. By having them positioned at the base of the tower and
the monsters around them, there’s more of a chance for
these monsters to prevent us from gaining entrance to his
Obelisk, and convincing his back-up human army from
allying themselves with us.”
“Is that all that we should expect?” asked Galden warily.
“I mean, there might be something you left out...”
“Why?” demanded Baringer, disregarding Galden’s
question. “Why is he fighting us if he wants this to happen?
I just don’t understand this.”
Avalzanet raised one of her eyebrows and regarded
Galden and Baringer not with contempt, but not without it.
“We are well prepared, and I have told you what I know and
what I expect. If there is anything else that I feel is important to this mission, I will reveal it to you.”
“Sounds to me like she’s still got a little bit of that Ullix
nastiness left in her,” whispered Ganasta to Tsingee. The
lutina giggled monstrously and nodded her tiny head.
233

DARK BECOMING
“Then we’d best be on our way,” sighed Galden, taking a
deep breath and striding forward into the silent town. They
could see the Obelisk looming ahead of them, beckoning
for them to come nearer and taste its poison. Enticing them
to draw near, so that it could sting them with the barbs that
waited uneasily at its base.
“Why should we even fight?” demanded Baringer in a
whisper, but his complaint was ignored, and he fell silent.
Silently the agitated group of heroes and heroines slunk
forward, adhering themselves closely to the sides of the
buildings, their weapons and shields raised to defend themselves. They traveled in a pack, with the stronger and heavier
armed holding up the lead and the rear, while those considered less powerful or more valuable to their company
stayed toward the center of the group.
And then something hurled itself violently out of the
window of the house they were slithering by, scattering
them as it lashed its taloned appendages at them. Po immediately took to the air, as did Tsingee. The others
reformed their band and placed themselves in a protective
circle.
The thing stopped lashing out from where it had fallen,
and with deliberate slowness rose to its full height, revealing a disgusting and distorted assailant. Its body was entire
patchwork, with black and rotting body parts crudely mismatched with others. For a torso, the thing had the muscular chest and midsection of a male elf. Although it was darkened with rot as the rest of the body was, it was pale in comparison to the black and snarling head resting upon its neck.
The left half of the head was that of what looked to have
once been a young woman’s, while the other half meshed
onto it was that of an old male goblin’s. The two halves were
tied together with some dark twine that wrapped around it
tightly, leaving harsh creases in the skin. The eyes were rotted, but the bulbous masses still swiveled in the sockets,
glaring directly at them. But by far the most formidable
aspects of this patchwork monster were its arms and legs.
234

DARK BECOMING
It had seven of them, ranging in variety from those of a
human to the hind legs of a dragon. They were joined to the
elfin torso on its sides, enabling it to scuttle toward them
like a centipede and attack and evade the thrusts of their
weapons.
It attacked them straight away, giving them no time for
their shock to register, parrying blows assailed toward it,
each one missing its target. A frying pan managed to thwack
the side of its head, sending it sideways somewhat and loosening the twine, but none the worse for wear. Likewise other
weapons fell at it, not causing much damage.
This one creature would have been enough to keep them
in battle for hours had it not been for the two companions
that had taken flight. Po fluttered wildly into the thing’s
face, successfully removing with his talons both the human’s
eye and a large portion of its neck that fell away when the
twine came loose. The creature brushed Po away with its
flailing arms as the head fell sideways, but the raven’s attack created enough of a diversion for Ganasta’s battle-axe
to chop into the thing’s back, while Tsingee planted a hurtling punch into the creature’s midsection.
The axe came through the creature’s body from the
lutina’s impact, and it sailed backward, its body meeting
the stone wall of a house nearby. It shattered the building,
sending the rocks and bricks to the ground. The blow shattered the monster’s body as well, the various parts falling
apart as if the force that held them together was destroyed
with the creature’s second death.
Their hearts beating madly and their bodies mired with
the ichor that flowed from the monster’s veins, they brushed
what mess they could from themselves and continued onward.
“This is going to take some getting used too,” muttered
Baringer to Galden after they had successfully dispatched
several other similar beings before they had come to the
base of the Obelisk. By that time, they were sorely fatigued
from battle, and wore upon them several cuts and scrapes.
235

DARK BECOMING
But they were determined to continue.
To Avalzanet’s dismay, they were not greeted by the
waiting army of human guards that she had expected. The
men were there, but instead of standing ready with their
weapons drawn, each and everyone of them were sprawled
upon the ground, several of them missing heads, arms, and
legs... quite dead.
“No use in convincing these folks to join us,” shrugged
Ganasta, picking his way across the fallen bodies to the open
door of the Obelisk.
“Wait, goblin,” pleaded the former aide of the evil mage.
“Please do not dash inside. You cannot know what awaits
us. This must be a trap! The Hooded One would not set up
such a formidable defense and then just slaughter them and
invite us in!”
“What else can we do?” asked the goblin, a disturbing
serious look on his face. “You said so yourself. ‘He’s looking forward to this’, right?” His logic was simple, and did
not stand to be argued with. Turning back to the Obelisk,
he continued into the door, followed by the others.
Ganasta, Tsingee, Po and Zeboblonuk found themselves
in a vast subterranean cavern. Try as they might, they could
not find any trace at all of their companions. The four of
them were alone in this black and sodden cave. The walls
and ceiling that rose high above them sweated the same
rancid ichor that composed the blood of the monsters they
had attacked outside. As it dripped into large puddles on
the cavern’s floor, the four oddities had to maneuver to avoid
being splattered by the mysterious goo.
“What in the world are we doing here?” questioned the
rumbling voice of the pixie. “We entered the Obelisk, but
I didn’t expect this! What sort of enchantment are we
under?”
“The evil mage has tried to separate us,” growled the
troll, dodging another drop of slime. “There must be a way
to get to him. This looks like some maze... I think I see
236

DARK BECOMING
another tunnel leading off somewhere at the other side of
this cave.”
“He’s delaying us,” murmured Tsingee.
“Tunnel!” croaked the raven above them. He darted past
drops of ichor as he flew toward the cave entrance. The others followed suit, and soon came upon the tunnel. Entering
it, they would have been lost had it not been for their obvious differences from normal humans. Their eyes, being
those of a raven, two wee folk, and the animalistic ones of
the troll, enabled them to see somewhat in the tenebrous
tunnel. Avoiding the slime that drooled from the rocky walls,
they soon emerged upon another cavern similar to the one
that they had first encountered upon their entrance to the
Obelisk.
“This is getting us nowhere!” shouted Zeb at the top of
his lungs upon emerging from a tunnel into the seventeenth
cavern.
“The perfect trap to prevent us from getting to him,”
muttered Ganasta under his breath, but loud enough for
his companions to hear. “Our abilities are useless here.
Tsingee can’t punch a monster to pieces. I can’t attack anyone with my axe, and you can’t kill anything with your weapons, either. We’re stuck.”
•••
Kieran, Broceliande, and Azurad found themselves in a
vast, burning desert. Though light bombarded them from
above, no sun was visible. This was a red, evil light, burning them as it seared the sands below their feet.
“What happened?” stuttered Azurad, catching herself
from falling backward into the hot sand. Her eyes burned
and she was as blinded as her companions. None of their
visions had adjusted yet, and they were completely disoriented.
“In all the centuries I have spent in the Obelisk, I have
never come across anything close to this!” muttered
Broceliande, in awe at her surroundings. She had been able
237

DARK BECOMING
to open her eyes sooner than the others, unable to feel the
pain associated with the sudden blaring light.
“We are in an enchantment!” blurted Kieran, forcing his
eyes open to gaze at the desert. “Can’t you tell? Nothing
like this exists in our world! Open your eyes! This is not
real!”
“Yes,” whispered Azurad. “A place like this does exist...
or... it did.”
“What do you mean, woman?” demanded the elf of the
warrior.
“We are in the Monshera Desert.”
•••
Baringer, Avalzanet, and Pouldin found their new location once they entered the portal of the Obelisk to be that of
a small, blackened room. The burnt remains of an immense
candle’s wick lay embedded in a thick layer of wax that covered the floor. Beyond them, at the other side of the room
from which they entered was situated a door.
“This doesn’t look like the Obelisk...” murmured
Baringer, looking about him and craning his neck backward
to look at the low ceiling. “I thought it was bigger...”
“The guard and I have spent many years in the tower,”
spoke Avalzanet in an awed whisper. “But... Never have I...
Wait!” she cried, in mid-sentence. “Somehow Ullix has
worked an enchantment upon us. That would explain the
absence of our allies. We have been teleported to a room in
the Obelisk... And judging by the amount of wax upon the
floor, I’d say we’re extremely close to the eternal candle.”
“But that’s the candle, isn’t it?” demanded Baringer,
pointing to the mess on the floor.
“Fool. Look at the ceiling. How could the candle have
been in a room this small?” Baringer shrugged, not knowing any better.
“What’s so imporant about being merely close to the
eternal candle?” Pouldin wanted to know. “Our goal here
238

DARK BECOMING
is to defeat Ullix.”
“We also set out,” clarified Baringer, “Galden and I, to
find the Orb of Knowledge, too. He and I never intended to
wage a full-scale battle against the god of death. If we’d
known that...”
“But it’s too late to be concerned with if,” said Avalzanet.
“We must think of the present now, and of what we must
do with it. The sphere is somewhere in the Obelisk, but to
find it, we must defeat Ullix, and where the candle is, so is
the Hooded One. If you want to rescue Senna, then come
with me!”
“I notice that the wax—and the dirt within it—comes
from underneath that door,” said Pouldin, pointing at the
door opposite their position. “Perhaps if we open the door,
we can find this candle and confront Ullix. The others might
already be there fighting him, and we could just stand here
and not know.”
“Don’t you think we would hear it?” demanded Baringer.
“Not with his magic preventing us from doing so,” whispered Avalzanet.
“But it may also be a trap,” added Baringer, addressing
the guard. “Maybe Ullix is waiting for us to open that door
so he can fry us and make us into dark knights or take us
apart and make monsters out of us.’’
“Ullix may not realize that he no longer controls me,”
mused Avalzanet. “Perhaps if I lead...”
“Maybe he does know that you’ve been cleansed of him,”
argued Baringer back.
“But my magic, and your might... We could fight him,”
suggested the sorceress.
“The three of us don’t have a chance against him. We
need the others.” Baringer glumly stared at the door. The
simple, flimsy fibers that made up the rotted wood were
the only things holding them from going through it. They
could have easily torn right through the fragile boards, but
they did not. It sufficiently held the three people back from
doing their duty.
239

DARK BECOMING
•••••
A large, stone sun-dial poked its form out of Baringer’s
newly plowed field. Speedwell pranced angrily about it, her
horn menacingly scraping against it, sending sparks into
the earth below it. Galden and Nisqué looked upon the spectacle in wonderment. They had expected to enter the ground
floor of the Obelisk, not the mushroom field back in
Kaelmorde.
“Where are we?” asked Nisqué, clinging to Galden’s
arms. She looked into Galden’s eyes with her big, brown
soft ones. Her lips trembled and the pan she held fell to the
ground.
Galden returned her look, shaking his head. “I think
we’re... we’re back in Kaelmorde, where I come from. This
is Baringer’s field. He... he just plowed it, and he showed
me that stone thing that he dug up.” He pointed to the sundial. “He said something about how Speedwell... How it agitated her. But... How did we get here?”
“I’m afraid,” she said, laying her head upon his shoulders as he held her close. She put her hands to his chest and
into the rough cloth of his shirt. Galden tried to pull back
from her advances, but found himself charmed by the young
woman standing so close to him, and the presence of the
ivory unicorn did something to him... Made him feel
pinpricks of arousal all over his body as the downy hair that
covered the skin of his arms rose to goosebumps.
“You know,” whispered Nisqué alluringly, “People say
that unicorns bring love...” She had succumbed to the spell
woven over them, though Galden tried hard to resist. She
was oblivious of her own actions, Galden realized.
Galden could not bring himself to divert his attention
from the girl clinging to his body and the unicorn prancing
in front of them. Slowly he raised his hands to her hair, running his fingers through it as he pressed it against his nose
to smell the soft fragrance she wore.
240

DARK BECOMING
Nisqué had fully unbuttoned Galden’s shirt now, and
pulled it and the vest off his shoulders and let them fall to
the dirt. She ran her fingers over his chest and stomach,
kissing him over and over again on his face, shoulders, and
chest. He in turn pulled the blouse from her body, his fingers rummaging over her soft skin, finding places only a
woman had, and that he had never before encountered. He
pressed his lips against hers, and their world exploded with
passion, sending them to the ground, the cool soil that would
one day hopefully bear the fruits of Baringer’s labors.
Speedwell ceased her prancing to gaze upon the slowly
writhing figures on the ground before her, unable to call to
them... Unable to stop them from falling into Ullix’s trap.
•••
A pit of fire opened up under Valza’in and Vortigurn as
they plummeted through the darkness. The flames lapped
hungrily upward at them, and they could already feel the
unbearable heat.
“Val!” screamed Vortigurn. The boy had been falling
right beside her, and was groping frantically to get to her.
The fall had separated them, and they were now streaming
downward several meters apart.
Vortigurn shifted her form to that of a winged great cat.
She tried to maneuver herself closer to her new friend, but
was unable to do so successfully with their velocity and the
narrowness of the pit.
Valza’in, hastily tossing the rope from his shoulder, began to swing it beside him, the fall impeding his efforts.
But with a mighty throw he managed to get the rope within
reach of Vortigurn’s mouth, and she clamped her jaw shut
upon it. She then flapped her mighty wings frantically, pulling herself and Valza’in upward from the hungry pyre
below them. The flames lapped at his heels, but Valza’in
deftly climbed up the rope with the speed and agility of
desperation, and then onto the great cat’s broad shoulders,
241

DARK BECOMING
taking special care to avoid the large wings. He wrapped
his legs tightly about her large body, and with great effort
coiled the rope around his shoulder again.
They were about to fly up and out of whatever pit they
had fallen into when the winged tiger and her rider encountered the ceiling of the pit. Vortigurn stopped her ascent
immediately, and circled in the air below the rocky dome,
pawing at the rocky walls to keep from falling downward.
Unable to speak in her current form, she growled at the ceiling, gnashing her fangs menacingly at it. Val understood
her intentions, and hurled his lariat at a rocky outcropping
that jutted from the pit’s wall. He then swung upward and
over to it, perching precariously on the ledge. As he watched,
Vortigurn’s body glowingly shifted into that of an incredibly immense serpent, whose coils kept her from falling
downward by pressing against the walls. With her serpentine head, she began pressing upward with all her might,
causing small cracks to appear. Valza’in shielded his face
with one hand. He quickly tied one end of the rope to his
waist, and the other to the serrated tail of the serpent— to
which he clung to with all his strength. The serpent’s head
broke through the rocky ceiling, sending a shower of rocks
and dust to the fiery pit below them. The force of her pressure sent the two flying upward, and Vortigurn had to press
her coils against the walls as she did before, to protect herself and Valza’in from falling into the lava that awaited
below.
She could not see an opening above her, but she kept
struggling upward, going through the same routine with
her serpentine body to eliminate the several barriers that
presented themselves as they ascended. Just how deep below the surface were they?
•••
Kieran refused to move from the spot in which they
stood.
242

DARK BECOMING
“I am well aware of how hot you believe the sand is,” he
replied to Azurad’s complaints. But he just squatted upon
the dune and stared after the fleeting form of Broceliande.
They had sent the ghost to scout out the area, and to see
what dangers might lurk beyond the dunes and in the heavy
fumes that steamed forth from the hot sand.
“If we let down our guard, we could be attacked at any
time out here, and no one would know what became of us.”
She had pulled a cloak about herself, despite the intense
heat. The skin of her arms and the back of her neck was
blistering from the intense light. “We can keep our guard
up as we travel!” hissed the warrior woman, pacing nervously about the sand.
“And if we travel off in the distance, we might become
separated from the exact area where we were transported
from. No. Only the ghost can safely scout the desert.”
Azurad angrily folded her arms over her chest, huffing
and puffing about the injustices of having an obstinate elf
to keep her company. But she also realized that she could
not press too hard with this elf, for he had just suffered
through one of the worst torments imaginable, and might
be volatile toward her should she provoke him too much.
Their patience was soon rewarded. Broceliande came
upon them so suddenly that they were startled by her
appearance. She had a look of worry inscribed upon her
gaunt features, and her eyes relayed a message of urgency.
“There are several monsters heading this way,” she
moaned, turning her head back to see if they still followed
her. She kept transferring the dagger from hand to hand,
willing herself to remain solid enough not to drop it, let alone
weild it.
“Monsters?” repeated the elf, standing and stretching
to get the ache of dry heat out of his bones. “Like those that
we confronted in the city?”
“The same,” replied the ghost. “And they’re right behi...”
Her warning was interrupted as a dark, hairy figure
came hurtling through her ethereal body, its sharp claws
243

DARK BECOMING
extended for the two warrior’s throats. It had appeared from
nowhere, and they were unprepared for the sudden arrival.
They jumped aside just in time to avoid the creature’s flailing claws; but one such talon caught in Kieran’s hair, pulling him down to the sand. Azurad instantly chopped off the
hand that was now reached for the elf’s neck, and then
turned her blade upon the creature s neck. She severed this
instantly, expecting the monster to fall back dead,
“Good lords on high!” wailed Broceliande from above,
her wails distracting them from their current situation. She
was pointing frantically at the monster’s severed head and
back to the second head that sat further back upon its hairy
shoulders. The two turned to regard the creature, looks of
disgust and revulsion upon their faces. Upon the burly body
of a fat humanoid, with several different arms attached to
it, as well as legs and other appendages, sat the emaciated
and rotting head of an old woman, while the one that had
been just severed and lay on the sand was that of an old
man. Although both were very far gone, they could still recognize the fine facial structure of the female’s skull and the
one piercing eye that remained in the male’s as those of
Broceliande’s. Her parents.
The creature leaped to its feet, its arms and claws lashing out at them. Though the ghost was too petrified with
fear to move—and seemed to begin to dissipate—Azurad and
Kieran fought valiantly against it, cutting off the arms with
her sword and piercing its tanned hide with his spear and
his arrows. With a gurgling roar of anguish, the undead
monster finally fell to the ichor-stained sand, the body parts
that remained upon it falling off as the magic that held it
together and brought it infernal life was drained forcefully
from it.
Sighing with relief, the two warriors sluggishly dug a
hole in the sand to bury the filthy remains, at the urgings of
Broceliande. Once the two heads, along with an arm that
Broceliande had insisted was her father’s were buried, the
look of anguish faded from her face.
244

DARK BECOMING
“They are with peace now,” she sighed, her graceful but
ethereal body undulating in the slight wind like a banner.
Their respite was short lived. For as they were looking
at the ghost, a clawed, scaly hand cut through the very air
behind her. It caught the ghost about her neck, somehow
able to choke the spirit. Unable to pass through the hand
that held her, Broceliande began to pull at it. Her face grew
thinner and more gaunt, and her entire being began to shake
and fade. She then, somehow, even though being a ghost,
fainted and fell to the sand where her body once again coalesced into her original form.
The body of Koldin stepped forward through a fold in
the very air to greet his one-time companions.
“Grtngs, dur brzzhr... valood warrer,” he gurgled. They
could see the deep gash in his throat, the blood having long
since coagulated upon it, as did the blood that had drooled
from his mouth, his eyes, and his ears. He had both gloves
and his eye-patch removed, and presented to them a truly
horrific sight.
“Hw quint its to finlly see you agn,” spoke that which
was once Koldin. As he spoke, reminders of the blood that
used to course through his veins and saliva from his mouth
drooled in rivulets from the open gash in his throat, as well
as the corners of his mouth. He had pointed his hand directly at them, the clawed finger beginning to glow with the
mage-power that somehow still remained in his dead body.
“Pty thut t mst end luk thsss.” A beam of green light burst
forth from the digit, searing past them as they dashed out
of its path.
Kieran, though distraught and tired, managed to continually evade the undead’s attacks, though he could never
bring himself to defend himself against what once was his
brother. He steely gritted himself, tensing his entire body
for defense, and avoiding to look directly at the undead.
All the memories of their life together came rushing back
upon him now. All the times when his mutant brother would
be teased because of his being the bastard son of a mage,
245

DARK BECOMING
and how he, too, was teased as the “brother of the bastard!”
All the times when Koldin would “punish” him for being
bad. He had done that so many times! And it would always
embarrass him whenever Koldin would do it in public, and
then treat him as if he had never harmed him, so that other
people would be sympathetic to him, and not Kieran. Anger began to seethe within the elf’s soul as he darted back
and forth with Azurad to avoid the fire hell-bent upon them
from the dead elf-mage’s fingers.
Kieran raised his sword to smite his evil brother and
kill him, but stopped. He realized that this was his beloved
brother that he was trying to kill. The brother that had so
many times comforted him in times of trial... When his wife
and his two daughters were killed in the war... When their
people were slaughtered and they were the only two left to
escape with their lives. He remembered all the times when
his brother, Koldin, had saved them from perils, and of how
his brother loved him, and how he loved his brother. The
intimacy they shared was peculiar to them alone, and
though it seemed aberrant to others, it was their special
bond. And he realized that this creature was not his brother.
He realized this as he finally brought the blade down upon
the undead thing’s head, slicing it full down the middle, cutting it in half, and letting the blood and other things inside
it splatter out and slither to the sand. Boiling in the heat.
“You have done well,” hissed a soft, gentle... almost
hypnotic voice. Kieran, Broceliande, and Azurad looked up
to see the demonic façade of Ullix leering at them from
beneath his hood. “And you are punctual. Your mother
would have been proud of you. Had she survived your
brother’s birth.”
They were standing in the ground-floor room of the
Obelisk. In it were the still-burning remains of a gigantic
candle that spread its heat in waves about them, a regal
woman bound to a chair, and the god of death standing before them.
A rumbling noise from below them caused them to wit246

DARK BECOMING
ness a giant snake emerge from a hole newly broken in floor
close by, instantly reverting to the shape of Vortigurn, with
Valza’in pulled up behind her. From that very same hole
flew Po and Tsingee, with Zeboblonuk and Ganasta clambering up out of it behind them.
A door at one side of the vast chamber opened, admitting Baringer, Avalzanet, and Pouldin, while Speedwell, with
Nisqué and Galden riding upon her back came charging in
through the front entrance.
“You have all done well,” repeated the demonic voice
from the Hooded One. He turned about to regard each one
in particular. “And you are all here at the right time.”
They all were facing him, surrounding him in a full circle,
their weapons drawn, their battle stances poised. “You have
each overcome your own special obstacle. For that I will
reward you. You may all join forces with me, and become
the most powerful and feared people on our black planet! It
is time for you to become the new gods of Harlus.”

247

DARK BECOMING

...of valor
and sacrifice
Chapter 20
It had cost Speedwell a small amount of dignity to shove
the sweating bodies of Galden and Nisqué apart with her
hooves, and only by pointing her horn at Galden’s midsection and aiming her hooves at Nisqué’s shins did the
unicorn prevent the two from falling further under Ullix’s
enchantment. At horn-point, she forced them to don their
clothes, and then, with them upon her back, ran blindly for
the sun-dial. Her sharp horn was aimed directly at the flat
tableau atop it as she gallopped madly across the muddy
field. The instant she made impact with it, they found themselves in the Obelisk.
Vortigurn and Valza’in relentlessly and wearily continued their perilous upward ascent. For them there was no
change; only continuous and repetitive upward movement,
tiring them out. And soon emerged in the same room.
Zeb, Tsingee, Ganasta, and Po did the same, continuing
onward untiringly avoiding the slime that threatened to sear
them as it fell.
Baringer, Avalzanet, and Pouldin finally decided that to
open the door was their only chance to find their opponent,
and did so.
248

DARK BECOMING
They were all clustered about Ullix now, staring in
disbelief at the utter evil that stood before them, propositioning them to join with him in his evil ways.
With his arms folded across his chest, the demon now
facing them stared at each individual, looking into the
depths of their souls, looking through their earthly forms
to see the spirit that dwelt within.
“Avalzanet,” spoke the honeyed voice to the sorceress.
“You were once my follower, my consort. You may become
so... once more.” On cloven hooves he strode toward her,
extending his hand as if to lead her away.
“Never,” replied the tall woman nervously, staring with
disbelief at the creature to whom she had been at one time
subservient to. She backed away from him, stumbling over
piles of dried wax as she did so.
Ullix sighed and jutted out his lower jaw. “Then I fear I
must remove the spell of immortality I placed upon you.
Should you decide to continue this foolish spat, you will
wither and die at the ripe old age of five-hundred and nineteen years. I do not believe that to be an especially pleasant
experience. The flesh will fall from your bones as you live
to feel every pain of dying. Your bones will scrape against
each other as your youth fades.” His voice rose higher as
she clenched his outstretched hand into a fist and shook it
toward her. “Your body will fail, and you will feel it all!”
Avalzanet shuddered in fear, realizing that Ullix’s threat
was real. She could once again be feared and worshipped,
live forever in the Obelisk, backed by the very god of death.
Never to see the sun again. “I would rather die in agony
than spend eternity in darkness with you,” she cried, her
face twitching in anguish as she sealed her own doom. A
solitary tear fell from her eye and coursed down her cheek.
“I’d rather die...”
“So be it,” acquiesced the Hooded One. He lowered his
clenched fist to his side, tearing away from her the life
essence he had given her centuries ago. She could feel the
essence rended from her, and the pain dropped her to her
249

DARK BECOMING
knees. She clutched at her chest, already feeling weaker by
the second. “Did he take my magic?” she wondered, then
fell into a fit of coughing.
Ullix then turned to Tsingee, Ganasta, and Zeboblonuk.
“The three of you have no business with human affairs. Your
kind has lived unharassed in this world. Why do you meddle
with me? When have I meddled in the afairs of the fairy
folk?”
“You are evil!” growled the pixie, punching the palm of
her hand menacingly. “And we don’t like you!” Her wings
thrummed as she darted about the chamber, flying dangerously close to him then speeding away.
“The light you stole was our light too,” insisted Ganasta
darkly.
“Ah, how simple,” laughed the demon, sighing. “It was
not I who took the light, if you recall your history lessons.
Pity that your innocence will be destroyed along with the
rest of your friends... The ones who are foolish enough to
defy me. You,” he said, pointing to Kieran, “you can once
again see your brother alive, and not re-animated as he was
when you fought him. I will grant that gift to you... In return for your obedience and allegiance. What say you?”
“You cannot tempt me,” Kieran whispered through his
clenched teeth. He stared at the cloven hooves that showed
beneath the demon’s robes. He wondered what Ullix looked
like, but dashed the thought from his mind. The stagnant
blood of his brother still stained the blade of his unsheathed
sword, which was aimed directly at the black-hearted monster.
Azurad and Pouldin proved to be just as obstinate as
their fellow warrior. “Don’t speak to me,” hissed the warrior woman as she glared angrily. “Do not!”
“The lovely Broceliande,” soothed the unsettling voice,
passing them by. “Do you remember the day of your death?”
Broceliande was unfazed and hovered silently with her
companions. “I remember it,” spoke Ullix. “I remember the
exact date it happened. I remember how the guards tied
250

DARK BECOMING
your lovely, long hair into a knot and nailed it to the door. I
remember how they tore off your clothes. They did not remove them, they tore them off. Do you recall how it hurt
your shoulders and your back? I remember how they
pressed their heavy, dirty, sweating bodies on top of you,
crushing your ribs and bones, cutting and scratching your
smooth skin... Do you remember that day?” He pointed to
a large disc embedded in the dried wax that had been
scooped up long ago and piled against the far wall. “It was
in that year,” he explained. “I made sure to leave that wax
here. You need not thank me for keeping that waste here. It
was the least I could do for you.” He folded his hands across
his chest and continued. “The wax is normally removed and
discarded. But that wax. That wax... that wax can restore
your body and your life. Do you want it?”
The ghost remained unmoved by his talk. The only
movement from her shimmering body was passing the dagger from one hand to the other as she struggled to keep herself corporeal.
He then looked at Baringer, Po, Galden, and Nisqué.
“You four have so much to lose,” he said to them, holding
out his hands comfortingly. “I can tell you all you wish to
know, I can answer all your questions. I can give you the
power and the fame that you have always sought after. You
will rule alongside me from the very top of the Obelisk!
Everything you see will be yours! Come with me! Join me!”
Galden realized that the demon’s temptations were not
his only weapons. He knew that the creature was just wasting time, using it to read their minds and discover their
weaknesses. But why was he delaying? What was his intention? Did he want to be defeated, or did he want to defeat
them? Already he could notice slight signs of aging upon
the fair face of Avalzanet. But he said nothing, nor did his
companions. The demon had spoken to nearly all of them
now, but his gaze almost purposefully passed over the forms
of Valza’in, Vortigurn, and Speedwell. Why was that? Why
did he skip them, and not us? What’s so different with...?
251

DARK BECOMING
The mage seemed to sense Galden’s concern, and turned
to the three that he had previously omitted. As the Hooded
One glared uneasily at them, the companions could see the
monster wring his hands beneath the folds of his vast
sleeves.
“You can have all the riches in the world!” he exulted to
Vortigurn and Val together. “I will give you entire kingdoms
to rule over... To play with as you see fit! You only need to
ally yourselves with me!”
Valza’in raised his eyebrow in confusion. He looked at
Vortigurn and shook his head, not being able to understand
the demon’s words, but comprehending the evil one’s
intentions. His gaze returned to the bound woman sitting
in the chair—his mother. She looked back at him, and shook
her head, “no”. He turned to Vortigurn and nudged her to
speak their shared query.
“Why?” asked the elf simply, staring with wide, innocent eyes at the mage. Her youthful companion copied her
blank stare, agitating the mage.
“Because you can be better than these infidels you travel
with! You can become all powerful and crush those simpletons beneath your feet! What say you?”
The two remained silent, but Speedwell snorted in distaste and stomped her hooves on the dirty wax.
Ullix could see that his threats and promises would gain
him no ground. He did not need them anyway. The time
was drawing near. The time. These minuscule insects would
not be swayed by temptation, nor by threat. Of course, the
Lady Avalzanet was fighting hard with her sorcerous powers to avert the onslaught of age. He allowed her that much.
It would amuse him to see her attempt to fight him, despite
the ravages of time. She was perspiring with concentration,
but otherwise seemed unfazed.
“Well then,” sighed the mage, feigning admittance of
defeat. “I believe you will just have to battle me. What a
shame that you do not agree to my terms. Your lives would
be so much better off!” Soon. Very soon. The time was near.
252

DARK BECOMING
“Ah, well. Come then. Be my guests.” He opened his arms
wide, welcoming their onslaught.
Galden looked curiously at the mage, and then at each
of his companions. What terrible fate was he leading them
into? He could not remember what Avalzanet had said. Did
she say he wanted to be defeated? Or was it that he was
anticipating the confrontation? Would they all die because
of some stupid idea he had? No. Saris was the one who insisted that the others join. He even knew that they would
join, and had prepared for them. How convenient. But now
they had to free Senna, sitting forlorn and docile in the
chair—and why did he just now acknowledge her? Wasn’t
she in that chair when they entered the room?—and somehow wage war with this all-powerful god of death. Just his
name brought fear into the hearts of people, calling to mind
all manners of demise at the scaly, clawed hands of the
Hooded One.
The demon looked once more at the motley crew gathered about him. “You may even have your Queen Senna if
you wish,” he waved one hand in the direction of the
ensnared queen and the ropes binding her instantly fell to
the floor, freeing her from their constricting bonds. She
rose and dashed to where Valza’in stood with waiting arms.
Holding him close to her, she turned to glare at the demon.
“You have waited for this moment for five centuries. You
think that this will be your ultimate victory, but it will not.
You do not know what will happen here today, demon,” she
declared. “I do.”
“Then keep it to yourself woman, for we both know that
I shall defeat the lot of you!” derided the mage. He once
again regained his composure, and waited patiently for
them to deal the first blow. “It is time for me to return to
Norbinda, and rule the cosmos from my former throne. I
alone will be the king of the gods!”
Not knowing what to do and tired of waiting, Vortigurn
was the first of them to take action. Her body shimmered
iridescently as she shifted her form to that of a fire-drake,
253

DARK BECOMING
and from that she assumed the form of a dragon. She loomed
ominously above the mage, but did nothing else. Ullix was
unfazed by her display. She still hesitated.
“You have no hope to defeat me,” he laughed derisively.
“To defeat a god, one must be a god. The only one here that
comes close to even being a god is Senna... only touched by
a god... who is now dead. And now look at you, dear old
queen-mother. Standing there with your adopted son, your
regal hair shorn short like that of a boy’s, while his hair is
longer than yours! Come now. You must have realized that
to defeat me you would have needed the old blind-man
Saris. Without my dear brother you are no match for my
might.”
The concept hit Galden like a ton of bricks. Saris’ revelation returned to his mind. For this very reason Saris had
kept his presence unknown. That was why he had stayed
behind at the camp. That’s why the dark knights were following him when they first met. They had no interest in
Vortigurn. Ullix did not care about the elf-maiden. It was
apparent that Saris had some kind of plan, as did Senna.
Was there some sort of communication between the two?
Were plans made five hundred years ago? What was important now was that he push all thoughts of the old seer...
the old deity... from his mind. He only hoped the others
had done so as well.
Baringer, too, realized full well that Saris had in him
some wondrous power. Ullix’s statement only confirmed
that by calling him his brother. What was Saris planning?
Would he show up unexpectedly and then throw the mage
off his balance? Or would he attack him from the camp?
Perhaps the healer would appear when the demon’s attention was diverted and strike the fatal blow upon him.
Perhaps... perhaps Ullix knew exactly where Saris was, and
was awaiting his entrance.
“Everyone!” shouted Baringer suddenly, startling himself and the others as they stood with sweaty palms and
frightened faces around their foe. “Attack him now! He’s
254

DARK BECOMING
trying to confuse us! We can defeat him!” Baringer only
hoped that his suspicions about Saris were true as he ran
madly with his sword raised for the demon’s chest.
Ullix easily swatted him away with his scaled hand, but
Baringer’s action set off a chain reaction with his companions, calling them to arms. A stream of fire spurted from
Vortigurn’s throat, bathing the Hooded One in it. He in turn
raised his hands and sent the fire back at her, causing her
to stumble backward as her own fire seared her scaly flesh.
Avalzanet spread her fingers apart in an arcane
gesture, chanting an incantation while Tsingee and Zeb
assaulted the mage with their fists and weapons. It was a
heartening sight to see the evil one tumble back from the
lutina’s blows, but they knew that he was in no way losing
any strength or sustaining any damage. An immense ball
of searing blue flame burst from Avalzanet’s outspread
hands and headed directly for the demon. It struck him with
a ear-shattering explosion, sending his cloak and gown up
in flames.
Gasping at the flaming figure flailing before them, they
were even more astonished to see the form that emerged
from the burning fire. Ullix stepped forward, shedding the
vestiges of his burnt garments. His figure was that of a
man’s, overly and hideously muscled, with black and silver scales covering his entire figure. His face resembled
that of a man, but with pointed nose, ears, and chin, curled
horns, and slanted, fiery eyes. A barbed tail lashed behind
him, sending sparks flying as it met with the stone floor.
“On my world, I was known as Pan, Tragos Oide, the
Goat-God,” he growled, throwing off the still smouldering
sleeve that remained on his arm. “I was a benign deity, and
people worshipped me, though I was servant to the king of
us all. When my brethren departed that world for Norbinda,
I departed my old ways. None survived the trek; none but
me. I remained victorious against gods whose powers
eclipse your own! We will now see who comes out victorious,” he hissed angrily. He jerked his left arm up, sending a
255

DARK BECOMING
blast of razor-sharp daggers flying at them. Pouldin was able
to raise his shield, and Broceliande spread out her ghostly
body, its cloudy shape maintaining just enough form to
deflect a few of the missiles. The others dashed to evade the
assault, leaving Azurad behind to defend herself.
Kieran had tugged her arm to elude the daggers as they
evaded them, but she had remained steadfast, forcing him
to throw himself to the floor of the massive chamber. Azurad
felt each cut as the blades embedded deep within the flesh
of her arms, legs, chest, and face. Bleeding heavily, she
stumbled forward, her sword flashing brilliantly in the
mage-light as it slashed down upon Ullix’s head.
Unable to move fast enough, the blade sliced off one of
the hideously deformed horns, and bit into his shoulder,
sending forth a steaming spurt of blood. But it paled in comparison to the blood that flowed from Azurad as she lay
struggling upon the ground at his feet. The blades were burrowing into her body, cutting through muscle, tendon, bone,
and organ. Though she was in pain, she was unable to
scream, for her vocal cords had been severed. Pan—Tragos
Oide—Ullix laughed evilly, kicking her lifeless body aside
with his ungulate foot. She shuddered violently as one of
the daggers emerged from the back of her neck, having severed her spinal cord. The dagger fell to the floor, swallowed
up by the vast ocean of blood that had once flowed through
Azurad’s body.
A cast-iron skillet came crashing down upon the back of
Ullix’s head with shattering force, sending the demon
sprawling over the body he had just killed. Nisqué speedily
backed off, allowing Pouldin’s metal clad boot to kick forcefully into the mage’s head.
Bone was heard loudly cracking and crunching within
his head, and his right ear hung from the mangled flesh.
Ullix jumped to his hoofed feet and leered madly at them as
he ripped off the useless ear and threw it. The projectile
twisted and grew, and unfolded into a vile, bloodthirsty flying snake. As it flapped its wings at them, Tsingee valiantly
256

DARK BECOMING
flew forward to confront it, her power-packed punch ready
to do damage. She placed a well-aimed blow at the serpent’s
head, sending it splattering on the ceiling above. She then
looked defiantly back at Ullix, who passed his hand over
the side of his head. Removing the clawed talons, they could
all see that a new ear had replaced the destroyed one, no
doubt the shattered cranium as well.
Before she could recover from her indignation and surprise, the same hand that had healed his head shot out and
grabbed her in mid-air.
“No!” screamed the rumbling voice, no longer comical
in its desperation.
The entire time Tsingee was in their company, she was
a source of amusement. Had they the audacity to, they
would have laughed heartily at her antics. She was a child’s
fantasy, a creature of immature daydreams, and innocent
play. “Please!” she screamed in a sweet, delicate voice—her
real voice—that momentarily surprised and deeply pained
her friends. It sounded like far off bells delicately ringing in
harmony... desperate harmony. Plaintive and tragic and
harrowed harmony. “Help m—”
Ullix’s fist clenched upon her small frame, crushing it
like a flower. Her frail bones snapped to splinters beneath
his grasp, and her body was torn and ripped asunder as her
blood dripped from between his fingers. Ullix threw the
mottled mass of faerie flesh to the floor and stepped on it,
grinding it to a pulp beneath his hoofed foot.
“NO!” The goblin sobbed and fell to his knees; another
creature of childlike fancy rendered in his torment.
“If Saris has chosen a time to come forward,” worried
Baringer, “I certainly hope that time is now.” He cringed in
horror and dismay at the bloody messes that used to be the
two powerful and valiant warrior-women of their troupe.
“Coward!” hissed Pouldin through clenched teeth. “You
strike down at the women of our band! Are you so weak
that you must use a lady for your kill? That you must destroy a fairy? The very heart of innocence!”
257

DARK BECOMING
On their own, the others had begun to share Baringer’s
suspicion, and his eye-gestures and hasty whispers informed them all that they had to stall for time, for Saris.
Zeboblonuk dashed forward to throw his weight against
that of the disrobed demon, but fell under the mighty fist
of him, his helmet jammed down over his brow, and he lay
unconscious on the floor of the tower, bleeding from his
ears and nose.
Concentrating upon the impending victory that awaited
him, Ullix failed to notice a lithe, skulking figure stalking
him from behind. Too late was his reaction to turn as
Valza’in jumped out from the shadows and leapt upon his
back.
“Worm!” hissed the mage, struggling with one hand to
loosen the boy’s grip around his neck while the other raked
its talons across Val’s unprotected arms. “You shall die miserably for this!’’ The demon felt pain from the boy’s touch.
There seemed to be a taint of fear in the demon’s voice, but
his actions belied it. The sharp point at the end of his barbed
tail shot up and pierced the skin of Valza’in’s back. The boy
cried out in pain, loosened his strangle-hold, and fell back
onto the floor.
There was instant silence. In his fury Ullix had neglected
to realize that they had traversed the floor of the vast room,
nearing ever so slowly the mass of molten wax that remained
of the candle. In his ire Ullix had stumbled backward, and
Valza’in fell directly into the slowly solidifying liquid. The
flame was extinguished by the boy’s body and the wax that
splashed against him.
Struggling frantically to free himself from the heavy wax
that clung to his skin and burned in his wounds, Valza’in
screamed in pain and thrashed madly about. The poison
from Ullix’s barbed tail was quickly spreading throughout
his body, and caused him to convulse in torment. He
thrashed his anguished body about in the burning wax, and
splashed the molten substance onto the others in his
frantic efforts to free himself. Trying to hoist himself up,
258

DARK BECOMING
he thrust a hand downward into it, but instead of pushing
his weight up on it, he withdrew his wax-covered hand, a
murky round object in it, which he flung violently as he managed to remove himself from the mire.
Catching the sphere, Baringer held it in his hands and
stared into its opalescent depths, his eyes transfixed upon
its shifting depths. But clarity inerrupted his gaze, and he
dropped it forthwith, realizing too late what he had touched
and what it did to him.
Senna paid no attention to the sphere, knowing full well
that it was the long sought-after Orb of Knowledge. Instead
she dashed over to Val and cradled his head in her lap. She
immediately began picking the wax away from the gashes
on his back and arms. His wounds were already pale and
discolored, and the skin pulled away from the cuts, presenting a horrific sight.
“Damn you, demon!” she whispered through her tears
as her son began slipping away. “Not again,” she whimpered.
Closing her eyes, she threw her head back and sucked in a
deep breath. The others, expecting her to wail mournfully,
were surprised when instead she called out. “Saris! Now is
the time! Come forth!”
“Shut up, witch!” shouted the demon, springing forward
to flay her with his talons. Before he could come in contact
with her crouching form, Vortigurn intercepted him, changing her body into that of a humongous bear, and slamming
the mage to the ground beneath her. But her actions were
of no avail. With one quick thrust, the poisoned barb of his
tail shot upward and deeply embedded itself within her ursine chest. As he pulled it out, Vortigurn slumped to the
ground next to Senna and Valza’in, reverting to her natural
shape. Senna pulled her to her, holding both of them close.
“Come, then, brother!” hissed Ullix. “I gave you life! I
alone created you, my brothers and sisters, and I alone destroyed our home. It is time to finish it! Come! I am ready
for more!” Ullix laughed at the disheveled group before him.
Elves, humans, and fairy folk. With nothing to stop him.
259

DARK BECOMING
He was invincible. He arched his glistening body backward,
his mocking laughter deriding them into humility.
But Senna had put herself into action. She stood, ensuring that the fallen elf-girl lay beside her son—Vortigurn’s
beloved—and removed the wax and blood-soaked rope from
around his shoulder. She tied the end of it around her waist,
made a lariat out of the other end, and then stooped to pick
up the wax-encrusted orb. By simply staring at it, the wax
dripped off of the sphere, and within her hand rested the
coveted answers to all questions. She then turned to face
the door, through which Saris had hobbled, unharassed and
unfettered. In time nonexistent, he found his way to her,
standing at the door one instant and at her side the very
next. She in turn tied the center length of the rope around
his waist, and then allowed him to place his wizened hand
upon the orb. Then, with her free hand, she swung the lariat
and shot the noose about Ullix’s body.
Although her entire actions took place in mere seconds—
a last gift of speed from the long-passed god—it seemed like
an eternity to her. All her life spent in captivity led up to
this this moment. The fate of their world rested upon her
shoulders, as well as those of Saris. And Ullix’s as well. He
pulled and tugged at the rope that bound him to his two
contemporaries, but to no avail. The rope was like steel,
forged with faith, with the love of two mothers, with the
pride of a people, and with the hope of a child.
“Touch the orb, my brother, my creator,” commanded
Saris to the demon. The old man and Senna were steadily
pulling Pan—Ullix closer to them, and extended the orb in
their free hands. The demon cringed in fear as he was uncontrollably drawn forward, but could not free himself no
matter how hard he struggled. “Stop! You cannot do this! I
will not allow it!” He craned his body backwards, trying to
avert contact with the glowing sphere, but Senna’s strong
hand reached out and grasped his wrist with the strength
of iron. She pressed the goat-god’s fingers against the
undulating crystal ball, joining theirs.
260

DARK BECOMING
An ear-splitting wail arose, first from the sphere, then
growing louder, emanating from the very bowels of the
earth. The cacophony was so incredibly loud that it sent the
planet’s entire populace reeling in shock. Waves crashed
onto cities, mountains crumbled, continents shifted and
islands sank. The Obelisk’s high walls began to shudder and
crack, and large pieces of the tower fell to the ground within
and outside of it.
“Hurry!” shouted Baringer to the others as he picked
up both Valza’in and Vortigurn in his strong arms. “Let’s
get the hell out of here! The whole tower is going to fall!”
Galden stooped down to help Nisqué back to her feet
from where she had fallen to gently pick up the smashed
lutina, and the others followed them as they dashed from
the candle room out to the township beyond the Obelisk
walls. Kieran knelt to pick up Azurad’s shredded and bloody
form, and Pouldin, steeling himself against the hatred he
felt for Avalzanet, aided the swiftly aging sorceress out of
the Obelisk. She cried out in pain as he slung her arm over
his shoulder, but she did not resist even when they both
heard the bone of her fore-arm snap.
The group, led by Galden and Nisqué, dashed madly
from the Obelisk’s looming presence. On and on they ran,
down the dark streets of the city and through the city gates...
Out into the welcoming countryside, and to their camp in
the mushroom forest beyond.
The Obelisk was glowing, and bright beams of light shot
out from the doorways and windows dotting its exterior.
The light shone across the land, extending past the coast to
the north, spreading across the continent to the south, and
across the entire planet.
Stopping at the edge of the forest, they all turned around
to see the Obelisk exploding in violent fury, sending a fiery
burst of energy soaring upward into the dark sky, showering sparks and debris to fall upon the city below it. The light
sailed through the night sky, upward to an astounding
height and burning away the clouds in its path; then veer261

DARK BECOMING
ing sideways, flying past the horizon in the west... leaving
in its wake a clear path in the sky, while rain fell down in
torrents on either side of the swath. Then it was gone.
Everyone gathered around Valza’in and Vortigurn. Crying uncrotrollably, Thirluaine and Maibin still managed
their best to cool their feverish foreheads and had covered
their bodies with several of the blankets that the guards had
initially confiscated for Kaldorne. Then they lay the woven
blanket Senna had made for Val over the both of them,
soothing Val immensely though having no effect on the elfmaiden. Her shaking grew worse, as did his.
Azurad’s body and what remained of Tsingee were
placed by Kieran and Nisqué upon the flat cap of a nearby
low mushroom. Kieran covered them with her regal cape,
setting her sword and the dagger Broceliande had returned
at her side. He wiped the blood from Azurad’s face, and arranged her hair neatly about it, framing her still beautiful
and tragic visage.
“Well, everyone,” said a cheerfully disturbing voice. “I
guess it’s up to me to solve your problems!”
They turned to stare at Ganasta, who had trailed behind
them as they fled the Obelisk. He grinned madly as he withdrew another thing impossibly too large to fit into his pockets. It was round, they could tell, but the cloth around it
disguised it from their view. Ganasta proudly set it on the
ground, and let the cloth fall away from it. Baringer knew
what it was, and his knowledge was confirmed as they all
once again beheld the great Orb of Knowledge.
“I won’t even ask you how you got it,” mumbled Zeb,
still recovering from the nasty blow he had suffered.
“One touch,” spoke Ganasta, “and all your questions are
answered! Use it on Val and Vortigurn! It’ll heal them!” He
was laughing hideously, the torment he had experienced
addling his already tenuous grasp on reality.
Galden, the unsure and disturbed leader of the group,
looked solemnly at the goblin. “No,” he said, shaking his
head and choking on a sob. “If they touch it, they will lose
262

DARK BECOMING
their innocence. I can’t let that happen to them. My...”
he swallowed hard and paused. What was she to him?
The grandmother of his grandmother’s grandmother ten
times back? More? “My... ancestor would not have wanted
that, and I don’t think they do, either.”
“What would you rather them have?” asked the indignant goblin. “Life or innocence?” He was holding the orb in
his small hands, lifting it above his head almost in a gesture of reverence, stained with madness and anguish.
Galden looked down at Valza’in and Vortigurn. Their
eyes were drooping, and their bodies were relaxing as the
poison took its toll upon them. Val struggled against contorting his face in pain to smile at him. Galden could see
that they had stopped struggling against the poison.
“You know the answer,” Galden replied, tears coursing
down his cheeks. How many had died? How many more
will? He looked once again at the two friends as they lay
near death on the ground. Valza’in weakly raised a hand
and placed his fingertips gently on Vortigurn’s lips, and then
back to his. The girl smiled gratefully, and repeated his gesture of love with agonizing slowness. Valza’in then looked
at Avalzanet, who was now stooped with age, and seemed
near death as well. Beyond death. He motioned for her to
sit next to them, which—with Pouldin’s assistance—she did.
The sickening sound of bones snapping hurt their ears and
tore at their souls, but the ancient woman did not cry out.
“Ma,” he whispered almost incoherently, pointing his
trembling finger to the horizon. The old sorceress turned
her head to look at the sky at which he pointed. Though her
eyes were clouded over and sightless, she saw.
“Thank you dear,” she murmured as she placed her hand
gently over the boy’s forehead. She then slowly fell to lie
down beside the two.
Nisqué knelt and reached to touch the sorceress, but
Galden pulled her back. “Don’t,” he said. “Don’t. It’ll just
hurt her more.” Both were crying unabashedly, powerless
to help someone in so much pain, both suffering for it.
263

DARK BECOMING
“Look,” whispered Broceliande after a pause. “Look,” she
repeated when none could tear their eyes away from the
three prone figures at their feet. “Look!”
The rest of the awe-struck entourage looked to where
she pointed, at the horizon, not knowing what to expect,
but fully realizing that something was about to happen.

And before their very eyes,
the Sun
rose
behind the clouds,
bathing
the entire world
in its loving,
life-giving
warmth.
The last thing that Avalzanet, Vortigurn, and Valza’in
laid eyes upon before they died.

264

DARK BECOMING

a book of
days

265

DARK BECOMING

...nothing...
And so it came to pass that the group of elves, humans,
animals, and little people gave a proper burial to their fallen
comrades, setting up a spectacle for the entire dead population of city of the Obelisk to behold, lighting up the entire
mushroom forest with their funeral pyre.
Kieran’s eyes were the first to see in the new light, and
in time the others were able to see, though the light was
blinding and painful. It was a welcome pain.
They then left forever the damned region, taking with
them the orb once again enshrouded within the rags that
Ganasta had brought it to them.
It was held with reverence, a constant beacon of what
sacrifices were made for its recovery and safe-keeping, and
of the hope that it embodied within the hearts and minds
of those who waged battle for it.
They led the people of the emaciated city, those very few
who had escaped and remained alive after the demon’s ravages, to neighboring villages. There was so much panic, so
much confusion brought on by the sudden brilliance that
the additional people blended in without undue attention.
There they lived out the rest of their lives regaling others
with tales of a host of creatures who at last put an end to the
darkness and destroyed the demon who enslaved the world.
266

DARK BECOMING
Time proceeded slowly following the restoration of
Norbinda, the sun. In all respects, what vegetation there
grew on Harlus should have withered in the unfamiliar sunlight. Mushrooms and fungi would have dried up, and the
foodstores gone barren—making life unbearable and nigh
intolerable. The moisture on the planet’s surface would have
turned to steam and seared the inhabitants alive. New wind
currents, ocean currents, seasons and climates would have
wreaked havoc and caused further catastrophe. All of that
and more should have happened... but did not. Though
Ullix’s magic was now gone—the magic that kept the planet
alive was gone—it was only due to the last remaining vestiges of that very same magic that the transition from a
doomed and dark planet to a brightly-lit planet thriving with
life was made possible. With its dying breaths, the mystic
force that had kept the dying planet alive in turn held its
hand until it was strong enough to survive on its own... free,
independent, alive. Then could the magic die knowing that
Harlus would survive without it.
Galden and his companions set out for the southern
coast, crossing over the Umbrannon Pass to Balluirc, a port
city on the coast of Gaelwinn, and then onward to Galden’s
and Baringer’s home of Kaelmorde.
None chose to depart from the company. The world had
changed, and they were together when it had. They chose
to remain together and enter the new era as comrades.
There in Kaelmorde they settled down in peace, together
in what harmony their association could afford, enjoying
each sunrise and sunset and the glorious growth they
brought with them, together. The bright light from the great
ball of fire burned at first the eyes so unaccustomed to it,
but eventually they learned to revel in the brightness, and
to cultivate the many crops that sprung from long-dormant
seeds now fully awakened by the light. As magic slowly died,
soon plants began to grow; flowers, grasses, grains, shrubbery, weeds, trees, fruits, vegetables... Slowly but surely,
creating a new Harlus for its inhabitants all over again.
267

DARK BECOMING
Rebirth.
Kieran set aside his anger and confusion, and built a
house next to Baringer’s, on the land that the young man
kindly gave to him; joining the young farmer as he tilled
his fields... Yielding now grains and vegetables instead of
the same-old mushrooms they were all accustomed to. The
sun-dial in the field proved a valuable tool in collecting time,
replacing the useless obelisks with their candles. Kieran and
Baringer eventually joined their two homes together into
one, creating both a home that they could share, as well as
a large gathering place where their companions always felt
welcome; eventually adding more rooms and a second floor
to become an inn. It came to symbolize the birth of equality
among them all, borne from two very different people who
came to care for each other very deeply. When Selene traveled to see her friends in Kaelmorde, it was at The Inn of
the Half-Elf that she made her home. When Dame
Ganydronne was fetched to finally ease into the slumber
from which she would never awaken, it was at that very same
Inn where she closed her eyes forever.
Nisqué and Galden were married, as were Pouldin and
Maibin. Broceliande and Garid, choosing to remain on that
world with their friends, took up haunting their homes, their
friendly presence adding a touch of quaintness to their
abodes.
Galden himself was pleasantly surprised to find no sign
of his uncle Pat upon their return, though his mother
scolded him to no end. “When you didn’t come home,” she
sobbed, happily, angrily, “I worried. When the days... the
months passed, I tried... I tried so hard not to give up.” Pat
had left her to her distress, and had not been heard from.
He was not missed, especially with a veritable army to take
his place in the Galden household. A household that was
soon joined by twin children from the union of Nisqué and
Galden.
Thirluaine and Kieran became close friends, and Kieran
took a great liking to Kaldorne, whom he reared as his own
268

DARK BECOMING
son. Kaldorne grew up in the Inn knowing the ex-mercenary elf as his loving father, and Thirluaine grew to love
him as her brother. And since Kieran and Baringer had become near inseperable, to Galden’s slight chagrin, Baringer
was Kaldorne’s other father. The one who shared with him
the depths of great wisdom and the heights of great abandon. The Inn of the Half-Elf welcomed family and friends
from near and far, and on cold nights when Kaldorne
stared—curiously and familiarly—up at the length of rope
coiled above the great fire place, precious memories stirred
and stories were told and retold.
Galden’s greatest disappointment was that, having gone
through so much trouble, he never once got to meet his
matriarch, Senna... At least, not formally. He fought with
her, saw her... saw what she looked like, heard what she
sounded like. She was the reason for—at least so he
thought—the entire quest and all their sacrifice. But he knew
that their sacrifices had not been in vain. Look at what they
had accomplished.
And one day, as Nisqué and Broceliande were sorting
through and arranging all the old clothes and momentos in
the attic of the old Galden house, she uncovered the Orb of
Knowledge buried along with Senna’s old dress and the book
of days in the old trunk. She placed it on the floor where it
sat under a beam of light that filtered through a small window. Unwrapping it, she gingerly brushed her fingertips
against the cold smoothness of it, much to the ghost’s timid
protests.
Nothing happened. The orb sparkled in the light, and
sat heavily on the old floorboards, but beyond that, nothing was evident. Nothing occurred.
Nisqué bit her lip and smiled at the ghost, who shook
her head in argument. She then lay her hand flat against its
surface.
Nothing happened.
269

DARK BECOMING
“So that’s why we set out on the adventure,” she murmured, turning to the ghost. “All the sacrifices and battle...
it all had meaning.”
“And what was that?” ventured the ghost timidly.
“That we all had to... No, we have to make our own decisions, to live our lives as we see fit. And be happy with it.”
She looked upon Broceliande, an all-knowing, wise expression upon her face. “We cannot force people to be good
instead of evil. If...” she juggled the thoughts in her mind,
dazzled at the clarity she now felt but still unable to form
the right words. “If.. all the people on... on a ship crowded
to one side, it would capsize.” She smiled at her friend, and
spoke with more confidence.
“Magic is fading, and in time we will fade with it. What
was our reality will become the stuff of legends.” The words
became heavy now, and weighted with wisdom that she had
not earned but wielded nonetheless. “Logic, science and
reason will earn their place in society... as dark becoming...
now light arrived.”
She repated, “We must all live our own lives, and be
happy.” She cupped the crystal ball in her hands, gazing
intently into its opalescent depths. Broceliande reached out
to brush her own ethereal hands against it. The two women
touched the great sphere at the same time.
Nothing happened.
Or maybe something did. Maybe everything did. But
that’s another story.

270

DARK BECOMING

dark becoming...
light arrived

271

DARK BECOMING

epilogue

A

nd so began the age of brilliance. What was once black was now
light. Evil had been subdued, and tranquility reigned anew. In
harmony now lived the people of Harlus, and in harmony now
lived the New Gods.
Devoted Loris, gleaming in his full armor of gold for all to see in
the northern sky, guards over the downtrodden, abused, neglected, and
poor. Azurad, dispenser of justice, grants favor to those in battle. Tsingee
Yingee Snordeap Knorrdouf, concealed amongst the flittering butterflies, faeries, and flowers and hidden out beyond the faintest stars on the
southern horizon enriches the plants and growing things, bringing rich
bloom and harvest. Lady Avalzanet presides over the magical essence
of youth, granting to those who possess it the presence of her comrade
Valza’in. Valza’in embodies and is forever innocent, reveling and existing in the laughter of children and the tears of joy, and existing in a
cluster of bright stars with a string of faint stars extending from it.
Vortigurn guards and walks with the wild animals of the forest and the
tame ones of the towns—her pets. Koldin walks with the pariah, his arm
comfortingly about his shoulders, his heart with their own. Even
old Dame Ganydronne resides within the great ball of fire, forever
watching over the old and homeless, while Broceliande has chosen to
exist throughout eternity as the goddess of love and beauty; her stars
clustered just above the eastern horizon. Senna guarantees peace and
harmony as she oversees the doings of her contemporaries as queen of
272

DARK BECOMING
the gods, dwelling with Ganydronne in Norbinda. Saris ensures health
to those who deserve it, and grants miracles of curing when he so wills.
And Pan—Ullix—Tragos Oide... the goat god... guarantees the endurance of the others. He provides the means by which they must continue
their work. Ullix is the god of death.
The Gods are home again, and that is good. The sun is once more
the abode of the Holy Twelve, and will remain so for all time. For, you
see, they each fought or contributed in some way to allow for the new
beginning, and the wisdom they gained in their previous existences has
allowed them to rise above the previous generation of deities.
And each month, upon the emergence of the full face of each of the
twelve restored and representative moons, the histories of the gods are
honored with the lighting of a vast candle made to burn for one month,
yielding at its demise, within the waxy base, a brilliant crystal ball.
So we leave Harlus: A planet still entrenched in the old ways, but a
planet nonetheless destined to join the great cosmic expanses.

273

DARK BECOMING

274

DARK BECOMING

Drawings of the
Many Characters
of

Dark Becoming
Used for
description and
Ease of Recognition.
Drawn by

Marcus D. Mébes
1992, 1994,
and some redrawn in 2006.
Map originally sketched by Derek Block, 1992,
redrawn and enhanced
by Marcus D. Mebes in August, 2006.

275

DARK BECOMING

276

DARK BECOMING

277

DARK BECOMING

Avalzanet

278

DARK BECOMING

Azurad

279

DARK BECOMING

Baringer

280

DARK BECOMING

Broceliande

281

DARK BECOMING

Galden

282

DARK BECOMING

Ganasta

283

DARK BECOMING

Ganydronne

284

DARK BECOMING

Garid

285

DARK BECOMING

Kaydrith

286

DARK BECOMING

Kieran

287

DARK BECOMING
Koldin

288

DARK BECOMING

Loris

289

DARK BECOMING

Maibin

290

DARK BECOMING

Nisqué

291

DARK BECOMING

Pouldin

292

DARK BECOMING

Saris
293

DARK BECOMING
Senna

294

DARK BECOMING

Speedwell

295

DARK BECOMING

Thirluaine

296

DARK BECOMING

Tsingee

297

DARK BECOMING

Ullix

298

DARK BECOMING

Valza’in

299

DARK BECOMING

Vortigurn

300

DARK BECOMING

Zeboblonuk

301

DARK BECOMING

end

302

