Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Dedication
Acknowledgements
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven
Chapter Twelve

Acclaim for the Psychic Eye Mystery Series
‘‘An invigorating entry into the cozy mystery realm. . . . I cannot wait for the next book.’’
—Roundtable Reviews
‘‘Well written and unpredictable. Everything about this book is highly original . . . a fun protagonist with
just enough bravado to keep her going.’’
—Romantic Times
‘‘The characters are all realistically drawn and the situations go from interesting, to amusing, to
laugh-out-loud funny. The best thing a person can do to while away the cold winter is to cuddle up in
front of a fire with this wonderful book.’’
—The Best Reviews
‘‘A fresh, exciting addition to the amateur sleuth genre.’’ —J. A. Konrath, author of Dirty Martini
‘‘A fun, light read, and a promising beginning to an original series.’’
—The Romance Readers Connection
‘‘Victoria Laurie has crafted a fantastic tale in this latest Psychic Eye Mystery. There are few things in life
that upset Abby Cooper, but ghosts and her parents feature high on her list. . . . [A] few real frights and a
lot of laughs.’’ —Fresh Fiction

My assumptions were confirmed when we heard Dutch say, ‘‘Mom . . . Mom, it’s okay. Don’t cry. I’m
here. Just tell me what’s wrong.’’
Dave and I exchanged a look as Dutch walked out to the living room to sit down on the couch and talk
to his mother. ‘‘What’s your radar telling you?’’ Dave whispered to me.
‘‘It’s bad,’’ I said. ‘‘I don’t know what it is, but it’s bad.’’
Dave ate the rest of his meal in silence and I pushed the food around on my plate, both of us straining to
hear snatches of conversation from the living room. Finally Dutch came back, his face pale and his

features tight. ‘‘It’s Chad,’’ he said.
‘‘Your cousin?’’ I asked.
Dutch nodded. ‘‘He’s been kidnapped.’’
I gasped. ‘‘Oh, God!’’ I hurried over to him. ‘‘What happened?’’
‘‘He was working security for some wealthy oil guy out in Vegas, and the last anyone saw of them was
when they headed out to one of the casinos. Mom said they found the car pumped full of bullets, but with
no sign of Chad or the guy he was guarding.’’
I squeezed my arms around Dutch. ‘‘When do we leave?’’ I asked him.
Dutch squeezed me back. ‘‘I’m going to catch the first flight I can, Abs. You should stay here.’’
‘‘Not a chance in hell, cowboy,’’ I said sternly. ‘‘You’ll need my radar now more than ever.’’
There was a long pause and finally I felt Dutch kiss the top of my head and whisper, ‘‘Okay, Edgar.
Have it your way. Now go upstairs and pack us some things while I book us a flight.’’
‘‘What can I do?’’ Dave asked as he got up from the table.
‘‘Look after the dogs while we’re gone,’’ Dutch said.
‘‘You got it, partner,’’ Dave said, and gave him a pat on the arm.
I left them to hurry up the stairs and pack. My radar had told me that today was going to bring something
terrible. I figured it had been my reading session with Marion, though now I realized it was that awful
phone call. But even as I pulled a large suitcase from the closet with trepidation, I had no real
appreciation for the fact that my nightmare was only just beginning.

