Cast of Characters
BOD CANTREU
inventor of the spacedrive unit and involuntary captain of the
SleiUris.

KIT BOWEN
Rod's fiancee and
helpmate.
JOE
An expert electrician,
trapped like Rod and Kit
aboard the Stetlaris.

COLONY LEADER
Member of an alien
species whose survivors
are found by Rod.

Also — other artisans and girl biologists trapped
on Stellaris, bulbuous headed pyramid-people
with attentuated limbs and the little, round folk
of the planet of the dead cities.

The
Black
Galaxy
By MURRA Y LEINSTER

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL No. 2 0
Galaxy Publishing Corp.

421 Hudson St., New York 14, N. X.

GALAXY Science Fiction Novels, selected by the editors of
GALAXY Science Fiction Magazine, are the choice of science
fiction novels both original and reprint

GALAXY Science Fiction Novel No. 20
35c a copy. Subscription: Six Novels $2.00

The characters, the location, and the incidents in this book are
entirely the product of the author's imagination and have no
relation to any person or event in real life.

Copyright 194-9 iby Better Publications, Jnc
Reprinted 1954 by arrangement with the Authot

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OP AMEBlCA
by

THE GUINN COMPANY, INC
NEW YORK 1 4 , N. Y.

CHAPTER ONE

Grounded!

T

HE Chairman of the Space Projsct Committee was very
po];te. But he was a politician and Rod Cantretl had been
a soldier and was a very famous man and all politicians
know that soldiers and other practical men can be most obstinate when politics shows clearly what should be done.
"Permit me to congratulate you," the Chairman said blandly,

"On being kicked upstairs?" asked Rod drily. "I'm not pleased.
It looks to me—since that's what I came to protest about—that
I'm promoted to something like a dummy job so that the work
I want to do and the decisions I need to make will be made
by people who think more of elections than of really important things."
The Chairman of the Space Committee laughed appreciatively. But he made a mental black mark. This man would not
be amenable to political pressure. Perhaps he had better be a
little more thoroughly deprived of authority—and given more
prestige to make up for it.
"Oh, come, come!" he said indulgently. "What have you to
complain of? The ship you're building has certainly all the funds
anyone could need!"
"I think," Rod said flatly, "that we should postpone any attempt at interplanetary travel until we get some interplanetary
weapons." As the Chairman beamed at him he went on doggedly.
"I designed the drive-units for the ship we're building, for the
one now under construction. I made the first interplanetary
flights—the only ones made to date. But I urge the postponement of exploration until we have some defense. The weapons
we have now would be useless against an enemy with spaceships."
5

6

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

The Chairman beamed on and offered Rod a cigar. Rod
curtly refused it.
"Yet," mused the Chairman amiably, "you did not encounter
any other space-ships in your three interplanetary flights, you
cannot name possible enemies and you have not any real evidence that this—ah—hypothetical enemy you speak of has
weapons superior to our own. After all, we have a gift for destruction ourselves! And remember, the idea of space-conquest
has caught the imagination of the public!"
Rod set his jaws. He was prepared to be made ridiculous
if he could bring about some measure of defense against the
dangers he foresaw. But a politician could not be expected to
believe anything dangerous if it brought in votes. And the
proven possibility of travel, not only to other planets but to
the stars, had roused enormous popular enthusiasm.
"There were Martians, once," said Rod. "There aren't anymore. They had a civilization that in some ways was higher
than ours. You've seen the proofs of that. And they were wiped
out. They simply vanished leaving their cities to fall in ruins
behind them."
"You assume that your—ah—hypothetical space-travellers
destroyed them?"
*
"I do," said Rod. He added with some irony, "You must remember that I saw the dead Martian cities with the least
stray possession left in place and what I believe were the remains of the Martians lying where they dropped. And I saw
that pyramid on Calypso, which surely no men made. It was
made by the race I'm talking about, which I haven't seen, which
I can't name or describe, but which made it to lure the first
man to see it into sending them a signal that space-travel had
been achieved on Earth."
"Yet you did not even photograph it," said the Chairman,
tolerantly, "And you insist that we devote research and money
to weapons—when the world is very weary of weapons and of

THE BLACK GALAXY

7

War—instead of upon space-travel, which has filled humanity
with optimism it has never known before! My dear sir, it would
be political suicide!"
"The point is," said Rod bitterly, "that not to do it may be
physical suicide!"
"Now, now." The Chairman beamed cordially. "I shall confer with the rest of the Committee. You have just had a promotion and perhaps we can manage another. We are fully
aware of your services in the past and you are surely the only
interplanetary voyager, so you cannot be contradicted. But you
ask the making of a very unpopular decision! Suppose we raise
you another step in rank?"
Rod stood up, rather pale.
"I'm not trying blackmail," he said bitterly. "I'm trying to
drive some sense into your head! There are more important
things than winning elections, and staying alive is one of
them! I can resign my commission and speak publicly of what
I fear."
The Chairman's smils remained, though he spoke acidly.
"I am afraid the popular impression would be that you wish
to prevent further space-voyages, to keep the credit of being
the only man who had ever crossed space. I am sure that—ah^—
other officers who are your equals in rank would look at it that
way. I shall discuss the matter with my Committee. Meanwhile
you are, of course, under regulation obligations not to make
public statements without official clearance. We will see about
another promotion for you.
He bowed Rod out, beaming at him benevolently. And Rod
was sick with apprehension. He'd wanted to have the first
real spaceship capable of putting up a fight. H e believed it
might need to fight But anyhow he was still in command of
the construction of the space-ship now building and he'd commatid it when it took off from Earth.
Maybe he could find more conclusive proof of the peril he

8

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

believed in. Most likely, indeed, on the Moon. The central
peak of Tycho would be the logical place to look for proof. If
he could show a group of scientists that proof. . . . But as it
turned out he wasn't to be allowed to do anything so sensible.
Two days later he had his orders. He had a promotion. And
all real authority was taken from him. He was again kicked
upstairs, to a desk, and he was transferred to another branch
of the service. He received the warmest possible thanks for the
value of his contributions to the project from which he was
now relieved. He went sick all over. And when he told Kit
Bowen about it he could have wept with impotent fury. She
looked at him indignantly.
"Ifs not fairl" she cried. "You designed the ship, Rod, and
you're the only one who will really know how to run it, anyway,
and—and—"
Rod tried to grin at her, but he couldn't. It was too important
Much more important than his own feelings in the matter.
But he said somehow through stiff lips, "I'll show my successor everything I know, K i t And I'll try to make him believe
in what I'm worried about-"
Kit stamped her feet. Then she turned away to keep him
from seeing that she wanted to cry. But she didn't really understand the gone feeling inside of Rod at that.
They stood beside the hulk of the Stellaris, which was just
two-thirds completed- The ship was a hundred-odd feet long and
forty-some through. It was a space-ship—the first vessel ever
built on Earth to navigate the regions between the stars. Rod
Cantrell had designed it, after making the first human interplanetary flights in a modified captured weapon taken from the
rebels in the war of the Total State against the Earth Government.
He'd seen the possibility of a space-drive in a device that
had been created only for mass murder and the drive he'd
worked out was no makeshift calling for centuries of develop-

THE BLACK GALAXY

9

ment before men could aspire to the stars. His first flight in
the toy-sized altered weapon took him to the Moon with absolute ease and safety.
His second was equally safe and precise and it took him to
Mars. He brought back photographs and artifacts for proof.
And the third flight, aimed at a more distant objective to check
the physical constants governing the space-drive, had reached
Calypso, the largest of Jupiter's moons.
That makeshift craft, though, could only make flights as
stunts. The Stellaris had been begun to carry an adequate
crew of scientists for the study, first of Sol's other planets,
ultimately for roaming the stars so that human colonies could
begin to spread throughout the Galaxy. Rod Cantrell had been
given charge of the ship's construction., and he had been promised her command.
But now he'd been handed orders from the • Space Project
Commission which dashed all his hopes. He was not only relieved of the duty of supervising the Stellaris' construction but
was bluntly informed that he would not even be a member
of her crew when she left Earth—because of his wild tale of
an inimical race, possessing space-ships, which would threaten
the peace of Earth.
Kit said, gulping, "It's not fair, Rod! It's stupid! It's unjust!
You deserve—"
"That doesn't matter," said Rod. "What does matter is what
can happen. This decision is on account of my report on that
pyramid on Calypso."
"But you did the right thing!" insisted the girl. "There wasn't
anything else to do!"
"That was my opinion," said Rod, "but the Commission doesn't agree. I think they feel that I consider myself too famous
and that I'd like to stop space-travel so I'd stay the only man
who ever achieved it"
"Nonsense!" scoffed K i t

10

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

"They've suspected that report from the beginning," Rod
added. "They've never allowed any reference to the pyramid
to be published. They said it would cause public alarm. Of
course, it would imperil their jobs.
"Their places were created to encourage Space exploration.
If they discouraged it, instead, the Commission will be scrapped
and they'll have no salaries. I hate to think of so great a risk
being run just so some political appointees can stay on salary."
Kit Bowen made a scornful sound. She wasn't exactly engaged to Rod, because engagements were no longer considered
matters that existed formally to be announced. But they had
planned to marry. Rod knew now that it had become doubtful He could have played it more or less safe, and guided a
scientific expedition in the Stellaris in search of proof of what
he knew.
But he'd tried it the right way, with full reports and an effort
to throw the Committee behind research for defense. As a result, he was kicked upstairs. He'd never have another chance.
And to be a permanent desk-officer—Kit wouldn't care, but
he would.
Riveters pounded on the Steltaris? metal skin like monster
woodpeckers hunting giant grubs. They were putting on the
flotation-bulges, designed to make her float merrily, even if she
landed in a sea of liquid ammonia.
The air-lock construction-doors of the ship opened. Electricians came out and headed for the commissary for lunch. Two
girls, no doubt assistants in biology working on the air-purifying
plant, also came out of the lock, chattering, and went briskly
to the seme place.
The air-system for the ship was already installed and was
being tested by being run to purify the air used by workmen
on the inside of the already-sealed hull. The ship's corridors
were still bare metal though and it would be many weeks yet
before the living quarters were fitted out, the computers and

THE BLACK GALAXY

II

astrogation instruments put in, even the first of the ship's store*
accumulated.
But the field-generators and tractor and pressor beams were
in and had already been tried out The ship would positively
go anywhere in the galaxy that her crew demanded, though
she was the first Earth-ship ever built for space-travel. Only
Kod knew that she wasn't the first space-ship. There were
others.
The thing was that the crews of the other ships, roaming
among the stars, weren't human crews and they wouldn't welcome human competition.
He'd learned that from a silvery-metal pyramid, some thirty
feet of seamless stuff on every side. It was out on Calypso, on
the very peak of the highest and most singular of the mountains
of that sub-satellite. It had not been built on Calypso and certainly men hadn't made it but the creatures who had made it
knew that men existed.
There were bas-reliefs of human forms upon its brightlygleaming metal sides and there. were two human-size metal
doors that could obviously be opened by simply turning the
handles of two human-sized locks. Its location was one that
would certainly be visited by any human explorer of Calypso,
if only so that he could leave a record of his visit there for
later voyagers to find. And that so-human pyramid, suggesting
earlier visitors still, would almost irresistably .impel the first
man to reach Calypso to turn the door-handles and go in.
But Rod Cantrell hadn't done that. Perhaps because of war
experience, perhaps because he didn't like the artwork. He cut
into the structure with a thermite torch, leaving the doors alone.
He found it packed with machinery which surely wasn't of
human design, and he struggled to understand it
In the end he found a power-storage unit that was far and
away beyond anything of human manufacture. He cut the
power-leads and traced connections. And then he caused the

12

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

doors to open. In opening they swung contacts and controls and
he saw that they'd have sent the power—some hundreds of
millions of kilowatts —in a mighty surge of energy through a
devrOhe didn't begin to understand but which was obviously
some sort of radiation-generator.
And instantly thereafter the whole pyramid and its machines
began to smoke and were glowing faintly by the time he got
out of it. It melted itself and dissolved in a pool of melted
metal—which exploded when the cut-off power-unit blew. So
that he had nothing but a verbal description to offer with his
report —and he wasn't quite believed.

CHAPTER TWO

Take-Oil
• y i O W he stood beside the incomplete hulk of the Stellsris
i y | with the orders that ended his career in his hand.
"
"It still seems to me that I did the right thing," Rod
said bitterly. "I guessed it as a sort of booby-trap. It was a
gadget to signal somebody, somewhere, when men climbed up
to the point of achieving space-travell And who'd want to be
warned when we reached that stage? Not friends certainly! If
they'd been friendly they'd have helped!"
"Of course they would!" said Kit with conviction.
"I kept that signal from being sent," said Rod. "If I'd kept
my mouth shut I'd have commanded the Stellaiis and we'd
have found another one—there's probably another on the central peak in Tycho's crater on the Moon—and I could have
msde the Commission see it
"But I had to tell about it, believing my word would be taken.
So now somebody else will take the Stollaris out and it'll be
pretty odd if the signal doesn't get sent off when he finds another

T K E BLACK GALAXY

13

pyramid. And then what'Jl happen? What would we do if we'd
been traveling among the stars for ages and found a new, upstart race getting ready to compete with us? And a rather
pugnacious race, at that? We'd smack them down and fast!"
Kit said, agreeing fully, "If we found them before they'd
reached that point we'd try to make friends with them."
"Whoever built the pyramid found us," said Rod, drearily.
"Maybe a few thousand years ago- Maybe at the time they
knocked off the Martians. They didn't bother exterminating us
then. We weren't worth the trouble, though the Martians were.ft
He shrugged his shoulders hopelessly. "Anyhow I've got ray
orders. Somebody^ come to take over from me within hours.
I'm going to take a last look over the ship and then clear my
desk and get ready to leave. Want to come with me?"
Wordlessly she pressed his arm. They went together to the
air-lock. Rod Cantrell composed his face so that nobody could
guess his inner feelings. The lock-doors opened and they entered.
Immediately there was the oddly pleasant smell of growing
things which came from the air-purifying set-up. It was partly
experimental still, but it demonstrsbly worked. The air in the
ship had been kept fresh and breathable for more than six
weeks, despite the men who worked inside the hull, by speciallybred plant life kept in hydroponic tanks.
There were chemical purifiers in reserve of course but normally the ship's air would be restored to normal as the air of
Earth is kept sweet—by plants. There was even a section of
the air-room in which food-plants were being tried out for the
same purpose, turning out foodstuffs as a byproduct of the
purification of the ship's atmosphere.
In hydroponic tanks, vegetables grew with amazing luxuriance. The Stellaris would not be quite self-sustaining but there
should be at least occasional meals of dewy-fresh vegetables
even when the ship was on the far side of Orion.
Rod Cantrell and Kit stepped into the unfinished interior

14

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

of the ship. The smells of work were noticeable, though work
had stopped for the lunch-hour. Rod looked lonesomely about.
In all probability, he would never set foot in the Stellaria again.
The smell of vegetation was strong and pleasant, but there
was the smell of paint too and the curious odor of heated metal
cooling off—all the aromas of uncompleted construction. In
a room designed for storage four painters ate their lunch companionably from lunch-boxes, rather than bother to leave the
ship. An electrician smoked restfully beside his tools.
They went into the engine-room, in which there would be no
single massively-moving part. A tiny isotopic generator made its
humming noise. It was built around a block of artificially radioactive material which gave off electrons alone, with no neutrons or mesons or gamma rays. It yielded utterly safe power and
when its total output was not needed for the ship's purposes, the
excess free electrons were absorbed in another artificial isotope,
which, in absorbing them, become converted into the parent substance.
A fuel-supply for years of operation thus had necessarily
been built into the ship when it was made.
The field-generators, too, were all complete. They had been
tested with the Stellaris safely anchored at bow and stern with
tractor-beams. Rod regarded the generators hungrily. He'd designed them and they had features of which he was very proud.
But now he'd never be able to see for himself how his designs
stood up under service conditions.
"You know how the force-fields work," he said almost wistfully to K i t "In theory there are an indefinite number of dimensions, therefore an indefinite number of—I suppose you'd call
them universes—in parallel. Our universe hangs together because all its parts attract each other magnetically and there are
gravitational linkages all through space.
"There's an incredibly complex network of electrostatic stresses by which even island universes attract each other. So our

T H E BLACK GALAXY

15

universe is stable. But if all the forces that link an object to
our cosmos—the things that tie it in—are cut it falls out of the
universe we know.
*"It goes apparently into a dark universe, where there seem
to fae no stars. Maybe ifs a dead universe where the process
of entropy is complete, where all the energy of the system
has run down. But we don't know yet."
Kit nodded wisely. In the late rebellion of the Total State
the city of Pittsburgh had vanished between two heart-beats
with some millions of human beings. Washington had been
slated to go next and Rod Cantrell had been duped—or so it
was thought by the war lords of the Total State—into operating
the weapon which would destroy i t
But he'd understood their weapon a little too well and it had
been turned terribly against them by his understanding. Now
the Earth Government ruled undisputed again—and the Earth
Government had taken from Rod his chance to go with the
Stellaris to the void between the stars. Because he'd made a
report that nobody wanted to believe
"These generators," said Kod wistfully, "make a field close
about the Stellaris which cuts every natural link between the
ship and the million-billion suns of our universe. Electrostatic
stresses can't go through that field. Gravitation doesn't penetrate.
Magnetic lines of force are stopped. So the ship leaves our universe. As Pittsburgh did. Only—we leave one link of our own
making.
"We leave a tractor-beam in existence pulling the ship toward
one spot. A tractor-beam can penetrate the field that cuts off
everything else. And the ship is drawn to the one spot the
tractor-beam is focussed on, although it moves in a parallel
universe and isn't in our cosmos at all. When it stops at the object the beam is pulling we cut off the force-fields and apparently
rail back into our own space. But we've traveled!"
Kit nodded again. She knew all this of course but Rod was

16

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

heartbroken and it helped him to talk.
"And," he said wistfully as he led the way out of the engineroom, "a pressor-beam works the same way. We can push away
from a place we want to start from, instead of waiting for a tractor to reach out a few light-years to our destination."
He sounded almost enthusiastic as he went along the straightline corridor between the engine-room and the control-cabin—
as yet practically empty of controls.
"My trip to Calypso proved," he added, "the mass-inertia
ratio in the dark universe I actually traveled in, isn't the same
as in our universe. The speed of light is higher—much higher.
The time I took to get to Mars suggested it and the trip to Calypso proved that the constants of the two spaces are different
I reached Calypso through the dark universe faster than light
could make the trip through ours!"
Then he stopped. He'd reached the control-room from which
he'd expected to direct the Stellaris. There was the big instrument-board with practically none of the intended instruments
set into place. The switches that had been installed were taped
to the "off' position, to avoid accident. They'd been used just
once, when the force-field generators were tried out and the ship
— kept from traveling by anchoring tractor-beams holding her
fast—had gone into the dark universe for minutes.
"But," said Rod, after an instant, "that's that."
He stood grimly in the ship he was now forbidden to command.
Then, just as he turned to lead Kit outside again, there came
a sudden sharp crackling sound from somewhere in the ship.
It had the violent harsh timbre of an electric arc. Somebody
shouted frantically. By sheer instinct Rod Cantrell plunged
toward the scene of emergency.
But he didn't get there. Suddenly he seemed to be falling
endlessly, horribly, nightmarishly, with no weight and no grip
on anything. There were vision-ports in the control-room, in.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

17

tended to permit a view of a landscape or of the stars. As the
crackling roar grew thunderous those vision-ports turned red,
then orange, then flashed through the spectrum to violet and
beyond.
The vision-ports became filled with utter blackness and on the
instant the control-room was as dark as any cave on Earth and
Rod and Kit seemed to be hurtling blindly through sheer opacity. Kit uttered a strangled cry. She had left the floor when
weight vanished. She had the hysterical sensation of an increasing, breathtaking dive.
There were streamings somewhere. There was a strange metallic smell of vaporized cable. There was a pungent reek of
ozone. The roaring seemed to grow yet louder and the panicstricken cries grew with i t There came the stench of burned
insulation and then of sooty smoke.
Kit cried out again, "Hod!"
He said in a coldly savage voice. "Steady! You're not falling.
The fields went on from a short-circuit somewhere in the ship.
Now the ship's on fire and we're in the dark universe—traveling.
Steady!"
A little flicker of light—flame—appeared in the corridor leading to the engine-room. There was enough light to show Sod,
floating helplessly in the air, inches only from a featureless
metal wall. Kit drifted yards from any solidity, her eyes wide
and filled with fear.
But the light helped. Rod twisted himself and kicked. He
went tumbling—head-over-heels away from the wall—to the
floor, where he grasped the edge of the incomplete control-panel.
He swung himself about The light flickered again, and he leaped,
diving through weightlessness for the corridor.
He went soaring into it and a mushrooming mass of yellow
incandescence licked out of i t Kit screamed. But the Same
died away a little as he plunged into it, flared out again only
when he was almost through, so that it barely singed him. He

18

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

went plunging on into the engine-room.
Unable to stop, he floated until his out-stretched arms cushioned his impact against the far wall. He swung about again
and soared a second time—this time for the humming small
isotopic generator which supplied the electric current for all
the ship.
He reached i t He held fast—it was extraordinary hard to
hold fast with no weight to help—and savagely cranked off
the manual switch which had kept the unit inert during shipment The roaring of the arc died instantly. There was only an
ominous booming noise as paint and insulation and constructionstores heated by the arc continued to burn. But even that tended
to die down without the arc to keep the flame supplied with
vaporized fuel.
Then Rod looked at the ports in the wall of the engine-room,
and cold sweat came out all over him. The ship was incomplete. It was unequipped. It had no stores at all. But it had
taken off from earth. There were stars in view out Ihe visionports, now that the force-field had cut off and the ship
was back in normal space. But it wasn't on Earth. It wasn't on
any planet
And there wasn't any sunlight shining in any of the ports.
TheTe weren't—this made Rod's throat go dry when he threw
himself across the dark vacancy of the engine-room to one port
after another and stared out—there weren't even any familiar
constellations. The Stellaris had had a speed and kinetic energy
of its own by virtue of the shared motion of the Earth on its
axis and around the sun, and the other motion of the solar system as a whole.
It had gone into the dark universe where the constants of
mass and inertia were strange and still unexplored. There was
not even a bright yellow star anywhere in the heavens which
might be Earth's sun at a greater distance than usual. The
Stellaria was somewhere among the stars. Earth and its sun

T H E BLACK GALAXY

19

could be anywhere, in any direction, at almost any distance
up to light-millennia away. There was no possible way to telL
Even worse—
The shipi in fact, was a derelict I t had been designed to be
driven by the reaction of its tractor and pressor-beams upon
solid bodies outside of itself. Now, apparently, the nearest
solid objects were the stars. It would take years for the beams
to reach the nearest and there was no instrument on board by
which the nearest might even be chosen. There were no stores
of food, no star-maps, no trained crew—there was no faintest
reasonable ground for hope nor reason for any effort
But Kit was on ooard. So when the flames died down and
only a penetrating, noisesome reek of burned paint filled the
air, Rod Cantrell turned on the isotopic dynamo once more and
switched on lights throughout the ship.
Painfully he began the process of searching the unfinished
hulk for unwilling members of its company, to calm them and
sooth them and threaten them in preparation for labors he had
yet to imagine, for purposes he had yet to devise, toward ends
he could not even conceive of. Oddly enough, he did not even
think of the alien race that had been the cause of his uneasiness back on Earth. But here among the stars was where the
greatest danger lay.

CHAPTER THREE

Contact

T

IAT danger manifested itself within hours. The short-circuit
had been repaired—a painter had shifted some welding-rods
to make room for a comfortable nap during his lunch-hour,
and so had made a contact between two exposed wires from
which take-off leads were to have led current elsewhere.

20

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

Lights again burned throughout the ship and Rod had turned
on all pressor-beams in the rather desperate hope that somewhere within their range there might be some solid substance to
give the ship navigability. Actually the most he hoped for was
something to drive toward or from so that there could be acceleration and the feel of gravity to hearten the bewildered
and frightened people who were the Steltaris" unwilling crew.
,They were turned on and almost immediately he thought ha
felt a slight stirring of the ship. It was too slight to be sure.
When he held a coin at arm's length and let it go, it stayed
there in mid-air. If anything had been touched by the beams
it had been lost—had slipped out of them. The nightmarish
feeling of perpetual falling continued. Reason did no good. The
sensation was nerve-racking.
Then, suddenly, a flash of unbearable light poured in through
the vision-ports. It lasted no longer than aflash-bulb'sflare,
and was gone again. But Rod dived for a port and stared out
Instantly he blinked, blinded As he reached the glass window
opening upon all of space a second flash came.
It was blindingly bright—but it came from a tiny spot, an
infinitesimal spot, no larger than a star-image. A pause, then a
third flash came. It would make the ship's hull glow as if incandescent. And the third flash was not from the same place
as the second.
Rod was dazed for an instant He had a flash of hope. Then
he knew better. He'd had the pressor-besms turned on at random. They'd touched something which had sped on out of the
pressor-beam field. Now that something flashed a search-beam.
And there was but one possible source for brief unthinkablybrightflashesof light which would last only for thousandths of a
second.
Only in space would a light-beam have certain advantages
over radar. On Earth radar penetrates clouds and mist. In space
there are no hindrances to vision. If there were a space-ship

THE BLACK GALAXY

21

somewhere off there in the void end if it had detected the
Stellarif? pressor-beams and dived out of them, it might use
radar to locate the Earth-ship.
It would learn more from a single flash of visual lights yielding
a photograph, than any scanning-beam could report in hours.
The fact was wisdom after the event but it told Rod instantly
that there was a space-ship yonder. And no space-ship could
be friendly.
H e went into frenzied activity. H e dived back to the engineroom and swung the pressor-beams in tense and urgent quest.
Spreading them wider at first he searched for something for
them to react against. He found i t He felt the ship stir. He put
on more power. The ship surged ahead. More power still and
he felt the floor-plates push against his feet He put on more
power and more and more . . .
In seconds the Stellarh was thrusting away from something
Unseen at a full gravity acceleration. In minutes more it was
a gravity and a half. Rod worked grimly with a small pressor,
hunting for a focus so the beam could be locked to the object
it was to thrust away from.
The acceleration increased. The fan-shaped pressors were
pushing against something which came closer despite the repulsive force of the beams the Stellaris played on i t There was
an arrogant confidence in the other space-ship, which seemed
to be testing out the maximum power the Stellaris could exert. Sweat came out on Rod's forehead.
Then, suddenly, the small pressor found a focus and locked and he struggled feverishly against nearly two gravities
to the control-room. Just as he laid his hands on the forcefield switches there was a sudden sickening loss of all but the
most minute sensation of weight as the other ship darted out
of the pressor-beam and came flashing up beside the unwieldy
Stellaris.
Rod had one glimpse of it as he flung the force-field

22

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

switches home. It was pyramidal. It blanked out a triangular patch of stars. Rod felt a momentary deathly giddiness
—and then the force-fields closed in. The Stellartf ports
went ebony-black and it was again in the dark universe.
Whatever weapon the enemy ship intended to use did not
follow into the dark cosmos, but the Earth-ship's focussed
pressor did not penetrate its own force-fields and thrust and
thrust and thrust—with all the power Rod dared to put
into its coils.
The hulk went streaking madly through the utter blackness of its private cosmos for second after second — and
nothing happened — and then for minute after minute, then
for hour after hour.
For a long time Rod Stood grimly at the incomplete instrument board, expecting any instant to 'feel that deadly
giddiness and then death. Some weapon had been used
against the Stellaris and he felt sick and weak and ill.
But after a long fime he went down to the engine-room
again and examined the single small pressor-beam he'd focussed and locked on the pyramidal ship and its point of
focus was very, very far beyond the point at which it had
been set. He could not guess the distance. There had been
no chance to calibrate the controls. But it was very, very,
very far away indeed.
After twelve hours the pressor could no longer adjust to
the increasing distance. The pyramidal ship went beyond
its range. The locked focus went off and the ship hurtled
blindly on through black emptiness.
"They haven't got our force-fields," Rod told Kit, grimly.
"There's that much gained. They couldn't follow us when we
vanished. At least we can play hide-and-seek with them!"
Kit had heard from him about the momentary glimpse
he'd had of the other craft.
"That feeling we had," she said with a shudder. "I thought

T H E BLACK GALAXY

23

I was dying. So did everybody else."
"We probably were," he said evenly. "If it had lasted a
fraction of a second longer they'd have caught the ship.
They'd have examined our corpses and they'd probably have
reported and had the records searched. They'd know that
people of our structure should have set off a gadget on
Calypso — only we didn't. I suspect we're not the only lucky
people right now!"
An hour later he said abruptly, "I'm going to cut the field.
That ship is a long way off. First I'm going to set the pressorbeams at a wide angle as a warning system. But we ought
to do some-thing better. . . ,*
He har.d-set the beams so that the ship would be surrounded by a shield of repulsion on every side. Any ship
or planet or even meteroite that might be within range when
the Stellaiis returned to normal space would bring about a
repulsion of the ship itself.
Having no detection-instruments, they could tell of the nearness of a solid object they could not see by the stirring of
the ship itself. Then he threw the switches again, to let the
Steilaris drop back into the universe of stars.
A myriad-myriad suns surrounded them, each so remote
that it was but a pin-point of light Again there was no familiar portion of the galaxy within view. There was the Milky
Way, to be sure, but even that seemed to have changed its
aspect. It was markedly brighter on one side than the other
— and Earth is not too far, on a cosmic scale, from the center
of the First Galaxy.
The Steilaris had fled at uncountable multiples of the speed
of light while in the dark universe. It was certainly many
thousands of light-years from Earth, with no possible indication either of its first course or of its second in departing
from i t
Rod stayed in normal space for four hours, and the pressor-

24

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

beams told of no solid object witb.in four light-hours' distance.
Grimly, he went back to the dark universe. The kinetic energy of the Stellaris' acquired velocity remained.
In normal space it meant a certain speed in an unknown
direction. In the dark universe that speed was multiplied. He
kept the ship in blackness for half an hour, browbeating an
electrician meanwhile into beginning the assembly of a shortshort-wave receiver.
Out into normal space again — and still no star within view
which seemed nearer than any other. He had a course of action planned out, which was almost hopeless but not quite.
He went back into the dark universe once more.
Six times within the next twenty-four hs came back to normal space. Five times the Stellaris was utterly alone in the
center of mockingly remote stars.
But the sixth time — and it was only chance—the Steltaris
winked into being in normal space and there was a giant yellow
sun perceptibly nearer. It had at least a visible disk and flaring prominences leaped and curled outward from its sides,
More, there were planets. No less than four were plainly
visible and a monster world — snow-covered from pole to
pole — swam within naked-eye view from the vision-ports. He
waited with taut nerves beside the force-field switches.
A bellowing voice came from somewhere below him in
the ship. "No-o-o-o radar!"
That was the electrician beside his short-short-wave receiver. Only voice signals could be used in the uncompleted
ship because there was no intercommunication system in being.
Rod waited. The presaor-beams spread out, out and out at
the speed of light Rod was hollow-eyed and jumpy. There
was a stubble of beard on his chin. H e had been doing four
men's work under heavier responsibility than any man or men
should ever be required to accept, because he believed that
on the safety or utter destruction of the SteUaris hung the

T H E BLACK GALAXY

25

safety of the human race. But he had no choice.
The voice came again from below, "No-o-o-o radar!"
The Steliaris then, was not being scanned. Not yet, anyhow. The ship stirred ever so slightly. The pressor-beams,
fanning out, had reached the snow-covered planet. Rod called
orders and the beams were narrowed.
The repulsion was from that planet only. Unless a spaceship were in exact direct line between the Steliaris and the
planet there was nothing in space that was menacing. The
odds were good. But Red waited a long half-hour, with the
"No-o-o-o radar!" at regular intervals, before he even began
to relax.
"I guess we're safe for the moment," he said wearily. "We'll
have to take a chance anyhow. Kit, we want a tractor put on
that planet yonder — not the near one but the next one in
toward this sun. We'll time it, of course."
Even then he waited tensely. The invisible, narrowed tractor-beam reached out at a hundred-and-eighty-two-thousand
miles a second. Four minutes — five — then a perceptible jerk.
The planet was in the neighborhood of fifty-five million miles
away but now the ship was being drawn toward i t
"Rod," said Kit anxiously, "you're terribly tired! Can't I
stand watch for you? It'll be hours and hours before we get
there!"
"It'll be days," said Rod wearily. "We'd better stay in normal space for this trip. But I'll fix a gadget If those pyramid
devils can't follow us into the dark universe we can fool them
at that."
He surrendered the controls to her. He improvised a spring
which would throw on the force-fields and keep them on it
the person on watch should be killed by a weapon like that
they had experienced.
"Get somebody to hold this," he said tiredly. There's enough
Pull to give us the feeling of gravity. And I've got a sort of
idea."

CHAPTER FOUR

Bead World
E SAT down to draw plans and make calculations. But
within seconds he was asleep. It was not only the sixtysome hours of unremitting tensity but the strain of worrying about what might be happening back on Earth that had
worn him out It would be believed of course that he had
taken off in the Stellaria deliberately as an act of resentment
at having his command taken away from him.
And of course he would be classed as a traitor or murderer
or worse and immediately the Space Project Committee would
set to work to duplicate the Stellaris and send it off — undoubtedly without orders to be wary of metal pyramids. He
had to get back to Earth in time to stop that — which was
patently impossible, He could not hope to get the Stellaria
or Kit back to Earth at alL
He slept and Kit stood valiantly beside the almost empty
control-board. The Stellaris moved on toward the unnamed
planet o! an unknown sun, its acceleration giving the effect of
weight for its occupants. Word went about the oddly-assorted
ship's company of an approaching landing, and they cheered.
The girl biologists, in charge of the air purifying plant,
brought it back to proper functioning. The hydroponic vegetables had borne a small crop of edibles, despite the alternations of gravity with no gravity at alL The crop was very
small but there were not many to eat it. Four painters, two
electricians, three arc-welders and five girls had remained in
the ship during the lunch-hour which seemed so long ago.
Presently a painter came to the control-room to present a
complaint Kit put her finger to her lips, pointed to Rod and
beckoned. She explained the significance of the spring, whispering, and made Rod as comfortable as she could without

H

26

T H E BLACK GALAXY

27

waking him. Then she went about the ship, talking earnestly
to every individual.
It was a very good idea, because with continued normal
feeling of weight, something like normal mental processes
returned to the unwitting voyagers. They began to realize that
none of Earth's other planets was suited for human use and
that it was not likely that this unknown world would be of
any value for them.
They realized, too, the utter lack of preparation for interstellar travel. There was not even food, save for the garden
in the air-purifying room. But Kit managed to change their
forebodings to no worse than anxious curiosity and when they
had reached that stage they were prepared to act as intelligently as they could. So the situation, as far as the crew was
concerned, was much more hopeful.
Kit waked Rod when their chosen planet loomed large before them. He opened his eyes as a voice bellowed monotonously, "No-o-o radar!" from somewhere below in the ship.
"We're almost there," said Kit anxiously, "and we don't
know how to land."
Rod was instantly awake. He stared at the disk — big as a
dinner-plate — on the planet ahead. The sensation of weight
proved that the Stellaris was hurtling toward it at ever-increasing speed.
"We'll switch to pressor-beams and slow up," he said, "So
far, pretty good!"
He sent calls through the ship, warning of the change-over.
There was a bare second of weightlessness, then all floors became ceilings and all ceilings floors. It was purely a guesswork process. Kod could estimate the planefs distance only
by the time needed for the pressor-beams to hit i t
He could not estimate the ship's speed at all. But he set
to work to improvise landing tactics by rule of thumb. As a
first measure he shifted the beams to one side of the planet,

28

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION MOVEL

so that the Stellaria would no longer head straight for the
center of the visible hemisphere,
It was necessary to remember that the danger from alien
space-ships might easily be greater here than anywhere else
in the universe. The.Sre/Jaris might actually have come back
to normal space so far within the empire of the pyramidbuilders that radar beams and scouts were considered unnecessary. She could, conceivably, be heading for the very
stronghold of the alien race and could have been undetected
only because such an approach was unimaginable. But it waa
not likely.
The Ship's course altered almost imperceptibly. She had
been approaching too fast for an endurable stop short of the
strange world's surface. Now she went angling over to a line
that would carry her past. But the great disk enlarged and
grew greater and they saw seas upon it and clouds and vast
areas of green vegetation. When the ship shot past the twilight zone the surface was within mere thousands of miles.
Rod said, "I wish we had a telescope on board. I'm not
sure, but I saw some splotches that could be cities."
"Do you think—?"
"I'm not guessing," he told her. "I'm taking a chance. If
they beam us it's the pyramid people. If they don't, it isn't.
But there must be plenty of civilization in our galaxy. The
fact that they had a trick all worked out to get warning when
we made space-ships rather hints at t h a t
"If there are two civilizations there are probably hundreds
of thousands. There must be too many for the pyramid people
to wipe out, so they only set traps for them and knock them
off when they reach a space-ship culture."
Kit said uneasily, "That — ship certainly turned something
on us, without trying to signal us first, and we were plainly
running away and not trying to fight them."
"Not surprising," said Rod brieHy. "I saw the bas-reliefs

THE BLACK GALAXY

29

they made of humans." The memory ol them was clear.
H e had. On the pyramid on Calypso there had been modeled human figures. They should have been irresistible as
incitements to curiosity, so that the doors would be opened
But the figured people were not modeled by friendly artists.
The figures had been made by craftsman who despised their
models.
No artist can keep himself out of his work and the figures
had actually made Rod angry at the scorn implicit in theii
making. They pictured humans with strict accuracy but managed somehow to classify them as beasts and vermin. Men
would not frave pictured men with such scorn.
Rod had felt instant suspicion and hostility toward the
builders of the pyramid and was disinclined to do anything
they planned for him to d a That was why he'd cut into the
pyramid instead of hopefully opening its doors — and that
was why there was as yet no warning that humans had achieved
space-travel
Kit said presently, "You're planning to land, Rod. Can we
test the air?"
"The sun's the same color as ours at home," Rod told her.
"It must have nearly the same spectrum. And the vegetation's
green. The chemistry must be the same. If plants use cnlorophyl here to utilize sunlight like ours, the air must be oxygen
and nitrogen and COa. Other gases wouldn't work, we can't
even guess at the proportions."
"And the — gravity?" she said uneasily.
"We've nothing to measure it with," he said with a shrug.
"But we do know that we didn't have to push unbearably to
get over to one side and run past We practically tested the
gravity with our feet — high up as we are." Then he looked
at her sharply. "I had some sleep, Kit. I doubt that you did.
Better go get some."
She hesitated, and looked at him wistfully. He said heav-

30

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

ily, "I'm not very romantic, am I? But I've got plenty on
my mind. The people in that space-ship tried to kill us out of
hand. They must have killed off the Martians.
"They'll kill not only us but everybody back on Earth if
they catch us and find out our physical structure and check
it with the records they'll undoubtedly have made when they
modeled those figures on the Calypso pyramid. So we've got
not only our own lives to think of but literally everybody else's.
"Fve got to try to figure out a way to finish this ship, and
arm it somehow — but I've got the beginning of an idea —
and I've got to concoct some way to blow it and us literally
to atoms if we're caught and killed. And after all that I'm —
well — I'm very much in love with you and I've got to figure
out something to make you safe."
He stood doggedly by the controls, holding the force-field
switches against the springs that would throw the Stellaris into
other-space if he should be killed where he stood. Kit's eyes
softened.
"I —see. We can't think about us. Not yet."
"Not yet," he agreed heavily. "If we're safe here — and I'm
beginning to think we are — I'm going to try to get the
Stellaris down. If those splotches are cities the inhabitants may
be anything and they may be friendly or not, civilized or not.
But I'm hoping they're not the people who tried to kill us."
He turned back to the vision-ports. They were over the
night-side of the planet, and to one side—actually it felt as if
the planet were below—there was only the blank black bulk of
the unknown world. It was hardly a thousand miles away but
the Stellaris could not be checked to land on it without killing
all on board by multiple-gravity deceleration.
Then the dark globe lay behind and it was time to change
back to tractor-beams to pull back toward it and lessen the
ship's headlong speed toward infinity. And then, hours later,
the again-remote planet ceased to dwindle and grew targe

THE BLACK GALAXY

31

once more and he juggled alternate tractor and pressor-Deams
to bring the Stellaris close to its day-side, then to match speed
with the planet's surface- At long last he dared lei the clumsy
tfiulk which was the Earth-ship down into atmosphere
Bellowing came from below 'No-o-o-o radarl" And then t
new voice called, "No-o-o-o radio!'" Because a civilization
which did not have space-ships 01 even radar cou!d have
broadcast-waves in its atmosphere, as Earth had done tor
nearly a hundred years before space-travel became possible
to its people.
The ship went heavily lower and lower, more and more
slowly in relation to the jungle underneath. Where the ship
approached there was jungle. There *ere rivers. Fat awaj
there were the slopes of a mountain range and, off to one side
the authentic blue of a sea. The ship went soggily down and
down, its small and accidental crew gazing at the scene nc
human eyes had ever before looked at—lower still and individual jungle-growths became visible.
There was a straight streak which looked like a highway of
some sort The Stellaris floated onward, rocking a little on the
pressor-beams which supported it Then a city appeared at the
horizon. There were towers and pinnacles and a myriad orisma
tic flashings of reflected sunlight
But there was no movement, no smoke, no aircraft overhead, no signs of alarm or recognition of the Stellaris1 existence
The ship was only two thousand feet up and there were deep
depressions in the vegetation below where its pressor-beams
touched ground to uphold i t
The city drew near. And it was dead. There was no life anywhere. But it had not been dead long because the Jungle had
not yet encroached on it It was simply dead—understated
untouched, unharmed but dead.
Rod brought the ship to a wallowing stop over the ver>
center of the metropolis It reached for miles in every direction

32

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

On a basis of human occupancy, it could have housed a population of millions. Yet there was no movement below. Rod began
painstakingly to let down for a landing in a central open space.
Kit said in a strained voice; "Rod! Those little things on
the highway. Colored thingsl Brightly-colored!"
"My guess," said Rod briefly, "is that they're the inhabitants.
People who could build a city like this would be pretty civilized.
No reason why they shouldn't wear brightly-colored clothes."
"But they're not moving!"
"My guess,1* said Rod again, "is that they're dead."
"A plague?"
"No. Our friends," said Rod grimly. "A civilization that could
build this city would be close to space-travel. Maybe they
sent a ship to that snow-covered planet and found a pyramid
there and opened it up to see who among their ancestors had
gone there first—and called in our friends to exterminate them."
She stared at him in horror. His face was very white. He
nodded toward the very center of the open space into which
the Stellaria descended. There was a bright metal pyramid
there.
"If, by any chance, there was a space-ship off on a voyage
when this world was murdered and it came back afteT the murderers had left," said Rod harshly, "they'd probably think that
some survivors had left word for them in that. And they'd open
it"
"At a guess that pyramid on Calypso would have killed me
too if I'd opened it in the normal way. Very probably that was
it. The ones who summoned the murders wouldn't live to know
what they'd done or take back any word of what a pyramid implied."
The ship hovered only a hundred feet above the ground.
Slowly, slowly, slowly, Rod eased it downward. He expected an
impact but the Stellaria touched the strange world's surface with
a surprising and quite accidental gentleness.

THE BLACK GALAXY

33

Without explanation Rod went to the air-lock and closed
the inner door. He cracked the outer door and sniffed cautiously.
He tried again. He took a deep breath. The air seemed to
him to be perfectly adequate.
To make sure,, he stepped outside and breathed deeply. He
felt a bitter amusement at the difference between this instant
of landing on a strange world of another sun, and the way he'd
pictured it while the Steltaris was building.
He hadn't thought that the landing would be made from
an almost unmanageable hulk, unequipped for landing or navigation or even the testing of air, lost utterly in space, with the
despairing knowledge that probably the best that could be
hoped was that the dozen or so humans on the ship might
manage to find a place of perpetual exile with a murderous
alien race for enemies.
The air was good but nothing else was promising.
If the ship that had contacted the Stettaris had reported its
encounter a galaxy-wide search for a race attaining space-travel
might be already under way. If they found Earth.
For that matter, Earth's cities might already be filled with
crumpled figures. Earth's air might already be empty of fliers.
Earth's cities might already be as dead as this one. Rod Cantrell
looked at tumbled heaps of garments on the pavements about
him and cursed thickly.
CHAPTER FIVE

Marks of Murder

I

T was one of the girls in charge of the air-purifying plant
who solved the food problem for the time being. Her test for
toxic substances was simple but absolutely effective. A tiny
morsel of vegetation was strapped against a girl's skin near

34

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

the wrist. A deadly substance would produce immediate reaction. Irritation or pain or loss of sensation would show toxicity
without any risk or danger to the girl.
A group oi two painters and an arc-welder marched to the
edge of the jungle and gathered what fruits they could find
They came back loaded down, reporting apparent cultivation
of the ground, only partly overwhelmed with wild growths.
Carefully labeled samples decorated the arms of each of the
five girls on the ship for the next two hours. Of all the specimens, only one produced a slight rash.
Then it was a question of finding out which of the remaining
fruits were most palatable. Tiny samples, chewed and swallowed, answered that. One produced cramps. The rest seemed
good. The problem of food, then, became to some extent merely
a matter of gathering a sufficient quantity.
While this went on Rod Canteen and Kit and one of the
ship's electricians went exploring among the city's buildings
for equally important materials. They wanted metals, tools,
weapons. They hadnt much hope of the last in a civilized city.
They found plenty of metaL They found few tools. What
they did find in horrible profusion, though, was the pitiful population of the city. Garments lay everywhere, each with a heap
of dust within i t What unthinkable weapon had killed them
could only be guessed at—though Rod thought he had an idea—
but surely it had come upon them without warning.
There were huddled heaps of garments in places that were
plainly shops, though the show-cases hung from the ceilings.
There were innumerable heaps of clothing on the public ways,
and in the queer vehicles the oddly human-like dead race had
used.
Many of the vehicles were wrecked, as if their drivers had
died at the controls and the untended machines had driven on
senselessly until they crashed.
There were many quaintly human-like items in the dead civ-

THE BLACK GALAXY

35

jlization. The explorers found one little shop with identifiable
cages in it, as if for small captive creatures, and collars of metal
apparently intended for pets.
They found where groups of the vanished race had died as if
in the midst of friendly conversation and—as their observation
grew more acute—they saw that some of the heaps of garments
were smaller than others, and that usually such small garments
were beside larger ones, as if the murdered children had been
with their parents.
Kit grew very pale. Rod glowered as they went on. The eleo
trician with them scowled more and more deeply.
"Who killed all these folks?" he demanded pugnaciously. "It
happened all at once an' it couldn't ha' been more'n a couple
of years ago."
"I think," said Rod tonelessly, "it was the gang we ran away
from. The gang that made a metal pyramid on Calypso. The
same gang that built a metal pyramid not far from where I
landed the ship— which we're going to make use of if we have
luck."
The electrician Spat. "An' you think they killed these people?"
"Because," Rod told him, "they made a space-ship. The pyramid on Calypso was supposed to tip them off when we did. The
pyramid in the square back by the ship is bait If there was a
space-ship away from home when this world was killed and
if it came back, the people in it would think some survivors
of the catastrophe had left a record for them."
'They'd go inside to see. And they'd be killed. And the murderers would be notified to come and mop up just to make
sure. See?"
The electrician spat again. "We'd better figure out something
to slap them guys down," he said coldly. T h e y need it"
The three went on. And everywhere they moved through
the city they saw new evidences of the high degree of civilization the dead race had achieved, more and more of the pathetic

36

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

heaps of garments which had been members of that race. Kit,
perhaps, saw those most clearly. The electrician saw also the
enormous wealth left ownerless by the annihilation of its creators.
Not only was there a metropolis left, which humans could
take over and use with little modification, but there were
goods and even jewels—strangely-cut and very beautiful—and
all the other portable possessions of a civilized world. Re made
no move to burden himself though. There was too much of
riches in sight to make mere looting a temptation. But it was
plain enough that he saw.
Rod saw the technical side of the murdered culture. H e noted
the lavish use of non-corrodible alloys. He saw plastics used
where human-made plastics would not have been satisfactory.
H e took a small sliver of colorless transparent stuff and held
a flame to i t It did not discolor or char.
"Looks like fluocarbon," he said absorbedly. "These people
had gone placesl"
Then they entered a great building which was plainly a
power-station and a communication-center at once. Here Rod
was in his element and the electrician was not far behind him.
The central hall was huge and bright with sunlight and there
were many machines upon the floor.
"Generator yonder," said Rod, nodding. "Looks like an electron-emitting isotope trick like ours. See the power-leads from
it?"
The electrician observedj "Silver bus-bars. Looks like nylon
insulation everywhere."
"Or fluocarbon plastic. Hm." Rod stared at a huge block of
solid transparent stuff with metal sheets and rods deeply imbedded in it. Power-leads ran to it but the metal sheets did
not connect within the transparency. He stared while the
others wandered about. Then Kit, a little distance away, uttered

T H E BLACK GALAXY

37

"Rodt Come here! Oh—it's terrible!"
Rod went quickly. And Kit was standing with clenched hands
before a double row of instruments. Between them the floor
was quite covered with the bright garments of the dead race,
showing that all the occupants of the building had been crowded
here when death fell upon their city. And the rows of instruments showed why.
They were, in effect, television instruments. But it took time
to realize it, because on each screen a distinct and motionless
image remained. Each instrument still showed the picture that
had been upon it at the instant the city died.
Some of the pictures were of individual members of the race
in the act of spe'.king. Others—many others—were of scenes
upon the ways, either of this city or another, showing the dead
race as it had been. On two screens there was no hint of danger
or of the coming of death.
But no less than six showed the death-agonies of those who
were still not dead. The screens were horrible to look a t Three
—and this was where the heaps of garments were thickest—showed the sky. Each showed a strange object against a background of clouds or stars. And the three were identical. Each
was a monstrous metal pry am id.
Rod stared wocdenly at the images. Then he examined the
instruments which held them.
"Vision-screens," he announced unnecessarily. Then he added,
"A good trick. They didn't project their television. They modified a plate of some sort that can change like—well—like the
skin of a chameleon. Didn't have to worry about brightness.
Like a photograph, only it must have moved. When the machine went off the last picture stayed until it went back on
again."
He fumbled and peeled off a strip of flexible material which
formed the screen. The image remained on it. It was, in effect,
a photograph of the last object the dying eyes of these people

38

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

had looked at. He hunted and found a stock of similar sheets
—but blank—to be used as replacements.
"Television," he said, ''only you could keep any scene you
wanted to as a photograph. I think I've got a good hunch on
what killed these people. The trouble is to prove it."
Kit caught her breath. She was grief-stricken at the pictures.
"Rod! They were so much like us! So much like us!"
"That flying pryamid was the destroyer," Rod pointed out
"A pyramid's a good structural form—the most rigid you can
make with straight girders. And there's no sense in streamlining a space-ship because there's no air-resistance in space.
Besides, polished metal at such angles would reflect away radarbeams—solar heat too if they wanted to go ctose to a sun.
"My guess is that, was a fighting-ship. It appeared in the
Bky overhead and these people's telescopes picked it up and
they were watching it when they died."
The electrician said suddenly, "Hey! These sets must've
blown out—"
"Whatever killed the people stopped the sets," agreed Rod
coldly. "They wouldn't have switched them off just because
they were dying. Whatever killed the people did something to
the sets! If we open one up we may check on an idea I've got."
He saw the electrician reach in his overall pocket for tools.
He went to the big block of plastic with the imbedded and covered metal plates. The thing bothered him. The plastic was
plainly an insulator and as plainly the whole thing was designed
to perform some electrostatic or electronic function. He felt
that he ought to understand.
One of the plates wasn't solid metal but pierced with innumerable holes like a sieve. Rod frowned, a" hunch telling him
that this was important He tried to figure it out as an electrostatic device, guessing at capacity-effects between the enclosed
plates. But this part would neutralize the capacity-effect between that and that and—

THE BLACK GALAXY

39

His mouth dropped open. It was a vacuum tube! Save that
the parts were imbedded in plastic instead of held in emptiness,
it wss plainly a vacuum tube! The plastic must have acted
electronically like a vacuum, allowing electron-flow. And they
must have had the trick of cold emission of electrons from a
metal surface! If that were so this device would bandit incredible amounts of power!
As Rod's eyes began to glow, the electrician came to him.
"Hey! We can fix these sets! I opened one up and a pair of
porcelain insulators is crumpled all up. They were the mounting
insulators and they went to powder and the works settled and
shorted and quit workin'!"
Rod wanted to babble of his own discovery but instead he
followed back to the vision-sets. It was as the electrician had
said. Supports for the apparatus within the cases had shivered
to powder.
Kit had a strange expression on her face.
"Rod! I've got an idea. I don't know anything about science
but in school once our instructor showed us how supersonic
waves could break glass to powder if they-were strong enough
and of sufficient high-frequency. He said they were used to sterilize things. Could the way these people were killed be something like that?"
"It could," said Rod grimly. "We had a dose Of something
like it from that other space-ship—remember? But air won't
carry supersonics. It's elastic and they go down in pitch. And
there wasn't any air where that other space-ship caught up
with us. I think you're close. Very close."
The electrician showed Kit the powder remaining from the
shattered insulators. It was very fine. The rest of the insulation
was plastic. Then he bent down and tore at silken garments
on the floor. Not even Kit protested. The dead race had no such
bony skeletons as humanity possesses. There was only fine
dust within the garments. The electrician folded torn cloth to
a pad.

40

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

"This's dry," he observed. "It'd ought to do for a insulator for
a try, anyhow."
He reached into the case, then drew back and put on rubber
gloves for safety's sake. As he lifted the settled mass of coils and
wires there was a tiny snapping sound. A spark jumped brittlely
and ceased. The electrician put the pad in place. He prepared
another and adjusted that
Kit said tensely, "It's working!"
They looked. The sheet on which a colored photograph had
appeared permanently fixed now changed beneath their eyes. It
was extraordinary to see the picture, by the light from overhead, change itself by an apparent flow of pigment from one
spot to another to form a new arrangement of shapes and colors.
Where the scene oh this instrument's screen had been that
of the last instant in the life of the people of this planet, now
it was the scene currently in being. The street was empty of
moving forms but there were those empty heaps of garments on
the ground where the people of the planet had been. It was
plainly a current view of the place where the connected sending instrument stood.
And then, preposterously, aa they watched there came a
movement in the distance. Kit caught her breath. Then the
electrician swore luridly. And then Rod clenched his hands
until the blood flowed in his palms.
CHAPTER SIX

Pyramids Coming!

T

HERE were living creatures moving toward the sendinginstrument Not many—the three human watchers could
see clearly and there were but four individuals in sight
Those four individuals rode in one of the odd vehicles native

THE BLACK GALAXY

41

to the planet. Rod and the others watched intently.
They had bulbous heads and attenuated arms and legs, and
one of them guided the vehicle to a spot no more than fifty or
sixty yards from the vision-sender. There the vehicle stopped.
The four got out and stared at a building.
One lifted something from a belt about his middle. Flame
darted from it in a thin straight line. He swept it up, and sidewise, and down, and across again. A section of plastic-sealed
wall fell slowly outward.
From somewhere within the vision-instrument, they heard
the crash of its fall. The four marched unconcernedly across the
wreckage, trampling underfoot the gay garments of the murdered native race.
Rod said in a whisper, "This may be a sender too. No noise!"
The three humans stood motionless. In minutes the four sticklike figures came out, burdened with loads of shimmering
stuff the watchers could not identify. They piled it in the
vehicle. They went back as if for more.
Rod thrust the others from before the vision-machine so
that, if this were a two-way instrument, their images would
not remain on the screen at the other end. Crisply he ripped
out the pads of temporary insulation. There was a tiny spark
and the picture ceased to move.
"They're looters," said Rod grimly. "They're not the native
race certainly. Presumably they're the crowd that travels in
those flying pyramids. They're the murderers. And now it becomes clear why they wait for another race to reach the spaceship stage of civilization before they murder them.
"A civilized race leaves a civilization behind when it dies. It
leaves cities to be looted. It turns murder from a precaution
into a business!" His nostrils were widened. He breathed heavily,
went white with a deep, corrosive anger.
"We go back to the ship," he said flatly. "You see the pattern!
They murdered the natives of this planet without warning and

42

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

set up at least one pyramid to tell them if any survivors turned
up later.
"When they were sure it was quite safe they came back and
now they've begun the leisurely looting of the cities whose inhabitants they killed. Quite safe and very logical."
His tone, at the end, changed to raging fury. But he led the
way back toward the ship without a word of explanation. He
was torn between quite irrational rage and a desperate desire
to get Kit away from here and out of danger. Yet he knew
that even bact on Earth, unless something quite impossible
happened, Kit would be equally doomed. Whether in flight
through space or hidden in the dark universe she was in no
better case.
Through the air-lock and into the ship. The party gone to
gather fruit was back with a large supply. Rod called a meeting of the curiously-assorted ship's company. He curtly summed up the situation.
"There are three things we can do," he said shortly at the
end. "We can leave this planet, which is being looted by the
creatures who killed its inhabitants. That means taking a
chance we can't even estimate of finding another planet where
we can try to provision ourselves — and possibly arm ourselves for defense.
"We can go into the dark universe and open the air-lock
and die quickly. Or —" he paused — "we can stay here, fight
or dodge the looters and try to find an observatory and starmaps and possibly the way back home."
There could be no dissension. But a painter pointed out that
since he hadn't agreed to this voyage he considered that he
was on overtime — rather, double-time pay for all work done
outside of his regular job of painting. His union, in fact, might
insist on a still higher rate of pay. And he would work only
if assured that a mediation-based award of pay would be
accepted.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

43

Rod agreed impatiently.
"But the first thing," he said urgently, "is to hide the ship.
The only safe hiding-place is the dark universe. You know how
the field-generators were tested. We anchored the ship in place
with focused tractor-beams and then turned on the fields. She
went into the dark universe, but Stayed in the part of it parallel to her slip. When the fields were turned off she came back
to where she'd been. That's what we'll have to do now."
One of the girl biologists said dismally, "No weight?"
"No weight," agreed Rod. "Except for those of us out on the
planet, working a little trick I think we can handle. Who volunteers for that?"
He had his pick of the ship's company. He chose an electrician and a painter and almost angrily refused Kit's insistence that she_ oe of the party.
"I'm not going to take any chances," he told her, "but I
don't want to be worried about you. And you're more able
than anybody else to attend to what has to be done — on
the ship, that is."
He shifted the Stellaris on her pressor-beams to a position
dose by the walls of a massive building. He anchored her
there by focused beams and flicked on the force-fields for the
infinitesimal part of a second. Back in normal space the ship
had not moved. He tried it again for longer periods.
The anchoring tractors worked exactly as he wished. Focused, they worked even from the other-space, though when
unfocused they could not be used either into or out of i t He
wrote, at some length. Then he took a half-dozen small objects and focused material-handler tractor beams on them —
small beams. He turned the tractor-power away down and
then took them out of the ship despite the reduced-power
tractor's pull.
He wedged them in place so they could not fly back to the
ship until released but so that they would fly back to the ship.

44

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

even into the dark universe, when set free. Then he was ready.
He and his two followers went outside. Rod looked up to the
port through which Kit regarded him anxiously. He waved
his hand.
There was a puff of air. The Stellaria — was not. There
was only emptiness where she had been. She was in another
cosmos, in another set of dimensions, as far removed from this
planefs surface as the farthest island universe.
Yet if any of the small objects arranged for the purpose
were released it would be drawn to the ship and through the
forcefield and into the open air-lock in the fraction of a second, implying a removal of no more than yards.
Sod started off for the big building in which he'd found the
television sets and the isotopic generator and the huge mass
of plastic which was a vacuum tube in its functioning. On the
way he spoke crisply.
"We had a space-ship turn something on us that was pretty
bad. It lasted only the fraction of a second, so it didn't kill us.
Here something deadly hit It didn't break plastic or metal or
stone but it crumbled ceramic insulators to powder. Got any
idea what it could be?"
The painter, knitting his brows, said, "You can break china
when plastic only bounces. What they got? Something that
smacks hard?"
"They didn't push down the buildings," Rod pointed out "A
bunch of little blows, like a compressed-air drill, will cut
through stone that a straight push or a rotary drill won't handle.
My guess is they had a sort of pressor-beam, only instead of
pushing steadily it hit hard and fast — and often. Vibration."
The electrician said, demurring, "Vd get an awful kick-back
from a pressor-beam that went off an' on like that!"
"Suppose," said Rod, "in between it was a tractor? Suppose
they had a beam that changed from a pressor to a tractor a
hundred times a second — two hundred thousand? What then?"

THE BLACK GALAXY

45

The three men took half a dozen steps toward the hall of
the machines and television sets. Then the electrician grunted.
"Mmmbl You could fix the tensor-plate to be a chopperl
Migawd, yeah! Say! I could fir one o' them!"
"We're going to," said Rod curtly. "We're going to use something the people that built this city made. My guess is that
it'll handle a few hundred million kilowatts. And I know a
power-unit that'll give it that much power—for awhile. We're
going to work like hades!"
In his mind there was a feeling of terrible urgency. There
were looters in some other city of this same planet That
meant there was a pyramid-ship here too. It might be the plan
of the space-murderers to loot one city of this planet at a time.
It was much more likely that there would be cargoships coming to load up with the booty of their crime at as many cities
as possible.
They'd have waited until they felt it safe to loot — but once
they began they would not want the looting to spread over a
term of years. After all, the jungle would begin to creep into
the dead cities. Since there were already looters in one city
there should be others on the way.
The electrician set about gathering the material for his coils
and plates, cutting away freely at bus-bars and cables of solid
silver to supply his needs. With power such as Rod had spoken
of no mere wire would serve as conductors. He cut and tugged
and tugged and cut.
Rod and the painter went out to hunt for a vehicle that
could be made to run. When they found one not outwardly
wrecked Rod had to sweat over it to discover how it ran. It
stirred feebly — and that was all. They tried a second and its
power was dead.
It was not until they came upon one which had apparently waited for its owners or passengers beneath an overhanging
arch — so that it was protected from rain — that the queer

46

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

vehicle moved briskly. Then they had to learn to guide it
But they were back and trundling into the great hall before
the electrician had begun to shape those illogical and superficially insane twistings of metal which ordinarily are hidden
by weather-proof housings and careful range-limiters, in the
tractor and pressor-beams of commerce.
He stopped to help Rod make sure of the cutting-off of
the isotopic generator and then the two of them hacked at
heavy leads and struggled with the massive bus-bars they
would require. The painter judgmatically contrived a way to
load the big block of plastic — which was a vacuum tube —
on the vehicle. Then Rod and the electrician mounted their
coils about the "tube" in its exotic placing.
Tve got a hunch," said Rod suddenly. "This is our mount!
Well run it up to the pyramid, cut in and connect the leads
with the power-unit there. And then —"
The electrician swung around suddenly. "Yeah!" he said,
blankly. "Then! Lookaheah! This thing ain't got any guides! I
got her hooked to squeal up to the bloopin' point, an' with
enough power in her there ain't goin' to be anything in who
knows how far ain't goin' to hot up! Where're we goin' to be
when you turn her on?"
"On the ship," said Rod, "and in the dark universe. We'll
be safe there. I've got an idea how bad this is going to be!"
He worked on, grimly. Hours passed. Sweat covered him.
The electrician mopped his forehead from time to time. The
painter helped awkwardly, obeying orders. The feeling of
tenseness grew greater and greater in Rod's mind. It was unreasonable but it was overpowering. It was a. hunch so strong
that at last he dared not wait longer.
"We get going," he said brittlely. T d like to file it down a
little more but we cant risk it. Come along!"
He started the little vehicle. He ran it slowly out of the
building, then faster and ever faster to the square where the

THE BLACK GALAXY

47

Stellaris had landed. He backed it to the base of the pyramid
^ - which was so much lika that one on Calypso — save that
the bas-reliefs pictured another race than the human — and
stopped the vehicle.
He ran across the square to where he had wedged certain
small objects in place. He scribbled a note to Kit on a scrap
of paper as he ran. The paper was the order removing him
from authority over the Stellaris. With an almost hysterical
sensation of urgency he jammed the note into the little object,
which pulled and tugged to escape from his hand.
He released i t
It flashed through the air — and vanished. It had been
drawn through the force-field which cut off all the rest of the
universe of stars from the Stellaris. It had, unquestionably,
gone into other-space and clanked loudly in the open air-lock
door of the space-ship.
And Rod stood wrestling with his illogical impatience while
seconds ticked away, more seconds and more -— but he had
given strict orders that when a noise of an arriving object
sounded in the air-lock, the outer door was to be closed and
the object examined for a note before any action was taken.
Then — there was the Stellaris before him, come out of another set of dimensions and another universe to obey his orders.
He rushed into the air-lock, shaking with the feeling of imminent need. "A torch!" he commanded feverishly. "A cuttingtorch! Make it quick! Speed! For the love of —"
He took the tiny, deadly instrument and raced back with it.
Ke began fiercely to cut through the plating of the pyramid
which was intended to kill any who opened it in the obvious
way and signal the tampering to a race of killers. The metal
smoked and a thin line of parting showed. He cut through
swiftly, counting somehow upon the inner identity of this
pyramid to the other he had opened.
It was identical He crawled inside, dragging the torch,

48

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

scorching his clothing and legs on the hot edges he had cut.
Again he cut at metal ruthlessly. He snapped commands and
the electrician fed in one long section of bus-bar. He welded
it to a connection. He welded a second semi-flexible bar.
He backed out and barked to the painter to get a string, a
plumb-line, anything that was cord. And not to let anybody
come out of the ship! Even as he commanded he was feverishly using the torch to connect the snaky bus-bars from the
pyramid's interior to the preposterous-seeming device mounted
on the odd small vehicle.
He finished and cast aside the torch to attach the string
with unreasonably shaking fingers to the switch which was so
ingenious and so easy to throw and would handle so monstrous
a current.
"Okay," he barked. "Get back and in the ship! Run!"
He backed toward the Stellaris himself, paying out the
string.
Then he heard Kit crying out "Rod—Pyramids!"
Out of the corner of his eye he saw a mote in the sky at the
edge of the horizon. But he dared not hasten. He paid out the
string and paid it out. He stripped off his coat and knotted the
end of the string to it. Then he ran.
Ther were voices babbling about him as he focused a tractor-beam on his coat, a hundred feet away. With the least
possible trace of power he saw the cloth stir.
"Go ahead!" he roared.
He stared oat the vision-port. There was not one pyramid
in sight but three. They came drifting onward and downward,
lower, toward the city. The Stellaris must be visible. They
would turn their beams on it as a mere routine precaution.
AH visible things turned red, flashed through all the colors
of the spectrum to violet and dead-black. The Stellaris was in
other-space, the dark universe.
Then Rod raised the power on the tractor-beam, drawing

THE BLACK GALAXY

49

his coat toward him in another set of dimensions. He heard a
faint tinking sound — the coat's metal buttons were smacking
forcibly against the ship's hull
Then Rod wanted to be sick — from relief. ,

CHAPTER SEVEN

Ambush

T

IME passed slowly indeed in the other-space. Sod found
himself doubting the time-rate of his watch. But a watch
did keep the same time in the dark universe as in normal
space. H e knew i t It had been verified on his three interplanetary trips and in the original testings of the Stellafis when her
force-field coils were first tried out. But the watch hands moved
slowly, very slowly.
Kit looked at him with anxious eyes. There were lights in
the ship now but the feeling of weightlessness kept a certain
nagging impulse of panic always very close. Still, Kit had beeo
so much more fearful for Rod that the eerie sensation of floating in emptiness could almost be ignored, now that he was
safe on board.
"What'd you do, Rod?" she asked
"I think," said Rod, "that I knocked off the looters and the
creatures in the three flying pyramids we saw- I hope sot I
even think I did it with one of their own weapons. I hope very
much that they haven't any defense against i t I can't imagine
one."
"Their weapons?' Kit said, startled. "You mean you think
you made the same thing they used to kill all the people on
this planet?"
"And the Martians," said Rod grimly, "and probably plenty
of other races that got civilized enough to be either dangerous

50

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

or worth looting. Remember, you suggested that the weapon
a space-ship turned on us might be supersonic-sound waves?"
"Y-yes," said Kit uneasily.
•"It couldnt have been exactly sound-waves. Not in space.
There was no air — or any solid to carry them. But we usa;
tractor beams as if they were cab!e3 to pull things and pressors ;
as if they were beams to* push things with. I figured that they
might have made a gadget that alternated between sending '
tractor and pressor beams.
'.
"It would send a thin slice of tractor, then a thin slice of
pressor and so on. That would go through space. And when •
it hit something solid it would generate sound waves in it. If
the slices were thin enough and alternated fast enough they'd'.
make supersonic waves — such as you suggested — in any-;
thing they touched.
»
"Air would vibrate in the supersonic range. So would water, j
So would the bodies of any living creatures such a beam •
struck. It would break up ceramic ware and not break plastic j
or metal. Sent from one space-ship to another, it would kill'
all the crew of the ship on the receiving end. Sent from a
Kit turned pale.
"They could — stay out in space and send beams dow
a city and everybody'd die! Oh, Rod!"
"Apparently they did just that," said Rod, "Anyhow, that's
the sort of gadget I made. There were bus-bars and a r
strous thing that works like a vacuum-tube in the building
where we saw the televisors.
"Joe and I —- Joe's the electrician who was with us — fixed
Up a pressor-beam generator and put in a feed-back to the
tensor-plate. It starts to make pressors, the feed-back makes 'ti
shift to tractors, then the feed-back makes it shift back ;
pressors and so on. It'll generate supersonic frequencies s
right! Simple enough too," he added grimly.

THE BLACK GALAXY

51

"But —"
'Tower for it? There was an isotopic generator in the building with the televisors, too. Probably better than the one w«
have on the ship here. But I did better than that I knew ther«
ought to be a power-storage unit in the booby-trap pyramid
we so carefully haven't touched.
"I cut into that pyramid, hooked up that power to the gadget
Joe and I had put together and tied a string to the switch. I
focused a tractor to pull the string after we'd come into this
space. The stuff it generated couldn't hurt us here. Tractor and
pressor stuff would have to be focused to come into this universe from ours."
He made an unconscious movement and rather absurdly
floated away from his former position. There was no gravity
here. There was always the sensation of interminable fall. While
constantly aware of the fact that it was weightlessness, not
dropping, it was endurable enough. But nobody would ever
be able to sleep where gravity was not
•To finish the picture," said Rod after a moment, "the powerstorage unit has probably some hundreds of millions of kilowatts of power stored in it I don't know just how fast ifll discharge through our gadget but there's a choke-effect there to
slow it up.
"My guess and my hope is that my gadget generated the
pyramid-folks pet murder-frequency stuff for several successive
minutes and that those who happened to be around have lost
all interest in looting — and in us."
"// it hit them," said Kit
"It did," he assured her. "We set it to radiate in all directions.
The faster the juice ran out, the more deadly that beam was.
I can't guess its maximum range but it should be strong enough
anywhere on this planet!"
In that estimate he was too conservative. Actually the lethal
effect of his device had extended rather more than a planetary

52

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

diameter beyond the surface on the far side of the world. I t •
had lasted for six or seven minutes and it had wiped out all
pyramid-creatures within that limit
Rod, however, was uneasy. His experience of the alien race
was not enough to let him know their resources, and he could
not calibrate or measure anything he used.
At the moment he worried mainly over the possibility that .
the aliens might have some defense against the weapon he
thought they used for massacres. But he knew, too, that the
danger could be greater than that and of a quite different sort.
As a matter of safety he kept the Stellaris in other-space
(or twelve hours. If the aliens had a defense against his weapon
they'd expect the Stellaris to reappear immediately the weapon
was used. But if twelve full hours elapsed they would think
the human ship had fled. So he waited.
But time passed very slowly until what might be termed
social life within the ship began. The four girls who'd tended
the air-purifier system had been classed officially as assistants <
in biology, and -weie more or less inclined to feel superior to \
mere painters and arc-welders and electricians. Some of the
men, too, were middle-aged and obviously family men.
But one of the arc-welders was good looking and one of the
painters displayed virtuosity on the mouth-organ. Also there r
was some food aboard ship and there was at least a precedent'
for expecting to set foot again on a planet with breathable air.jj
Also there were the lurid tales of riches and jewels a n d |
incredible luxury in the empty cities of the planet to which i
they were still anchored. So, during the tedious wait, barriers^
broke. Music began somewhere off in the ship. There were*
voices. There was even laughter.
'•,
Kit went to see while Eod sweatingly tried to. make calcu-|
lations and draw diagrams on a memo-pad which had no weight^
— and while be himself floated head-down in relation to a|i
normal position in the control-room. Kit drew herself lightly!

THE BLACK GALAXY

53

along the hand-rails which ran on floors and ceilings and sidewalls alike. She came back smiling, floating with extraordinary
grace in mid-air.
"Rod! You ought to see!" she told him. "One of the painters
has tied himself in place with string. He's playing the mouthorgan and they're having a dance! It's like a Virginia reel in
three dimensions! Everybody's got pieces of cardboard and
they're using them like wings to fan themselves around with
in the craziest set-to you ever saw!"
Uproarious laughter sounded in the ship, which floated in #n
illimitable emptiness of darkness — in a universe in which no
living thing could dwell — alone as surely no human ship was
ever alone before — in a cosmos without a single star.
Rod said restlessly, "That's good, Kit. Go and watch ff you
like. I'd better not. Anyhow, I'm going to try something."
There was reason for his reserve. He was, perforce, the captain of the Stellaris. As such he could join in difficult labor
and should share in any danger. But he must remain remote
if all his decisions were to go unquestioned. And it was necessary for him to make the decisions. If he relaxed to mere
sociable behavior his leadership would no longer be based upon
the mystery of commissioned authority. He would have become
merely another man.
He pulled himself to the engine-room. Restlessly he set the
tractor-beams — those not in use for anchorage —• to fan out
in all directions through this other-space. Practically nothing
was known as yet about the dark universe. Light traveled
faster there and inertia was less. Incredible speeds were possible.
So much was known, and nothing else. The other-space could
be a mere incalculable emptiness, without the most minute
particle of substance anywhere in it. Yet in theory a cosmos
without mass could not exist. A closed universe could not be
closed without substance to make the gravitational warp that

54

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

would close it. So there must be matter of some sort.
But Rod turned on the tractor-beams and fanned them out,
merely to be doing something. The odds against any solid object within the distance the tractor-beams would cross within a
few hours — even at the tremendous speed of radiation here
were enormous.
He went back to the control-room, looking at his watch. Kit
rated lightly in a screwed-down chair, staring at nothing. Her
face was utterly dismal.
"I — e r — I put on the tractor-beams to see if there could
be anything solid around," he told her, pretending not to see
her expression.
She did not answer.
"I'm hoping," he said awkwardly after a moment, "that we've
wiped out those pyramid-makers and that we'll be able to go
through one of their ships and pick up some of their stuff. In
this space those projectors of theirs that shoot beams of light
should be handy. I'd like to know what kind of drive they have
— and they've got a sort of Same-pistol that could be useful."
Kit's lips trembled. A tear appeared at the corner of her eye
and did not run down her cheek because there was no gravity
to draw it. It blurred all her vision and she shook her head to
clear it The tear-drop flew off into the air as a tiny round
globule. She gulped.
Rod said helplessly, "I feel like a scoundrel, Kit. I act as if
I didn't think about you at all."
"You don't think of me," said Kit. "And — and we're likely
to be killed any time and —*
"If you looked happy," said Rod doggedly, "as if we were
being romantic, the four other girls would envy you. And if
romance breaks out in this ship it will be bad! There are ten
men and only five girls. Right now it doesn't look as if we've
much chance of getting back and if ten men get romantic over
five girls —"

T H E BLACK GALAXY

55

"S-some of the men are m-raarried," said K i t
"It'll be hard for them to bear that in mind after they give
up hope of getting back home and know they're some thousands
of light-years away."
Then Rod said grimly, "I look at it this way — we're in the
position of people who were shipwrecked in the olden days.
But we've no hope of being rescued. No friendly space-ship
will ever run across us! So we've got to load up with food. We've
got to get weapons. We've got to get tools.
"And if we can't find our way back to Earth — the chance
is slim — we've got to find a planet these space-murderers
aren't interested in, one that we can settle on. We may have
to turn ourselves into a colony and spend all our lives somewhere we can't even guess at y e t Right now we've got to keep
from doing 'anything that will start dissension on board."
"You could say something nice once in a while," said Kit
miserably.
"If I did," said Rod, "I wouldn't want to stop at that."
The ship stirred — slightly but definitely.
Rod dived for the corridor to the engine-room. The movement of the ship could mean but one thing. The tractor-beam
had touched something solid. Even hurtling through the air he
glanced at his watch. The beam had been on for fourteen
minutes. That would mean a hundred and sixty million miles
in normal space. It might mean ten or twenty or a hundred
times that, here. It might mean anything or nothing whatever.
He reached the beam-projectors. Again carefully leaving the
anchor-tractors untouched, Rod cut down the power of one
after another of the rest Another stirring. The beam which
had struck something was identified. He put pressors in parallel
and sent them out to cover the direction.
It was again fourteen minutes before a pressor hit the unseen
object the tractor tugged a t Rod took a deep breath. It wasn't
coming this way, then. Not fast at any rate.

56

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL I

He settled down to finicky, delicate manipulation. It was, in
a.way, ridiculous for him to try to locate and focus a beam
on something of unknown size — an unguessable but enormous
distance away — when it was somewhere in a fifteen-degreesquare arc of apace.
It took fourteen minutes to discover whether an individual
beam waa even pointed in the right direction. But he had a
dozen beams he could use, adjusting them in sequence, and he
could shift the unfocused beams to find when they slid off the
Object.
The three-dimensional dance ended when the painter ran
out of breath with which to blow the harmonica. An impromptu
theatrical performance began. There was a painter who fancied
himself as a tap-dancer. He essayed to demonstrate. With no ;
weight to hold him anywhere his antics were unpredictable
:
even to himself.
The spectators held fast to handrails on walls and floor and .
ceiling. The girls shrieked with laughter. The men howled.
Somebody essayed to juggle. It was impossible. Nothing came
back to his hands. The laughter tended to grow hysterical.
It was a wholesome enterprise and it was all very well as
long as they could remember that they were not falling into
endless nothingness. These antics helped them to remember.
But the instant that thought ceased to hold the center of one's
mind, muscles tensed in panic, eyes widened and breathing became difncult because one was falling, falling, falling. , . .
It was long hours before Rod heard the curious crisp noise
within a pressor-coil which told that it was locked. It was
focused upon something invisible and unspeakably remote in
the absolute black of other-space. Rod looked at the beammounting. He made a tiny mark. After half an hour, there was
no change in the long-range adjustment. Whatever the object
was, k had no great velocity either toward or away from the
Stellari*.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

57

If it was a — well — a heavenly body, a burned-out sun
in a universe run down, it might be useful. So Rod left a beam
on it, drawing the minimum rf power. H e went floating along
the corridor to the control-room and there Kit looked at him
steadily, a sheet of paper in her hand. She no longer looked
unhappy.
"Rod," she said, "do you remember writing this?"
Rod flushed. He'd written her a note before going out to
make the death-beam generator. The Stellaris was to vanish
from the planet's surface while he worked — it was to hide in
other-space because there were alien looters on the unnamed
world.
Pyramid-ships might come to this city. They might beam
any area they intended to land on, as a matter of routine precaution. If they did he and the other two men on the planet's
surface would die. So he'd written a note for Kit to find in
case he didn't come back. And she'd found i t
"I didn't think to tear that up when I came back," he said
uncomfortably. "Just — well — forget it, won't you?"
"Hardly!" said K i t She smiled tremulously. "If you really
feel this way about me, I want to remember i t I won't doubt
any more!"
She smiled at him. The temptation was irresistible. But the
electrician named Joe came floating into the control-room,
flapping two large sheets of cardboard for wings. He braked
expertly with them and grinned.
"If I only had a harp," he said, beaming, "I'd feel like an
artgel for sure!"
"I'm getting set to go back and see what our trick did to
those looters, and the pyramid-ships," Rod told him, momentarily confused.
Joe raised his eyebrows and made no comment. He fanned
himself to a wall and caught hold of a hand-raiL
"I'd like to spring an idea," he said.

58

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

"Go ahead!"
"Suppose we fix up a couple gizmos like the one we made
back yonder on the planet," said Joe. 'Then we could put up
a scrap if one of them pyramids came after us."
"Providing we shot first," said Rod.
"Thafs right," agreed Joe. "But suppose we tricked the circuit so the tensor-plate was choked? So when we turned on the
juice nothin' happened?"
Rod waited, frowning.
"Then," said Joe, grinning, "if they turned a beam on us, our
feed-backs 'ud pick it up an1 uncork our beam on them! They
start shootin', an' automatic we shoot back."
"Good enough," admitted Rod. "Only we'd still die. That
wouldn't kill their beams. It would just kill them."
"Then tie in our force-field switch," said Joe amiably. "They
slap a beam on us, we shoot back an' go whammo into otherspace. All automatic! A bear-trap. I don't like those guys!"
"I don't either," said Rod. He reflected. "Moimmmm. You've
got something there. I begin to like it. I wonder if they have
it."
"It's not likely, Rod," Kit interposed. "They'll kill oil other
civilizations as soon as they have space-travel. You didn't arm
your first ship and there was no plan to arm the Stellaris. Nobody'd be set to fight in their first space-ships.
"The pyramid-people have probably never had a real fight
in their lives. They won't, be looking for anybody to fight back,
any more than a hunter expects a rabbit to let go at him with
"Something there too," admitted Rod. "But they're probably
scary at t h a t Most likely they started this murder business
because they were frightened the first time their ships came
upon another race. They wiped that race out because it scared
them. Then they looted its cities and found it paid off. Still, if
they think that way , . . "

T H E BLACK GALAXY

59

A chilly thought came to him. He felt small cold prickles
running up fluo. clown his spine.
"Bight now we've got to take a chance that we hit them
hard," he said grimly. "Pass along the word that we're going
back to normal space on the planet we found. And Joe —"
"Yeah?"
"Go down in the engine-room. I've got a pressor locked on
something in the dark universe. If I throw the force-fields back
on, you put power into that pressor. Plenty of it! We'll want
to get moving, and fast!"
Joe grinned, let go of the hand-rail and flapped blissfully
across the room. He bounced off the doorway and went soaring toward the engines.
Shoutings went through the ship. There was a roll-call, so
that the sudden return of gravity would not take anyone by
surprise. Then Rod threw off the force-fields.
Weight came back, but no light outside. Rod blinked, then
roared, "Lights out! Quick!" It was night outside on the planet,
and the lighted ports of the Stellaris would show for miles.
After long minutes Rod put Kit's hands on the switch that
would send the Stellaris back to other-space. Quietly — it
seemed strange to be able to walk — he went to the air-lock.
He cracked it open. There was no sound anywhere. He stepped
out into the night. The air was chill and many strange stars
shone overhead. It was altogether eerie to stand in such strangeness on the ways of a city that had been murdered, on a planet
that had no name, in the weird stillness of its night.
But night had not long fallen. On the horizon there was still
a trace of luminosity. A single wisp of cloud, high up, glowed
faintly in sunlight from below the horizon. But overhead the
sky was deep-blue. Stars twinkled brightly.
And there was silence to crack the eardrums. Perhaps at the
edge of the city where the jungle began, boughs and branches
whispered in a night-wind. But here all was stillness. Every-

60

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

thing was dead. As his eyes adjusted to the starlight the soaring, graceful architecture took form in the dimness.
And then he saw one of the pyramids that had been floating
overhead before the Stetlaris — its improvisioned weapon radiating death — had fled into the other-space. The pyramid had
come down out of control.
It had crashed into the side of a cliff-like structure and
tumbled out again. It lay askew with one of its corners still
caught in the gap its impact had made. Rod drew a deep
breath of satisfaction. The weapon he'd made had worked.
There was now no living alien of the murderous race upon
this planet. But —
Something made him raise his eyes. Stars moved overhead.
They moved visibly. Tiny specks of yellow incandescence
shifted place among the many-colored distant suns. One winked
out completely. Another suddenly appeared.
For an instant Rod thought of shooting stars — of meteors.
But meteors do not move slowly. These things did. Especially,
meteors do not move in geometric formation, arranged as a
slightly skewed triangle which give the appearance- from one
viewpoint of a pyramid.
The specks were pyramid-ships — a space-fleet of the killerracel There were literally hundreds of them and they approached the planet on which Rod stood. The flashes of light
were sunlight reflected • from their polished sides.
Rod went cold all over. But it was obvious enough, once he
thought about it. The aliens who put up a pyramid on Calypso
had the mentality of people who install elaborate burglaralarms. It was part of a pattern of thought
They did not think of mercy, so they would not think of
watchfulness. Cold-bloodedness manifesting itself in unwarned
race-murders implied a whole psychology. And a suspicion that
had come to Rod no more than half an hour since was verified.
The aliens plainly took no chances. As they did not imagine

T H E BLACK GALAXY

61

friendly commerce — implying loyalty — between different
races, they did not imagine loyalty or. courage in their own.
So a pyramid-ship was not trusted to meet and report upon
emergencies.
As a power-storage unit and a transmitter was built into the
traps they set for other civilizations, so similar devices were
built into their ships. In the unthinkable event that one of their
crews was wiped out by a race unknown to them the crew was
not depended on to report with their last trace of strength.
When the stick-like creatures in a pyramid-ship died the ship
itself sent out a death-cry of radiation which could travel
across half a galaxy. Perhaps there were relays to receive and
transmit communications faster than the speed of light. When
a ship was destroyed, a monstrous, overwhelming fleet could
be sent instantly to avenge and destroy.
The winking spects of light moved on. Probably they would
englobe the planet on which the looting-party had been destroyed. They might blast the planet itself out of existence.
Or perhaps —
Rod ground his teeth. He'd made a mistake. He'd lost precious hours out of exaggerated caution. But he would not make
that mistake again.
He went back into the ship to give crisp and savage orders.

CHAPTER EIGHT

The Enemy

T

HERE was no alarm but the suspense itself was hair-raising. Joe the electrician and an arc-welder with a torch cut
loose the generator of the deadly tractor-pressor radiation.
Already there was a tendency to call it "the push-pull beam"
instead of tractor-pressor or supersonic radiation.

62

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

While they did so Rod and two others assailed the fallen
and apparently helpless pyramid-ship. They cut into its airlock door — and gagged at the smell within. It was a livingthing sraelL
It was, in fact, the personal smell of the aliens. It was indescribable and revolting. In all probability the aliens themselves
were unconscious of it, as humans are unaware of the human
smell which is so comforting to a dog. But this reek filled men
with rage.
They went through the monstrous ship, hand-flashes flickering here and there. They were armed with nothing more
deadly than spanners but they looked fiercely to see if anything remained alive. They ignored machinery and weapons
and technical devices, seeking only dangerous life. They found
none though there were many bodies.
They clambered out again and found the vehicle they'd used
as a beam-mount and trundled it to the Stellar!^ air-lock door.
They helped heave off the block of plastic which acted as a
giant vacuum tube.
Joe the electrician observed casually, "Say! When we were
fussin' around that pyramid we musta stepped on somethin'.
Their little booby-trap got all hotted up and melted itself
down. Okay?"
"Very much so," Rod told him. "They'll think somebody
opened it, or maybe that it went off of itself. But they won't
see where we cut it open. It should puzzle them a bit Come
along!"
With two others he set the little vehicle off at top speed
through the dead city's streets. His spine was literally crawling
with apprehension but he went on grimly. If the newly-come
fleet simply surrounded the planet and at a signal blasted it
with the deadly push-pull radiation, every square inch of the
planet's surface would become death itself. Nothing could live.
It could happen at any instant

i

:

j

'

\

THE BLACK GALAXY

63

And there was no conceivable defense against i t
But he'd lost twelve hours, waiting in other-space out of
apprehension, overestimating the pyramid-ships' means of defense. Now he knew that a race so careful of its own life that
it practised murder as a trade would be a very fearful one. It
was likely to overestimate the enemy that had struck at it.
Instead of a manned ship it would probably send a robot
— a drone — to investigate the weapons used against its vanquished ships. If the drone itself were destroyed the fleet would
withdraw until some counter to the new weapon could be
Revised.
But Rod had no new weapon. He had only — he believed
— the instrument by which the aliens did their murders. Even
that needed to be powered by apparatus of their construction.
He could not destroy anything now. So the aliens would find
nothing in particular to alarm them, though it would be some
time before they felt safe in landing.
Still, they could be examining the surface of the planet with
telescopes — perhaps electron-telescopes — and they might
detect the Stellaris. On the other hand they'd have to use infrared on the night side of the planet and infra-red does not giv«
good definition. The ship and its tiny landing-party might —
might! — be safe until more light came with the dawn.
He had to risk i t He drove to the power-station. The four
men cut free the isotopic dynamo and manhandled it to the
vehicle. They loaded up four television-machines. They went
racing back. The other load had been carried in through the
air-lock. Now this load was put on board the Stellaria.
T d like to have more food," said Rod, "but we can go on
short rations for awhile. All right? Sea! her up!"
He took post in the control-room. Joe had connected up
more switches, but there were still no instruments. He released
the anchoring tractor-beams and pushed the ship up on preasors. He maneuvered above the tumbled pyramid-ship- He

64

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

sent down tractors and locked them.
The Steltaris sank as the strain came on, but he fed more
power to the pressor-beams which held up the earth-ship on
unsubstantial stilt-like legs. Presently the pyramid-ship stirred
and floated free. Then Rod maneuvered it very gently up
against the Stellartf bottom-plates and pushed up to five
thousand feet
For long minutes the ship hung there, swaying and oscillating with a soggy, burdened motion. But Rod had more controls
to set by hand, since the ship was not one-tenth wired for navigation. There had to be tractors — unfocused — set to overlap in a globe all around. The force-field generators had to
have certain constants changed.
That was really the ticklish part Rod had designed the generators but he sweated as he worked. And as the crucial instant
drew near he felt a despairing certainty that, from somewhere
in the star-studded vault overhead, a death-beam would strike
down just before he took his final action.
But it didn't.
When he raced to the control-room and glanced out the
ports he saw a shimmering, faintly luminous horizon all about
and many stars above. He saw far-distant darkness, which was
this world's jungle, and at one place a sea.
But directly under the Stetlaria a huge fiat plate of polished
metal shut off all sight of the ground. It was the pyramid-ship.
Rod threw the master tractor-switch and, as the ship lurched
violently, he threw the force-field switch hard over.
It was all familiar, now. There was only blackness outside
and there was no weight whatever, but there were new strange
grinding noises. They were against the earth-ship's hull. They
were rhythmic and reverberating.
"We made it," Rod told Kit, swallowing. "I was almost sure
we wouldn't have time."
Kit held fast to a hand-rail to keep from floating free.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

65

"What's that grinding?" she asked Rod in a frightened voice.
"That's our friend, the enemy," he said. "The force-field generators were intended only to drop the Slellaris into otherspace but I designed them so they could be changed. And I
just changed them.
"I had them spread out to make a spherical field a half-mile
across — well beyond our hull. So when they went on, they
dropped the pyramid-ship and everything else within a quarter-mile into other-space with us."
Kit frowned bewilderedly.
"But can we do anything with it?" she asked. "There's no
air outside and we've certainly nothing like a space-suit."
Rod grinned a little, as he wiped sweat off his forehead. "We
brought air with us."
Joe the electrician came floating seraphically into the control-room.
"Near as I can figure," he reported, "we got five-six hundred
feet of extension cable we can hook together to get light in
that ship those critters ain't usin' any longer."
"But —" Kit grew more uneasy.
"We brought a half-mile sphere of air with us," Rod repeated.
"And we've got tractors pulling in every direction. They act
the same as gravity. There's a vacuum outside, of course, but
there's a vacuum outside of every planet
"Gravity holds air to the planets. Tractors are holding auto us. We can walk around on the outside of the ship if we
want to. We couldn't even fall off! The tractors would pull us
back, as they pull back the air."
With Joe he went to the air-lock. He cracked the door. No
hiss of escaping air followed. He opened it wider. There was
air outside. i^he S^^'i^rjs and its captive were m effect a ro'ni—
ature planet, holding an atmosphere against the emptiness of
space by means of tractor-beams.
"But we've got to work fast," Hod said grimly. "I wish we

66

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVB|j

hsd warm clothes. This air will be losing heat to sp
there's no sun to put it back. We'll be lucky to have -,
Let's go!"
Carrying a line, with Joe uncoiling flexible light-extensi^
wire behind him. Rod Stepped out of the lock. A huge, glariaj
bulb glowed on the end of the wire. The tractors held tneJl
fast against the Stellaritf outer skin. There was the one fie
electric-light in an entire dark universe.
One tiny spot of illumination in hundreds of thousands
light-years — it showed the brightly-polished flat plating
the alien ship. A painter poked his head out of the airand shivered, then gingerly followed- An arc-welder came
carrying the tools of his trade.
They cut through the skin of the other ship, since the ail
lock was no longer convenient. They pulled away mass
insulation. They cut through another skin. The repugnant
of the pyramid-people filled their nostrils.
"We'll try to turn on their lights," observed Rod. "The;
mustVe had them! And then we start to loot the looters. JM
and I will hunt for technical stuff. The rest of you send bacS
tools, anything that looks like books or fabrics — anything
that could be interesting or useful. And work fast!"
Joe strung lights and hunted for a way to turn on the obvii
sources of illumination in the first compartment they ha<5
reached. The lights remained obstinately off. Joe cut one loosS
and turned it over to be sent back to the Stellaris. Rod weril
The ship was amazing — not because of its development
but because of its crudity. Its pyramidal form had doubtlesj
been chosen long since because of its rigidity and because r e |
fleeting surfaces at specific angles had advantages when it wasjj
desired to go — say — near a sun.
>
But the ship was not the work of a really civilized race.l
There was no trace of artistry anywhere — not even the clean

T H E BLACK GALAXY

67

smooth lines of purely functional design. This ship looked as
if it had been designed by a construction man who thought
only of how to put it together. Everything else had been
ignored.
It was a job that ignorant or unskilled labor could assemble
and there was no particular thought for the comfort of its crew
or the psychological effect of good design. The dead members
of the crew were not prepossessing. Their faces were almost
without features and were wholly without expression. They
seemed fit occupants of a vessel designed for strict utility and
nothing else.
Rod gained an increasingly strong impression that this was
a case of a barbarous race suddenly acquiring a weapon they
were not prepared to use except as barbarians. It appeared that
just as mathematics was thousands of years ahead of technology in ancient Greece, this race had suddenly developed a
specific technology thousands of years ahead of every other
part of their civilization.
Used as they had used it, such an advantage would almost
or quite stop progress in every other line. They would not
develop a civilization of their own as long as they looted other
He looked at the ship's weapons. He found only the push-pull
beam and he'd designed it better than they had. The engineroom was absurdly simple and utterly cryptic but even there
he saw clumsiness in such items as the grouping of bus-bars.
The source of, power, though, did baffle him. All bus-bais
ran from a triple plate of glass or plastic which had two metal
plates between its leaves. It looked like a primitive condenser
but apparently it supplied all the power that was used in the
ship.
It was dead, now. There was no potential across it but there
could be no other reading of its function than that of powersupply.

68

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

Rod had it cut loose and sent it to the Stellaria.
The drive was equally crude and equally improbable, unt*|
he looked at it twice. Then he held his head. It was simply I
pressor-beam fined down to a needle-point and aimed at ai
infinitesimal hole in a metal plate.
The pressor-beam would exert a pressure of hundreds o
thousands of tons upon the center of an opening only thous
andths of an inch in diameter. There was a not particular^
good gas-flow regulator which governed the flow of a tintrickle of gas to the opening.
"My sainted aunt!" said Rod bitterly. "Look at it! We coul<
have had space-travel this past fifty years! Interplanetary
travel, at any rate! They let gas flow to the pin-hole and pus(
it through with a pressor-beam! It's a pressor-beam rocket!
"Millions or billions of tons to the square inch pressure
the escaping gas! They'll get jet-velocities close to light-speed
Get this to the Stellaris, Joe. We'll use it, though I'm going ti
be ashamed. But they get more than light-speed in their shipj
Joe! How'd they do that?"
He went prowling. He found the self-acting signal-devioi
which sent a thunderous message of despair when the
went out of action. Simple enough, save for the apparatuj
which used up the energy. He could not guess at the type G
radiation which was produced. But nine-tenths of the things hi
saw were behind comparable human devices.
Men could do much better with every contrivance he undej?
stood and he suspected they could do better with the rest. Thil
race had been enough ahead of the races it had murdere*
never to have to extend itself. So there was a flavor to tbj
entire culture. I t was barbarous and unpleasant and crude ant
revolting. It figuratively stank as its possessions did literally,
Joe the electrician tried to draw his attention. He wavec
him away. Other men spoke to him and he paid no heed. H*
searched feverishly.

THE BLACK GALAXY

69

The light-guns were simple. Men could make them. He found
something that was obviously a type of radar. There was a.
vision-screen of sorts. But he hunted desperately and in vain
for star-maps and for navigation-instruments.
The nearest thing he found to them was a chest from which
a fierce heat still poured and which was a chaos of melted and
churned-up metal and charred stuff like paper. Nothing could
be made of i t It might be — it could be — that all star-maps
and navigational data was automatically destroyed when the
signal of despair was sent off by a shattered ship. If so, it was
still more proof of the murderer-psychology of the race.
Then Kit shook his elbow insistently. Her face was white
and pinched.
"You've been here two hours, Rod! It's cold! The moisture's
all frozen out of the air outside the ship. The tractors pulled
it down as snow! Now the air's lost so much heat it's apt to
freeze tool"
Rod said harshly, "You should have stayed on the Stellaris!
Why'd you come?"
"You wouldn't listen to anybody else!" said Kit desperately.
"They said you pushed them away and kept on hunting like
a crazy man! When the air freezes you can't live!"
He stared at her. Her breath was a white steam. She shivered violently. There was already a thin layer of frost on her
clothes.
"All right," he said sullenly," but I want to know —"
Angrily — angry at his own incomprehension — he led her
back to the opening in the pyramid-ship. There was every
seeming of gravity here, created by the tractors which held an
atmosphere.
Rod stepped out on the Stellaritf skin and there were feet
of feathery snow on i t It was unbelievably cold. There was
no heat in the dark universe and its emptiness sucked greedily
at heat in objects from a living cosmos.

70

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

Joe stamped and chattered in the air-lock. When Rod handed Kit in he cut the cable that had furnished light in the alien
ship.
"W-we got more cable from them," he gasped, "an' we got
to close this lock! I'm glad I ain't a brass monkey or this cold'd
ha' done me dirt!"
The outer airlock door closed. The inner one opened. There
was warmth and light, and a slight pervading taint in the air
from the objects the aliens had owned.

CHAPTER NINE

War Bass's

F

IVE minutes later Rod grimly cut off the tractors which
had held an atmosphere in mid-space and an enemy spaceship with i t He found sardonic amusement in picturing
the effect of that gesture upon the pyramid-folk.
The Stellaria still had a beam locked on the planet of the
dead cities. Its power was low, but she would not be too many
millions of miles away if she went back to normal space now.
And the air she'd brought into the dark universe would return
to normal space immediately it expanded beyond the forcefields.
There would be a sudden, violent, astounding irruption of
vapor in emptiness, somewhere in sight of the planet. And a
comet's tail can contain no more than a mere few cubic inches
of gas, which yet is expanded and ionized and visible as a trail
of hundreds of thousands of miles.
A half-mile sphere of air, expanded suddenly, should make
such a sight as the stick-men "had never seen before. It should
fill them with enormous apprehension, simply because of its
strangeness and because it followed closely on the destruction

T H E BLACK GALAXY

71

of at least three of their ships.
If they investigated ar.d found the gutted pyramid-ship,
which should go back to a star-filled cosmos somewhere near
the air-cioud, they should be more uneasy still Because they'd
find their ship looted only of sample objects rather than of all
its contents, and they'd realized that it had been flung contemptuously away as worthless.
But there was that loot to examine. It was more than ever
unfortunate that the Stellaris had no gravity. The booty floated
about irritatingly and those who tried to explore its possibilities floated too.
The primitive-seeming condenser remained inscrutable,
though its power-leads had surely carried an enormous load.
The sample light, however, glowed brightly when connected
to the Stellaris' power-lines. But Rod was scornful.
"Mercury-vapor," he said contemptuously, "with a phosphor
in the tube around it! We stopped using that sort of thing fifty
years ago!"
The drive was again irritating. To all intents and purposes
it was a rocket with a jet-speed astronomically high because
a pressure-beam was used on it. The light-guns could have
been made on Earth. The radar set had elements of novelty but
Joe and Rod agreed that men made better ones. The visionscreen was not nearly as good as the ones in the dead city.
Rod pushed himself away from all of them.
"They had a drive and a push-pull beam, both of which
were quite within our reach," he said sourly. "Their powersupply is over my head and undoubtedly they had some trick
for faster-than-light travel. But that's all! In two months we
could wipe them out, given this stuff back on Earth! Since we
can't get back to Earth we've got to do what we can right
here!"
The other things taken from the ship, being non-technical,
seemed less important. But there were bales of soft, lustrous

72

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

fabric, which the girls oi the air-p!snt oft'd and ah'd over. There
were chests of prisms tic ally glistening ware of unfamiliar shape
— household luxuries of some sort and possibly tableware.
There were jewels. There were art-objects portraying flowers of exquisite delicacy and people — at least, they wore
garments — which were neither the people of the planet of the
yellow sun nor pyramid-folk nor any other known race.
"Those fiends didn't make this stuff," said Rod grimly. "This
must come from the cities of some other poor devils they've
wiped out!"
The faint taint of alien smell made his hackles tend to rise.
There could never have been friendship between human beings and the people of the pyramid race under the happiest
of auspices. This smell made enmity inevitable.
"We'll get to work," said Rod distastefully. "I hate to use a
trick of theirs — but we need that drive."
Groping with tractor and pressor-beams was not the most
efficient form of space-travel, so the alien drive was to be installed. It was simple enough to float it to a stern-ward position and weld it in place.
It needed a tiny opening for the ejected gas-particles to
escape from but their speed would be so great that they'd bore
their own exit. It was not so easy to weld braces and a mounting to take up its thrust Rod left two welders swearing at the
difficulty of working when they had no weight.
Kit smiled at him wrily. "Somebody has to take care of
you," she said defensively when she saw him frowning. "And
you'd have stayed there until you froze! I had to come after
you!"
"Thanks," he said heavily. "I'm just worried because there
was some stuff on that ship I didn't get. Most of their gadgets
were primitive and we can do much better. But —"
"Did you find out how they got their artificial gravity?" she
asked hopefully. "I get awfully tired of just floating."

T H E BLACK GALAXY

73

"They didn't have gravity," he protested.
"But I could walk in that ship," she insisted. "I did!"
"That was our —" Rod groaned. "I'm stupid! I'll be back!"
He went to the engine-room. He pulled Joe off the driveinstallation and together they set up a tractor in the extreme
stern-most compartment of the ship. They widened out its
beam. In less than twenty minutes objects and persons within
the SfeZ/ans began to settle gently toward the stern.
Thirty seconds later they had perceptible weight and after
a minute weight was practically normal everywhere in the
ship. Rod climbed then — though the ship was in other-space
— back to face Kit in the control-room.
"We could have had gravity all along," he told her ruefully
"I only had to put a tractor in the ship's tail to pull us all
toward i t Joe's setting up a pressor in the bow to neutralize
it outside. So we've got gravity. Now what?"
"Nothing," said Kit wistfully, "except that it would be nice
to stop worrying and think about ourselves sometimes."
"I believe," Rod told her, "there's an outside chance even
of that!"
He inspected the small tractor locked on the planet of dead
cities. Locked as it was, its mount adjusted its focus to allow
for varying distance and it was possible to estimate the distance from the planet to the spot at which the Stellaris would
return to normal space. It was too close. He put power on the
pressor. Joe came in, uncoiling a power-lead.
"The jet drive," he said crisply. "You got a switch you ain't
usin'?" He connected the cable and scrupulously labeled the
switch.
"Joe," said Rod. "Re?m :mber your idea of a push-pull beam
that ivould s hoot back if we were beamed? Listen!"
He spoke carefully. J< e grinned.
"Suire! I'll fix it. To0 )ad we ain't got more stuff to work
vith."

74

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

"Tfou might use that isotopic generator we got from tha
city," Rod suggested. "We can hardly run a cable out."
•Mmmm," said Joe. "It'd be a kinds good idea to try out
that power-gadget from the pyramid. I got an idea about t h f
There's nothin' there to supply power. Nothin's used up. Ni
in's breakin' down. Nothin' to happen. But it gave 'em po
— in regular space."
"It's dead now." Then Rod stopped. "You think it could
a trick receiver of power from somewhere?"
"That's my hunch," said Joe. "Maybe they got broad
power."
"Galaxy-wide?" demanded Rod skeptically. "How?"
"You guess," said Joe grinning. "I bet it's a simple tr
though — like their drive."
He nodded and went back toward the engine-room. ]
looked at his watch. There was gravity on the ship now s
they had at least twice the power they'd started out with. T
knew how to make weapons at least equal to any the a'
pyramid-folk possessed. He remembered the pencil-beam
heat the looters had used to cut out a wall in the dead c
He'd have to look into that too. Joe was busy. His job wo
'Rod hunted in the loot for a pencil-beam gun and foim .
one. On the way back he stopped to watch Joe at work on the
automatic push-pull weapon. Joe had only such tools as had
been on the ship during its construction but he was doing a
good job. Rod watched approvingly.
"Joe," he said after a moment, "if you sliced that tensor-plate
into segments and fixed the feedback so —"
He illustrated.
"If you do that," Rod finished, "it will shoot back only in
the direction from which it's shot at. AH the power'll go into a
relatively narrow beam." Then another idea struck him.
•My sainted aunt! Better than that, Joe, set the feed-back

THE BLACK GALAXY

75

like this! There's no pull on 9 tractor until it hits something.
When there's a tractor going out from every segment — better
put a commutator on and run through them in turn — when
there's a tractor going out and it hits something, that will turn
on the push-pull beam! Full-power too!"
Joe grunted. He looked at Kod with a wry expression.
"It's a bright idea all right. We're turnin' the old Stellaria
into a warship, sure enough. But we won't be good company
for nice people. We're goin' to go roamin' around like a mad
dog?"
"A shunt here will take care of that," said Rod. "With the
shunt cut in it will ring a bell when a tractor-beam hits. With
& power-switch in parallel we can make it shoot back and then
tell us what it did."
Joe looked relieved. "Y-yeah. I see that" He grinned twistjly. 'Td hate to go around1 spittin' death-beams just automatic.
We'd wind up kinda lonesome, seems like."
Rod went back to the control-room. But the weapon that
was developing stayed in his mind. He went back again and
asked Joe to make an adjustment so the push-pull power-feed
could be cut off from any desired segment, so that one part
of the weapon's range could be left unblasted if desired.
"I'm acting," he said, almost embarrassed, "as if I thought
we might find friends."
Joe grunted. "Well? Those guys in the pyramid-ships are
tough babies. Maybe the folks they killed were good guys.
There's usually a good guy somewhere to make up for a bad
one."
Then he added, "111 have this thing ready in a coupla hours.
You know how we're goin' to mount it outside? No air there
Rod sketched out a notion for that too. Joe grunted again.
"That's half an hour more. Til set those welder-guys workin*

76

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

Back to the control-room again. Rod paced up and down, no
longer really conscious of the novelty of gravity in space. The
ship began to feel like something other than a hulk navigated
by makeshift means.
He began, to feel less like a shipwreck victim and more like
a man in command of a ship. He began, indeed, to think in
terms of what could be done to the pyramid-race, instead of
the peril they represented.
It was nearer three hours than two before Joe reported the
new weapon finished. It had called for very careful work by
practically every man on the ship and the using up of I-beams
intended for interior partitions.
When it was complete, Rod threw the switch that meant a
return to normal space. There was practically no change in
sensation as dots of light appeared in the vision-ports and ran
through all the colors of the rainbow before they settled to
their usual appearance as stars by myriads on every hand. The
yellow sun was now very far away. It was only the brightest
distant object in the heavens.
They opened the airlock door, with a tractor covering the
opening so no air would escape. Focused pressors pushed the"
new device outside and maneuvered it delicately to a new
position. From the ports Rod guided it to the Stellaritf nose
and anchored it. And then a tiny tractor pulled back the switch
that set the generator into action and the Steltaris was a fighting ship.
For the first time Rod applied the jet-drive. The ship gave
a mighty surge forward.
It headed for the yellow star — and battle.

CHAPTER TEN

Battle!

T

HEY had seen four planets on their first approach to this
solar system. Ope a world all ice from pole to pole, they
had by-passed for the next world sunward. There were
two others still nearer to the sun. Rod regarded them speculatively as the Stellaris drove toward the world of dead cities.
"I think," he said meditatively, "that I'm going to take a
look at those planets — if we live through this."
Kit stood beside him.
"And somehow that settles i t Do you realize, Rod, how completely you are expected to decide things? One of the painters
said we should be trying to find our own sun or else hunting
a planet we can settle on. But Joe said he was crazy and there
wasn't even an argument You wanted to fight, so there simply
wasn't any question about it."
"There's a reason for us to fight," said Rod curtly. "Nobody
can guess the size of the pyramid-ship fleet but it's surely all
hunting us. If we stay in one place, fighting, maybe they'll
think we're survivors of the race they murdered.
"We have to try to make them think so for the sake of
Earth. If they decided they'd better start a general massacre
of all the races we could come from, Earth would certainly be
included. And there's no faintest preparation to Stop them
back there."
Joe came climbing up from the engine-room. "That thing
that looks like a condenser," he reported amiably, "it works.
It's hot now — plenty of power. I hooked it Up an' we're run"Then unhook it," commanded Rod sharply. "Get back to
our own power! That doesn't work in the dark universe and
we couldn't go into it or stay in itl Shift the leads backl
Quick!"
77

78

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

Joe's mouth dropped open. He dived for the engine-room
again. Rod's forehead creased. Minutes later Joe came back,
crestfallen.
"Sorry," he said apologetically. "I thought it was kinda
humorous to use their own power to fight 'em with. We're back
"Ifs broadcast power, all right," said Rod grimly. "Somehow
they can fill the whole Galaxy with power for their ships to
draw on — unless they've found a source of energy that comes
from nothingness itself."
After a moment he added, "I keep thinking about those inner planets. It's a hunch. It bothers me. It doesn't seem quite
natural." He shook his head as if to clear it. "Those devils
must have broadcast power of some sort, though."
A bell rang sharply. It stopped. It rang again. It stopped.
It rang again. Rod and Joe tensed.
"What does that mean?" asked Kit apprehensively.
"It should mean that we blasted a pyramid-ship," Rod told
her. "This is a long way out, though."
The sun was again a glaring disk. Something winked in its
rays. It vanished. It winked again out a right-hand port It was
infinitely small and the effect was that of a bit of tinsel spinning in a bright light
"Right!" said Rod in satisfaction. "A pyramid-ship sentry.
Our beam-gun on the bow found him and blasted him, probably before he knew anything about it His skipper probably
had a spasm as he died and jammed his controls, so he's spinning."
The bell rang on monotonously, once in each revolution of
the commutator which applied full power to each segment of
the tensor-plate in turn, to blast any target the device might
find. The pyramid-ship was getting a fresh lethal dose of the
push-pull beam at each clang of the belL
Onward the Stellaris bored. Presently the bell stopped.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

79

Rod said, "Hm — we left him behind. We've got to allow
for that! We can't havs them coming up behind us, where the
ship fills up a space and the beams turned off."
"Will we beam the planets, Rod?" asked K i t
"We've got a minus arrangement," Rod told her. "We don't
shoot at anything over a certain range. I don't know exactly
what it is but it's probably some thousands of miles."
The planet of the dead race was a perceptible disk now. It
was the size of a pea. Time passed. It grew to the size of a
The bell rang. Twice. It stopped and rang twice again —
and again — and again.
T w o more of them," said Rod savagely.
Time passed. The double-ring stopped. There was silence.
Then a single ring again, monotonously repeated.
"This ain't sportin'," said Joe, scowling, "but y'don't play
sportin' with rats."
The planet was the size of a peach, now. There was an infinitesimal shimmering in space ahead — an infinitely thin
sliver of what looked like gossamer came up out of the planet's
atmosphere. It spread and formed itself into a geometric pattern of wavering specks of light.
"They know we knocked oiT their ships," said Rod. He was
thinking aloud. "They've plenty of sentries out and when a
ship dies, it squeals to the rest. Automatically. So they know
we can hit, and hard. But they're forming up to fight us. How"ll
they fight?"
The Stellaris sped furiously toward the enemy formation.
There was silence. Then Kit gasped.
"Rod, I feel queer — like that other ti —"
Red's hands moved like lightning. The force-fie!d switch
crashed over. He said distinctly — with the ports all black —
"The rats!"
They were in the dark universe for a bare second. He flung

80

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEJL.

the switch back once more. There was no difference in the
feel of things now, whether in other-space or normal. The
Stellaris had dodged only momentarily into the other set of
dimensions but in the other-space her velocity was enormous.
Eod, however, overestimated i t He had thought the Stellaris
would slip back into the universe of stars beyond the enemy
- fleet But she winked into being in its very midst.
There were shining pyramidal shapes on every hand. The
bell burst into frenzied, continuous clanging. Glittering metal
ships flashed past the ports so swiftly that the eye could not
focus on them.
But the Stellaris" weapon poured out death — the death of
the pyramid-folk's own contriving — as the Earth-ship hurtled
through the fleet of space-murderers and went on beyond them.
She was through before they could train a single weapon.
Then Rod swung her about to face the enemy. The drive-jet
fought her acquired momentum. The ship slowed — and kept
its beam-weapon going as it struggled to dash in again.
Minute by minute the clanging of the bell grew less. Despite her drive the ship was only slowing. She had not stopped.
But when the planet's disk ceased to recede and began to
grow visibly larger once more—when her savage second charge
was evident — Rod saw flickerings as pyramid-ships deserted
their formation and fled toward emptiness.
The main body of the fleet did not disperse. It did not flee.
But as minute after minute passed, it became apparent that
something was wrong. The edges of the pyramid-formation
grew fuzzy. The ships did not keep station.
When the Stellaris bored into them again the bell clanged
and clanged and clanged. At the thickest part of the fleet it
rang frantically, one sharp stroke for each outpouring of the
push-pull beam at an individual target But the ships made no
concerted move, nor spy purposeful individual ones. The
Stellaris was merely killing again ships that were already dead.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

81

Minutes more and she was through a second time and the
first space-battle in all the history of the galaxy was over. One
Earth-ship that had taken off from its home planet fay pure
accident, unarmed and unequipped, had wiped out nine-tenths
of a fleet that had never before been opposed. And its remnants were in flight.
The Stellaris drove on and on. The unmanned hu!ks which
had been fighting vessels only a little while since fell astern.
The clamor of the bell lessened. Presently there were only
random disconnected sounds.
Later there were none at all.
"Not too nervy," commented Rod, "They saw we had them
licked and those that were left headed for home. It fits the way
their minds seem to work."
"What will we do now?" asked Kit. "Land on the planet
again?"
Rod considered, scowling. "Part of the fleet ran away as
scon as they found their broadside was no good."
"Broadside?"
"Massed push-pull beams," said Rod shortly. T h e y turned
the beams of the whole fleet on us. We shouldn't have been
able to live through it to get within range with a single ship's
weapons. Probably wouldn't, at that, only you felt queer"That was the first-aligned beams hitting us, away out of
range for a few beams but well in range for the bunch of them!
Another second and that blast would have been so strong
nothing in creation could have stood it. Certainly we couldn't!"
He paused.
"Some of them, though, ran from a fleet action. They're not
a very brave race. I'm trying to figure something o u t The ships
on the ground knew we'd knocked off their sentries. Of course!
So we were dangerous.
"So maybe some of them didn't take off with the rest of the
fleet. Playing it safe. It would seem to fit in with the way their

82

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

minds work. So maybe some ships are still skulking on the
ground."
"So?" Kit waited.
"If we can spot them they're dead ducks. But if we tried to
land they might knock us down practically from ambush.
They're probably half shivering in deadly fear and half licking
their chops as they wait for us to land. So —"
He looked abruptly at Kit, and then at Joe. Joe grinned.
"I guess we stop off at one of those other planets?"
T h a t ' l l be it," said Kit confidently.
Rod's eyes narrowed, even as he released the small har.dtractor which kept the deadly contrivance on the'ship's bow
"Ye-e-e-s," he said slowly. "I guess that will be i t We'll see
what is to be seen. But I think I'm going to be mighty cagey!"
He swung the Stellaris about on her course.
The line of flight of a space-ship is not at all the same thing
as — say — the path of a ground-vehicle. When a ground
vehicle, moving south, turns east it travels east and stoos moving south. A space-ship doesn't. The space-ship doesn't stop
moving south. There's nothing to stop it.
Wnen a course is changed the new line of movement simply
modifies the one the ship followed before and that is the result
of all its previous courses. A south waid-moving space-ship
which heads east actually travels on a line somewhere between
south and east.
The exact line depends on the acceleration of the ship, how
long it was on the southerly course, and how long it continues
on the eastern one. Its direction of motion changes with each
of those factors. So that to sight for a planet from space, as
the Stellaris did, and then head for it, is no way to reach i t
Rod probably knew it in theory but he realized it tha hard
way. The yellow sun's second planet had a proper motion all
its own, which Rod did not know. The Stellaris had a motion

T H E BLACK GALAXY

83

all its own, which wag the result of all the courses it had followed during two full days in two different universes. But
nevertheless, Rod aimed the ship at the second planet and
drove for i t
Hours passed and the Stellaris was farther from the planet
than when it started. More, it no longer pointed at the planet
though the distant stars it aimed at were the same. Rod tried
again and the same thing happened. In the end, scowling, he
swung a tractor on the elusive world, waited an astonishing
four full minutes for the beam to take hold and then grumpily
set Joe on watch and went to sleep. It was his second period of
rest in more clock-days than he could count up.
He slept heavily for a long, long time. He waked and Kit
brought him food. It was strictly vegetable and vaguely unsatisfying. He ate, only half-awake, and went back to sleep
again.
This time he dreamed. And oddly, it was not a dream of
Earth or of the battle just past or even of Kit, whom he could
not allow to absorb him too much in the present state of things.
He dreamed of the dead race on the yellow sun's planet —
the race which was now only a multitude of crumpled heaps
of brightly-colored garments.
In his dream he saw a space-ship rise from the third planet
and land upon another. He dreamed of a tiny colony established there before this space-ship made its flight This ship
landed on a hitherto unexplored part of this new planet and
the colonists just moving to the new planet found a vague
metal object there.
They meddled with it and immediately they died — not
only the meddlers, but those in the grounded space-ship nearby. And then the object melted itself to a mere pool of bubbling metal, which was found by members of the alreadyestablished colony much, much later.
The space-ship itself was smashed as if by explosives. And

84

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

after that there was no more communication between tbs
colony on this other world and the planet from which they
had come. The colonists simply lived on, bewildered and helpless.
As a dream it was at once remarkable and suspicious. It was
reasonable enough as a rationalization of a hunch. But Rod
wondered cagily why his subconscious had pictured no metal
pyramid as the object tho colonists-to-be had meddled with?
Why not a pyramid with sculptured figures on its sides?
It was a very vivid dream. Of course he'd been thinking of
other races endangered by the pyramid-ships. Joe had said
something about good guys existing to make up for the bad
ones. And he'd thought unreasonably often of the yellow sun's
second planet. Especially lately. Even when his mind should
have been full of battle-plans as the Stetlaria sped toward a
fight
It could be a hunch, of course. He'd had a hunch before —
on the dead planet, when he was making a push-pull beam to
wipe out the looters there. He'd felt deadly danger without
knowing why he felt it
He'd worked frantically, racing against time, though he
knew of no real reason why he should fear the coming of looters to the city the Stellaris had landed in. And that hunch
and the hurry it caused had saved him and Joe and a painter
then and there and probably the Sieltaris besides.
The hunch and the dream and the constant thought of the
second planet fitted together a little too well. It was plausible
that uneasiness should show up as a hunch. It was reasonable
enough that an urge to visit a planet should show up in a
dream as a concocted explanation of a reason why he should
go there. But he didn't believe it
The real cause of his dream didn't know that the killer-race
made its booby-traps in the form of pyramids. The real cause
of his dream didn't picture a pyramid on the second planet.

THE BLACK GALAXY

85

though almost certainly one had been there to cause the
murder of a raceRod got up, thinking coldly. He heard Joe's voice, angry.
"That ring-tailed haystack ain't goin' to lick us! If we set out
to hit some place we're goin' to hit it"
Rod stepped into the control-room. Kit was there, looking
anxiously ahead.
Joe shook his fist at a forward vision-port
"Morning," said Rod, drily. "I must've slept the clock around.
What's up?"
Then he saw. The second planet loomed large and very
near. It appeared to be merely a featureless fleecy white. That
would be clouds. But on closer view the clouds were not wholly
solid.
They were in masses which sometimes merely thinned at
their junctures, and sometimes separated a little to show a
darkness beiow them, the whole producing a mottled semimarble effect. But the Stellaris was not approaching the planet
It rotated serenely at a seemingly fixed distance.
"We been tryin' to get down onto that hunka cussedness
yonder," explained Joe, indignantly. "But the closer we come
the quicker it dodges! We been clean around it a dozen timea
already an' we can't get a bit closer! What're they doin' down
there? Pushin' us off with a pressor?1*
Rod grinned. He thought he understood the dream now.
"Hardly! We've got a lateral velocity and we're hung tight
to the planet by a tractor beam. So we're in an orbit around
it. Naturally we can't get down like that!"
"Says who?" demanded Joe pugnaciously, scowling at the
planet.
"Says me," Rod told him. "We'll get down through." He
took over what controls there were. "When I was a kid I used
to twirl a weight on a string and get it going fast, then let it
wind itself up on my finger. Did you?"

86

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

"Uh-huh, but what's that got to do with this?" demanded
Joe.
"It's the trick," said Rod. "As the string wound up and got
shorter, the weight went around faster and faster. Remember?
But it didn't go faster in feet per second, just twirls per second.
Thafs us. The closer we get the faster we go around it — and
our tractor-beam will stretch. Thafs all. HI fix it"
He swung the ship until the fleecy planet was straight abeam.
H e put on full drive in the direction opposite that of the
planet's seeming motion.
"How long do we take to get around?" he asked.
"Less'n an hour," said Joe angrily. "You can tell. There's
one place where it looks like a mountain or something sticks
up through the .clouds."
Rod nodded. That checked. "We'll land there."
He watched. The. Steltaris? drive produced no visible effect
tor a long time and it seemed .insane to try to descend to a
planet's surface by driving at right-angles to the desired descent- But that was the only way it could be done.
Presently the passage of the mottled misty surface seemed
slower. At the very farthest edge of the visible hemisphere, a
speck of solidity appeared. Rod stepped up the drive again.
Then the mottlings were visibly larger. As the planet seemed
to slow, the mottlings continued to increase in size.
"We're coming close, now," said Rod. "We'll be holding off
on pressors, presently."
It was true. The sphere beneath slowed to a snail's pace
and it was very near indeed. The speck of solidity vanished
and reappeared, and vanished and reappeared. Mist sometimes
boiled over it, sometimes left it in plain view.
Rod began to juggle tractor and pressor-beams. He adjusted
the jet-drive. At long last the planet's surface seemed stationary and he cut off the jet. He began, very carefully, to let the
ship down into atmosphere.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

87

"I'm going to make a guess," he said meditatively. "When
we get down to that mountain-tip — it's the only one that
pierces the clouds — we'll find a big mass of stuff that once
was melted metal. And not too far away we'll find a smashedup space-ship. Not a pyramid-ship, this one, but a ship made
back on the planet that's dead now."
Kit looked at him, and her mouth opened. Then the logic
of the statement appeared.
"I think I see," she said slowly. "You mean it would have
been easier for the people of the dead cities to reach this
planet than the snow-covered one because it comes nearer.
And the one place where solid ground shows would be the
place where a space-ship would land. Also it would be the one
place where the pyramid-people would have put something to
tell them when it was touched."
Rod grimaced. "I spoke too sensibly," he said. "Now Til make
a prophecy. When we land we'll wait. And presently some survivors of the race of the next planet out will come to us. And
I think they'll be friendly."
Joe blinked. "Ghosts?"
"No. Real people," Rod assured him. "People that happened
not to be home when their world was murdered but perfectly
real people. You saw what they were like in the televisors."
"How'H they come?" demanded Joe skeptically. "Spaceships?"
"More likely eeroplanes," said Rod, working the ship down
with infinite pains. "Maybe ground-vehicles. But they'll come!"
In this, though, he was wrong. He let down the Stellaria with
the utmost of painstaking care. There was air outside, and
winds. There was a vast sea of cloud and streamers of mist
that writhed up from i t
Sometimes the mountain-top was hidden by white stuff.
Sometimes it was laid bare. But at long last the Stellaris settled with a noticeeble jolt upon the barren rock of what ap-

83

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

peared to be an upward-slanted small plateau rather than a
pointed peak.
Rod pointed out a port. There, in plain view from where the
ship touched ground, was a shining, mirror-like surface. It had
been a liquid once. It w;.? solid metal now. A quarter-mile
away there was a shattered carcass which was only a quarter
of the Stellaris? size but suiv!y had once been a nearly spherical space-ship.
But Sod was mistaken about waiting, about having people
of the supposedly dead race come to them.
They didn't have to wait The people were already there
on the mountain-top, waiting for them.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

fit the Cards

T

H E Stellaris settled again through thick and swirling mists
Slowly and cautiously, and slowly and cautiously, she
moved down toward the white oblivion the clouds promised and produced.
There were strange people in the control-room ol the Earthship. The tallest was no more than four and a half feet tall
and they were distinctly rotund, all of them. They made clear
high-pitched sounds to each other, and now and again one of
them put urgent hands upon Rod at the controls and made
the same clear sounds to him.
At such times the sounds made sense. When there was physical contact there was meaning in the musical tones of the
small people. At other times they were only sounds — very
musical, more or less pleasant, but only sounds.
But of course the same could be said of any unfamiliar
Earth language.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

89

Rod had been prepared for it. After all, he'd had 8 highly
useful hunch in a dead city and he'd been obsessed with the
thought of coming to this planet, and he'd had a dream which
ignored information he possessed.
Had his own subconscious mind dictated that dream, it
would surely have pictured a metal pyramid on the cloudwreathed world as the origin of the pool of metal. But the
dream did not picture that at all.
When the other facts were taken into consideration it added
up to limited, incomplete information from somewhere, from
a source which had some knowledge that Rod did not possess
and lacked some data that he did.
Explanation was complete, now. The dream was accurate
as far as it went The little people now in the ship's controlroom had been very brave indeed. They'd come out of the
mist to meet the Stellatis as it landed and they'd made gestures obviously intended as a welcome.
And Rod had gone out to them. He carried a flame-weapon
taken from the captured pyramid-ship but he left it in his
pocket. He had no uneasiness about the air because the small
. people breathed it and the air of their home planet was suitable for humans.
So the group of half a dozen rotund figures and Rod —
inevitably grim — had met on the top of the one mountain
to rise above the planet's clouds. There was not exactly tenseness in the air. Rod felt an anxious, an actually desperate
sensation of hope and fear together> communicated to him in
the odd fashion of a hunch.
He spoke. His tone was dry. "We're all in the same jam, it
seems. And with a community of dislikes we ought to be
friends."
Flutelike notes filled his ears. Then a short round figure
approached, very hesitantly, and held out two hands. They
were not human hands but they were empty. Rod put out his

90

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

own. The round figure almost apologetically moved closer and
very tentatively offered to touch hands with Rod.
"I'll try anything once," said Rod. "Go ahead!"
The hands touched. The round man's flesh was warm and
firm. But instantly the high-pitched sounds were language.
Urgent, apprehensive words. It was even reasonable that comprehension should follow physical contact but Rod did not
wait for theoretic discussion. He spoke himself and his wo.d
were understood.
Minutes later he led the way to the air-lock.
"These people," he said crisply inside the ship, with t :
small group clustered behind him. "These people are memb
of a colony from the planet we visited. They know the rest
their race is wiped out. They've every reason to be our frien
"If you hold hands with them you can talk. We'll work <
explanations later. Right now we're going to shift the Stella
down out of sight beneath the clouds. Get talking to th<
and find out all you ca.n."
And then he went to the control-room with the rotund m
who had first touched hands with him. He prepared to sli
the Stettaris. Here, atop the mountain, at least sometimes
could be sighted from apace and bathed in a deadly push-p
beam.
The ship rose on her pressor-beams. She moved. But na
gation in a world of mist was ticklish. Rod had to feel his w
cautiously. More, the small people had come a long way
greet the Earth-ship. It was necessary to ease the unwieldy
space-craft through many passes among high and unseen mountains.
There were moments when he was absorbed in the task and
the trilling speech of the little folk was a disturbance. And
there were many times when warm hands touched him irritatingly — but at each such contact the twitterings became intelligible — and he received useful knowledge about his im-

THE BLACK GALAXY

91

mediate problem. He was beginning to feel more tolerant
When the mountains were cleared there was a long flight
of some hundreds of miles over unseen level stuff which might
have been either flat land or sea. Rod did not like i t He
liked to see what he was doing. But in snatches between the
more practical data on course and height he caught fragments
of twittering not meant for his ears. And they were reassuring.
When at long last he set the ship down — it was actually
the third time he had brought her to ground since her lunatic
departure from Earth — when at long last he landed again
he was reasonably satisfied about the small folk. But he was
wholly dissatisfied with the picture of the future as they saw
it. He was not even very much pleased with the ship's surroundings when he cut off the power.
The Stellarw lay in a forest of gigantic trees, with trunks
from ten to fifty feet in diameter. There was everywhere a
gray twilight Huge wide-spreading branches at once shut out
a view of the clouds and seemed to form a roof which kept
out the mist, so that the space beneath them was clear.
Later one of the biological assistants told Kit that the order
of things in vegetation was reversed in these trees. Instead of
taking moisture from the ground and losing it through the
leaves, these trees absorbed water through their foliage and
Gent it down to their roots.
But under their protection the colony from the third planet
had set itself up to survive. There was a tiny power-house,
quaintly like the architecture of the dead cities in its details.
There were small houses. And everywhere, some fifty to a
hundred feet up on the tree-trunks, there were light-projectors
to throw light down on the colony and its inhabitants and
their cultivated fields.
On a cloud-covered planet there would not be much ultraviolet and under such a forest there would be none at all. But
lights could substitute. The colony could survive and feed it-

92

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

self. But it was very small. There were no more than two
hundred individuals remaining of a race that had dotted a
planet with cities.
When the humans emerged from the ship they could feel
the overwhelming relief from tension the welcoming-party's
report had brought. Rod was led at once to the colony's head.
And — holding hands absurdly — they plunged into the business before them.
For the rest the establishment of friendship and understanding was the most urgent of needs. Kit took half a dozen of
the little round women into the Stellaria. She held hands and
talked and they readily understood her.
They exclaimed politely over the Stellaris, but it was clear
that they considered its incompletion uncivilized. Only after
Kit explained the accidental and unpremeditated beginniMV
of the voyage were they quite convinced. Then they expresst '
engaging sympathy.
But when they saw the loot taken from the pyramid-sh
— the lustrous fabrics, and the delicately prismatic plasti
ware, and the flowers and seeming people on the other at
objects — they were fascinated.
They could not understand how people who made sut
things could be murderers. Then Kit explained that it Wi
apparently loot from still another murdered race and she fairi
felt the burning hatred the small people knew.
When Kod came back to the ship she was full of news.
"Rod, they're adorable!" she told him enthusiastically. "They
are civilized! They are charming! I've found out about telepathy, Rod. They say that telepathy's never quite satisfactory
because no two people see things exactly the same way.
"A square or a circle doesn't look quite the same to me as
it does to you, Rod. So there's normally a fogginess in anything like thought-transference because you're trying to see
through somebody else's eyes."

THE BLACK GALAXY

93

Rod nodded
"But words do help to get thoughts into a pattern that can
be transmitted," Kit went on breathlessly. "And with contact
real communication is possible. When they talk and hold hands
they get each other's meanings much more accurately than
we do.
"Outside of that they can only pick up emotions, not thoughts.
They know how you feel but not what you think. And they
knew that their race was dead when they couldn't pick up any
feeling of the race's emotions.
"They were able to tell when the looters were on the planet
because their emotions were alien and contemptuous. But
when they picked up our emotions of horror and sympathy
and anger at what we saw they knew we'd come and weren't
the murderers!"
"I know," said Rod tiredly. "The whole colony held hands
and all of them tried to warn us about the looters but all
they could do was make me jumpy, Before the battle they
were trying again."
"They could only make us interested in the inner planets.
After I went to sleep they were able to make me dream but
they can't do more than that without physical contact and it
took all of them working together to do so much."
"It's wonderful that they're able to do that much," said Kit
"Very wonderful," said Rod in some bitterness- "They
brought us here with it. But do you think we can take all of
them on the Stellaris? Will our air-purifier keep them from
suffocating with us if they stay on board indefinitely?"
Kit looked blank. "I don't suppose so. It's kept the air good
for us."
"Fifteen people! Add two hundred more. What then?"
"But they're all right here, aren't they?"
"For how long?" demanded Rod. "We had one brief contact with a space-ship just out of Earth. AH our other contacts

94

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

have been here in this solar system. The pyramid-people murdered this race because they made a space-ship and it was only
luck that this colony'd been started before they learned of i t
We figured that if we stayed here those fiends would think we
were survivors and not guess we came from Earth. Now there
are survivors! So what happens?"
Kit shook her head. He said savagely, "Those rats hunt for
us — as a colony. They find these people — a colony. They
wipe them out for what we've done! I've been talking to the
colony head. There's no evading i t That's in the cards."

CHAPTER TWELVE

Boarders

S

HRILL twitterings down below. The voice of Joe the electrician, just coming in the air-lock.
"Okay, fellasl If you can make anything outa it, you're
welcome! Anyhow, ifs plenty hot if you can use the power."
His voice died away and the twitterings with it. He was
taking a group ol the small round men into the engine-room,
doubtless to show them the condenser-device from the pyramid-ship the Steltatint crew had looted.
"If we hadn't turned up," said Rod, "those fiends would
never have suspected that there were survivors. The colony
could have gone on for centuries, building up a new civilization maybe and knowing about space-murderers and working
out ways of fighting them when they dared take to space
again. But we turned up. We've spoiled that ideal"
He spread out his hands. T h o s e rats will look for us.
They'll find (hem. If we go away and leave these people here
they'll be murdered like the rest of their race. Because of us!
And we can't allow that!"

T H E BLACK GALAXY

95

"N-naturally," said Kit distiessedly. "Of course we can't. But
what can we do?"
"That's what's got to be worked out," Rod told her grimiy.
"We can depend on the pyramid-ships coming back. And with
an answer to our last trick, too!"
He felt something close to despair. There are obligations
that cannot be evaded. If the Stellaria had made the race of
murderers suspect the existence of a colony, where there was
none, that was warfare. But to cause those murderers to search
for a colony which did exist wes something else. Human beings
can't do that sort of thing and go off untroubled.
Joe came in, beaming. "Those little guys are pretty smart,"
he said contentedly. "They take that condenser that's a powerpicker-up an' chirp at each other an' tell me they think they
know somethin' that they can figure out that gizmo from. They
say they got a hunch it's even the answer to faster-than-light
travel. So they go off, cartin' it precious, to see what they see.
Okay?"
Rod nodded. He sat scowling at the mass of unfilled spaces
which should have been the Stellaritf instrument-board.
"Listen, Joe," he said heavily. "Those pyramid-rats have
taken a licking. From us. But they can't leave it at that. They
can't stay ticked. They've committed so many crimes they
can't stop. If any other race gets space travel and they can't
wipe that race out the pyramid-people get wiped out. They
know it. They can't make friends now. It's too late!"
Joe said amiably, "Those little guys won't make friends,
that's sure! Maybe they got squeaky high voices but they
know what hate is! They were asking me questions about the
cities yonder an' the way I could tell they felt made my hair
curl!"
Rod said impatiently, "What do you think the pyramidships will come back with? I doubt they're too smart They
made some discoveries and used them for weapons and ap-

96

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

parently were satisfied to stop at that. Their ships aTe no more
civilized than a pirate ship in the old days. But they've •gnt
to work out some way to handle us. What'll it be?"
Joe sat on the corner of what was intended for a navigator's
table, if a navigator should ever acquire star-maps and navigating instruments. He swung one foot.
"What I'd do? Hm — we come out of other-space right in
the middle of their fleet an' knock 'em off by dozens before
they can slap a beam on us, an' we're gone, still fightin', before
they come to — them that's left. If I had to cook up somethin'
it'd be to handle a ship that turned up in my lap."
Hod waited, frowning.
"An' it looks to me," said Joe, "like if I thought somebody
was goin' to do that I'd have beams goin1 out in all directions
as soon as I thought he was thinkin' about it. If there was any
way to keep 'em from bumping off my own gang —"
Rod jumped. "Right. I keep thinking in terms of our outfitting. But they've got measuring instruments! They can cii
brate their beams! They could mount push-pull generathat would kill up to ten thousand miles but not beyond.
"Then they could space their ships fifteen thousand m '
apart and have a fifty-percent overlap and a formation thi
fill up the whole solar system! All such a fleet would need <
do would be simply to sweep through a solar system ana
everything in it would be dead! If we charged a formation
like that or tried to turn up in its middle . . . "
Joe nodded. "Uh-huh. We'd get a dose of push-pull be^ni
that'd knock us off in a hurry,"
"And what's more —" Rod's forehead cleared. "Since they
haven't got other-space force-fields they probably think we
can jump from a standing start to light-speed or better. That
would seem to explain our jumping through their beam into
their laps!"
Joe swung his foot, unperturbed. "Uh-huh." Then he said,

T H E BLACK GALAXY

97

"Those little guys are pretty good with tools. How much time
you think we got?"
"Not much! The ships that escaped have got to get back
to base, wherever that may be. They've got to work out a new
trick — which will probably be that one — and mount new
projectors and calibrate them and then come back. But it
won't take long!"
Joe said amiably, "A focused tractor works from the otherspace to this. You think it'd work from this to the other space?
An' a pressor, too?"
"Why not?" Then Red stared. "Are you thinking of a drone?
That would be the trick, of course."
"Yeah," said Joe, grinning. "I'd scare the pants off 'em if
they saw the oV Stellana amblin' right up to 'em through all
the beams they could pour into her, wipin' 'em out copious
an' not havin' a whisker curled by the worst they could do.
They'd figure they were goners sure!" Then he added, "If we
got time to fix it"
"That," said Rod sourly, "is the question!"
It was a very urgent question. And there were others. But
answers of a sort were forthcoming for most. As for the time
before a refurbished pyramid-fleet could be expected back, the
small people could promise some telepathic warning.
As they'd known of their race's death by the absence of
any emotions to perceive, and of the coming of looters on the
planet by their scorn, and of the landing of the Stellaris by
the much more sympathetic emotions of its occupants at sight
of the murdered cities — so they could know of the spacefleet's return.
But they could not get the slightest inkling of any technical
improvements in the enemy ships by their, psychic gilt. They
simply couldn't read thoughts — only feelings.
Feverish activity commenced. The small people began to
make a double of the Stellaris — a double in appearance only.

98

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

It was a mere shell of thin metal put over a frame that would
hold it in shape. Some of their technicians began a feverish
duplication of the fighting-device on the Stellar is? bow.
The arc-welders from the ship welded that in place and so
released tractors that had anchored it. Joe ran cables into the
control-room and set up something like adequate indicators
— getting the needed instruments from the colony's small
store.
Work went on frantically in the Stellaria1 flotation-bulges
too- There was no time to build new sections to the ship bill
the flotation-bulges now served no purpose.
Heavily insulated inside, with heating-elements provided,
they could accommodate a great addition to the hydroponic
gardens which kept the ship's air fresh. The small folk, too,
had plants which would serve to excellent purpose. They
would provide food in vast quantities.
The matter of food for the fifst time was solved- The colonists had plenty and the colony had necessarily been staffed
with technologists needed for its survival. The dieticians discussed matters in great detail with the several humans. They
made tests. They painstakingly experimented.
In two days from the SieHanY landing, the diet of its human crew was wholly bearable. There was a close approximation of bread, and a very near similitude of three or four different vegetables — but the ones from the ship's air-rooms
still tasted better.
There was even a pretty good imitation of steak, which the
dietitians assured Kit contained all the needed amino-acid
chains the human being required, plus the fsts they had begun
hungrily to crave. It was not exactly right — not exactly —
but it was a great deal better than they'd had.
The real triumph, however, was in the technical department The little round men used the same plastic "vacuumtube" that Rod had salvaged from the planet They had two

T H E BLACK GALAXY

99

others, which were smaller. They used the condenser-device
from the pyramid-ship also for power.
The imitation Stellaiis was an empty shell but for a complex, heavily-built device in its very center. That device did
not include a drive, because there were reinforced plates on
which the real Stellaris could focus tractor and pressor-beams,
so that its pseudo-twin could be maneuvered and moved from
a distance.
But in place of the drive there were tiny beams focused oa
devices in the Stellaiis which performed the functions of cables.
The power in those beams would vary to communicate information to the Stellaris even in other-space. And the little men
dismantled the four televisors and set their scanners in the
giant robot they were constructing. The receiving-screens went
in the Earth-ship's control-room.
Altogether an incredible lot was done. The Earth-ship was
no longer alone. She had a fighting-ship for companion, unmanned, to be sure, but which had at least five times the
power-supply of the parent vessel and her fighting-beam wag
deadly.
With many hands to work on it, all inspired alike by hatred
and equipped with skill, that fighting-beam was a monstrous
engine for destruction.
The push-pull beams were ingeniously designed to scan all
space with fifty times the rapidity of the first device and to
linger briefly on any found target.
They had the power of a generator designed to supply a
metropolis, plus two smaller generators intended to furnish a
colony not only with ordinary power but the means of combatting a strange environment, plus a power-unit from an
enemy space-ship itself. The beam of this single ship should
have nearly the range of a fleet-broadcast of the enemy.
But it was, of course, a robot
Two days passed — three — four. Then there were twit-

JOO

GALAXY SCIENCE F I C T I O N N O V E L

terings in all the compartments of the Stellaris as the round
little colonists crowded into it. They carried small possessions.
They had already moved stores and highly useful supplies
into the ship's unfinished storage-rooms. They were, to all intents and purposes, abandoning their colony, because their
entire solar system would be blasted when the pyramid-fleet
returned. And the Stellaris seemed crowded.
It was necessary. Twenty of the little folk had been on
watch since the beginning. They sat in a circle, holding hands
in a quaint absorption.
They were aware, of course, of the emotions of their fellows
and of the humans around them. But they carefully ignored
those sensations.
They must have felt a curious loneliness as they listened
or watched — however the process could be described by
which they waited for the sensations of alien presences which
would tell of the return of the enemy fleet
It was coming. It was coming fast. T h e air-lock was sealed.
The Steliaris thrust up-ward on those invisible stilts wlrch
were pressor-beams and Rod drew the pseudo-ship after him
as cloud-banks swirled around the Earth-ship.
K e had controls for this ship, now. H e swung it past the
Stellaris as it wallowed in the impenetrable mist
H e sent the drone out of atmosphere into space.
Warm hands clasped him urgently. Twitterings.
They had meaning.
"It seems that they come faster than light They are very
triumphant. Their emotions suggest that they will slow to
visibility only alter they enter this system and that tl-ey will
Hash through it, destroying everything in an instant
without
any possibility of reply."
"That," said Rod with some confidence, "is what they think!"
An hour later he no longer had confidence. An hour later
the Steltaris was beaten, its drone crippled. It Bed madly

T H E BLACK GALAXY

101

through other-space while the pyramid-ship systematically
wrought destruction upon all the planets of the yellow sun. If
any life had remained it no longer did so.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Defeat

A

T FIRST, it did seem that the battle would go Rod's
way. The drone-ship went up into sunlit space from the
the cloudy covering of the second planet Hidden in tha
mist, Kod had to interpret the look of things from the television-screen in the control-room.
In a very real sense the vision-screens were superior to
eyesight. There was an adjustment of which the humans had
not known by which the images could be enlarged. Any part
of the transmitted scene could be chosen and examined under
high magnification.
Small round men watched those screens, ready to rip off
for later study the lasting image should an informative event
occur. The images were in full color and of astoundingly fine
definition. It was hard to believe that they were transmitted
from space by tiny focused tractor and pressor-beams.
The first scenes were wholly peaceful. There was the yellow
sun and there were the four planets in plain view. Beyond
there were the cold lights of a million million suns of every
color and degree of brightness.
As the pseudo-ship rose higher and higher from the cloudbanked globe Rod saw for the first time the actual picturesqueness of interplanetary space. Always, before, when he saw the
stars beyond atmosphere, he had had immediate pressing problems of navigation or of survival.
But as a color-picture on a vision-screen its startling beauty

102

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

and variety struck home. Which proved that Rod was wholly
human in failing to notice beauty until a frame was put around
it
Of the enemy ships there was as yet no sign. The drone ship
was two thousand miles out. Three. Five. Then warm hands
touched Rod and musical notes in his ears formed themselves
into words.
The enemy fleet was very close. The crews of its many
ships were triumphant by anticipation.
Rod shot the Stellaris up to emptiness. For seconds, there
seemed to be two Earth-ships in the void. They were identical
to all outward appearance and to all seeming they were alone
in space.
Suddenly, though, the real Steltaris winked out of being. It
had gone into the other-space and its only link with the cosmos of the yellow sun was the tenuous complex grid of focused
tractor and pressor-beams which linked the drone-ship ta the
Stellaris, the Stellaris in turn to two planets of this solar system and to an unthinkably remote unknown object deep in
the heart of the dark universe.
These three anchorages gave the Earthship leverage she
needed to maneuver the drone. The television eyes in the drone
gave what information was needed to maneuver the drone. The
television eyes in the drone gave what information was needed
for maneuvers and, of course, the hidden inner weapon began
its ceaseless search for targets the instant the Stellaris vanished.
The tranquility of airless space remained. The drone-ship
— a mere shell — moved like a pawn from another universe,
seemed to come to a decision. It swung about in emptiness and
headed steadily for the planet of the dead cities.
Its movement was smooth and even, which was in itself a
proof that it was not a ship moving on normal drive. A ship
under power would either be accelerating or slowing, certainly

T H E BLACK GALAXY

103

not coasting at the beginning of an interplanetary voyage.
The dummy space-craft moved on and on. And then something appeared magically, something else appeared magically,
suddenly ail of space seemed aglitter with shining metal shapes
appearing eerily from nowhere.
The yellow sunlight gleamed on their sides, and the visionscreens showed them by myriads in all directions, from a colossal pyramid almost within arm's reach of the drone — it
filled all of one television screen — to others and others dwindling through all sizes to the uncertainties of sixth-magnitude
brightness.
Within a space of seconds the whole system of the yellow
sun was filled with ships. There was no counting them. There
were thousands upon thousands upon thousands of them. The
pyramid-race had massed such a fleet as Rod had not conceived of to crush the one small vessel which challenged its
might and its privilege of assassination.
But the Stellaris did represent in fact as great a danger to
the murder-race as the pyramid-ships to it. If left undestroyed
the Stellaris could multiply.
In the dark universe Rod stared in amazement at the spectacle. He touched a single stud, and the drone-ship's weapon
lashed out invisibly. But he was almost dazed by the instantaneous appearance of this monstrous fleet.
"They slowed from faster-than-light drive," he said blankly.
"That must be it! They traveled in formation, faster than light!
And they all slowed together and — here they are! They took
my trick of jumping into their laps and twisted it to make
their lap jump into me!"*
The statement was exact. In the previous fleet-encounter,
the Stellaris had leaped from extreme range instantly into the
midst of the pyramid-ships. There it had done vast damage.
Now the enemy fleet had appeared as if leaping from incredible distances, in a formation which could not but surround any

104

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

space-ship near this sun, with every pyramid-vessel spouting
deadly radiation from each of its five flat sides.
perfectly designed to wipe out all life in a volume of space
exceeding the gravitational field of a sun. Every world and
every comet, every asteroid and even every stray grain of
meteoric matter — all would be sterilized instantly before a
warning-device could operate or a single relay kick over. It
was deadliness itself.
And it worked perfectly. The drone-ship was almost crashed
by a monster pyramid as it slowed to visibility and ravening
beams of push-pull killer-stuff reged through it. That pyramid
flung away, keeping formation at many miles a second. Other
pyramid-ships flashed past, each one pouring its deadly beams
upon the robot vessel. The pseudo-Stellaris seemed to falter.
Nothing living could survive what it had taken. Nothing could
live within it. Nothing!
But the drone-ship fought on. It spun crazily and its beam
licked out and licked out and licked o u t It bit savagely into
the enemy armada as it poured by, every ship flooding the
defiant drone with ever-fresh murderousness. Pyramid-ships by
dozens and by hundreds hurtled by and each one blasted it
afresh.
And each one died. Because whether dead or not, a complicated and inordinately powerful apparatus functioned in the
robot, too. Three separate generators — plus a power-supply
unit of the enemy's own make — thrust energy eagerly into
a push-pull generator which threw a tight aimed beam at every
target its detectors disclosed.
That beam far outranged the enemy weapons, because they
were practising saturation-beaming and that precluded concentration of their deadliness. So the little robot killed and
killed and killed.
But its own lifelessness was certain. Its far-reading murder-

THE BLACK GALAXY

105

ousness became known but the enemy ships beyond its range
exulted in the destruction of the one small crew which was a
danger to their race.
Those within range of its weapon, however, were past triumph. They were past everything. They were coffins hurtling
. onward senselessly.
In other-space, in the Stellaris1 control-room, warm hands
touched Rod. Twitterings became speech. "More! Kill more oi
them!"
Rod said grimly and with narrowed eyes, "I share your ambition. But this is bigger than I expected. They're regrouping
now and they must know by this time that the beam that's
killing them is working by itself. Every one in range is knocked
off and the others are ducking."
Kit said, staring from one to another of the vision-screens,
"A terrible lot of them must have been hit, Rod. Look at the
way they —"
"There's a terrible lot left," he said bitterly. "We've already
knocked off more than were in the entire other fteet, and they
know they've been hurt. But look how many are left! I'm
worried!"
He sent the drone belligerently at the ships which now drew
back from it. But in the space about the yellow sun a curiously
dramatic picture formed. The fleet which hsd already made
sure that no life remained on four worlds and the space about
them was halting in its plunge.
Scurrying motions took place. Ships whose previous course
would have taken them closer to the dione-ship now franticaliy
scurried out of her way but not all of them succeeded.
Yet despite Rod's furious working of controls in other-space
there presently developed a regTouping of the untold thousands
of angular enemies. The pyramid-ships formed a titanic hollow
sphere — and the drone-ship was in its very center.
The drone-ship plunged and spun and plunged again. It sue-

106

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

ceeded only in violent jerkings and the hollow sphere remained
— remained beyond the farthest limit of the robot's range.
In other-space Rod scowled. "They've got pressors on it," he
said savagely. "All the whole fleet Massed pressors — as they
massed their killer-beam before. They're holding it still and
away from all of them. I haven't got power enough to push-pull
it against all that! Looks bad!"
He kept the drone-ship trying frantically to break free but
he watched the vision-screens. Time passed. Twitterings sounded behind him, warm hands touched him. The shrill became
intelligible.
"They will try to tow it somewhere. Perhaps to their home
planet."
"That," said Rod, "I would like to see! But I don't think
they will. They build gadgets in their ships to destroy their
star-maps when a ship goes dead. They might suspect us of
something even more drastic. And if we'd thought of it we
would have! I don't know what they'll try but things could
look a lot better than they d a "
Time passed. Any action among the ships of the hollow
globe, of course, was invisible because of the distance. Rod
waited grimly, keeping the robot still plunging as if unreasoning mechanism only were at work. But there was something still
to be learned.
The pyramid-folk, probably for the first time in their history,
had met intelligent and deadly opposition to their career of
murder. The opposition had been costly. But they had learned
from i t Much too well and much too much! They'd englobed
and now held helpless a much more deadly fighting-machine
than the Stellaris had been only a few days since.
Rod drew in his breath sharply. A little knot of angular
ships sped out from the massed armada.
It went swiftly toward the helplessly plunging little ship in
the midst of all its enemies.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

107

Warm hands. More twitterings.
"More of them die?"
"Hardly," said Rod angrily. "They learn too quickly! They
know nothing can be alive on our ship, though still it fights.
So they've set up robot-controls on some of their ships and
— we'll see what they do.
"They want to look at the dead crew they think is inside, so
they can be sure to massacre the race that bred it. They'd
also like to have that fighting-beam, which is better than theirs.
And I don't want them to have it!"
Already he had multiplied the deadliness of the alien race
by forcing them to devise this new saturation-beaming of a
whole solar system. But if each of their ships, in addition, acquired a fighting-beam as deadly as the robot's that would be
more serious still.
The moving remotely-controlled pyramid-ships took position
on every side of the dummy craft. Its self-directing weapon
flooded them with .lethal push-pull radiation. It did not affect
them. They arranged themselves in a geometric pattern about
i t They swayed a little in their respective positions.
Rod, watching through the television eyes, said softly, "Ahh-h! They've got pressors fanning out! They push against each
other but mostly against our double. Now they'll move and
take her where they please. But the fleet'll have to cut off its
beams!"
He released the directional controls on the locked beams,
so the little dummy ship could be moved where the enemy
wished. It moved. Its robot escort set out for the nearest planet,
which was the world of dead cities.
"They'll ground it," said Rod, "and hold it against the ground
and hammer it with another robot ship until they crack it and
knock out its beam. Then they'll look it over. iVo.'1'
Another ship came streaking out of the spherical formation.
I t had taken longer, perhaps, to fit out with more accurate

108

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

remote control. It swept in a great curve, matched speed and
course with the small convoy, and went along with them for
seconds. The dummy Earth-ship seemed to struggle mechanically.
Then there was a sudden flash of light. A thin, concentrated
beam of pure flame darted across emptiness. It lanced through
the hull of the Stellaritf substitute and on beyond for miles.
The flame flashed again. Another puncture. A third.
In other-space, a television-screen went dead. There was a
sudden crashing noise. A locked beam going from one universe
to another went crazy as the object on which it was focused
ceased to exist save as blue-white vapor. The robot fightingship, helpless now, was being systematically riddled with holes.
The process would keep up until ita weapon went off and
examination by living things became possible.
"We're licked," said Rod coldly. "They're smarter than I
thought They've got us beaten."
He threw over one switch after another. The Stellaris surged
forward in the dark space where stars were n o t
"Rod," asked Kit anxiously. "You mean we can't do anything but run away?"
"Nothing else," he told her. "We simply can't handle that
fleet We can play heck with it — we have — but it's just
too big for us. So we depart for new pastures."
Agitated twitterings came from all about him. There was
one of the little folk touching Kit for the ability to understand
what Rod said. He repeated the confession of defeat The
others made grief-stricken sounds.
"We're still safe ourselves," said Rod over his shoulder.
"We're safer probably, than anybody else in the galaxy. An]
I'm not leaving our dummy for them to paw over. We've j\i
got to start all over again in some new fashion. The only q
tion is, what the heck can the other fashion be?"
He cut off the robot's weapon and watched the televis

THE BLACK GALAXY

109

screens. Suddenly, all the screens went black. There were flutelike wailings from the little folk.
T e l l 'em, Kit," said Rod "Remember we made our forcofields take in a half-mile sphere of air outside the ship when
we wanted to go over that other pyramid? And remember how
I sprang the booby-trap before that by tying a string to my
coat and pulling it into, this space with a focused tractor? And
how I sent you a note from the planet when you were in this
space?"
"I remember," admitted Kit. "But I don't see —"
"A focused tractor can pull something out of normal space
to this, if there's s force-field big enough to hold it So I pulled
our dummy-ship into the dark universe."
There was a resounding crash against the Sfetfaris1 hull.
"Here it is," said Rod. "Now we'll get to blazes away from
here and figure out what next"

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

New Tactics

F

OR hour after hour the Stellsris plunged blindly through
the utter blackness of other-space with its battered, shattered robot-twin in tow. Rod pulled the ship away from
the system of the yellow sun by the tractor long ago fixed on
an unseen object in darkness' deepest heart
He could have used the jet-drive but there would have been
a trail of vapor — tenuous enough, but possibly followable —
when the ejected molecules of gas fell back to normality beyond the ship's force-fields. Even then the Stellaris would be
unreachable but there was no point in giving the enemy any
clues at all to the nature of its security.
As time went on and acceleration continued the ship reached

110

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

the speed of light and multiples of it Inertia had quite other
values here than in the inhabited universe. But whatever they
pulled toward was solid and Hod checked its distance by sending pressors to strike it, estimating their time of travel to the
strange object.
The small round folk talked interminably among themselves.
Joe the electrician, passing by an especially intent conclave,
was halted and hands laid upon him. After seconds of listening
he sat down absorbed ly.
Half an hour later Rod was down in the engine-room working with tractors and pressors that had no wired connections
to the control-room. Joe came in search of him.
"Hey!" said Joe. "Those little guys, they got an idea about
the way the pyramid-ships go faster than light!"
"Yes?"
"They got it figured out mathematical," said Joe, "that there
could be a klnda stuff that ain't natural. That hadn't oughta
exist but could get made — of maybe could make itself in a
atar or something. It wouldn't — uh — react to our magnetism
an' it wouldn't be pulled by gravity or anything like that."
"It ought to fall into other-space," objected Rod.
"Only," Joe explained, "it could be alloyed with natural stuff
when it got made. And if they had that kinda stuff a little of
it would mix with a lot of other stuff and y'could make a ship
of it And that phoney stuff, it would absorb gravity an' magnetism an' so on jin' make it damp itself out
"That's why it wouldn't be pulled by it But the energy'd
have to go somewhere so ifd show up as motion. Thafs what
they say and they say the figures prove it," he added hastily.
"Ifd be like soaking up heat an' getting electricity. Vsee?"
"Partly," said Rod. Something clicked in a pressor-coil. He
looked at the distance-adjustment on the pressor-beam mount.
He compared it with a similar guide on a tractor mounting.
He began, very delicately, to vary the two together so that

"HE BLACK GALAXY

111

neither was subjected to excessive strain.
"So all they'd have to do would be to line up the motion
an' they'd have a whale of a drive!" said Joe. "Actually, these
guys say that if you got the stuff movin' fast enough if d start
movin' faster on its own account. They say those pyramidships could have that stuff in 'em, in all the metal an' such.
"So that all they have to do is pile on their drive-jets until
they're goin' fast enough an' they pop into all kindsa speed.
It's like runnin' fast enough to catch a train. Once you got
holda it, you ain't runnin', you're ridin'.
"Only the train they catch is runnin' all ways at once. Whichever way they want to go, when they 1 goin' fast enough all of
a sudden they're ridin' 'm an' how! Then all they got to do is
slow down when they want to get off."
Rod straightened up and stared. Then he bent over again.
"There's more to it. It has to neutralize increase in mass
with velocity and a few little things like that," he observed,
' put it does make a certain amount of sense."
"Yeah? But —"
"Ask 'em to figure out two others things," said Rod. "One
is how those rats broadcast power, if smashing the generator
will cut it off and how fast the cut-off will spread. And the
other — I'm asking them to dig into it because I gave them
the theory and they've time to work it out and it'll need time
and sound thinking — the other is how to make force-fields
that will drop matter from this space into ours.
"We can take stuff from our space and drop it into this and
hold it here. When we cut out fields it drops back. Now I'm going to want to reverse that process and I think I could do it in
time but I'm going quietly mad with stuff that doesn't need
He went back to his pressor and tractor-beams, while Joe
returned to the conference of the small people with a puzzled
frown on his face.

112

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

The ship was crowded but the colonists were civilized and
likeable. They crowded themselves to leave room so the humans wouldn't feel crowded. Their women zestfully took over
some of the looted fabrics and presently presented Kit with a
costume faithfully copying the cut and fit of the one she wore,
but breathtaking — in part because of their use of some of
the art-objects of unknown origin. The other four girls instantly
begged to be similarly attired.
The men conferred and politely asked leave to use an
empty store-room for a laboratory. There they conferred endlessly and one of them made computations on an extraordinarily, simple machine from the colony and then worked painstakingly with Joe to transfer the equations from his notation
to human mathematical terminology.
Rod juggled his beams and juggled them and adjusted them
ever more delicately. In the end the Stellaris made what might
be called a landing on something large and solid in the depths
of other-space. Lights thrown out the ports disclossd a rough,
seemingly curdled surface of a dark and apparently metallic
substance.
Its size was unguessable but it was huge. It had, apparently,
no gravitational attraction for the ship — or the drone'— and
it was plainly not a type of matter normally found in the
universe of stars.
When Rod had made tests, he called a conference of all on
board. He put his hands on the colony leader so that all could
understand him.
"I want to make a report," he told them grimly. "We were
licked in our last encounter with the pyramid-ships. But we're
vastly better off than we were. Putting extra vegetation in tlie
flotation-bulges has kept our air pure. We've plenty of power
and plenty of food. I consider that we can live indefinitely in
this ship while we hunt for a planet we can live on.
"We can possibly establish a colony the pyramid-folk will

T H E BLACK GALAXY

113

never find. Certainly we can now build more ships — given
materials — which can elude if not defeat those fiends. I don't
think it likely that we can ever find our way back to Earth."
A twittering interrupted him. A round little man spoke. Rod
understood, but Joe — also touching one of the little folk —
translated truculently.
"He says he's been askin' all of us all we knew about the
stars we see from Earth. He says he ain't sure, but he thinks
there's a chance he can pilot us back to Earth."
There were fifteen humans on the ship. Twelve of them —
Rod and Kit and Joe were silent — made a lot of noise. When
it ended, Rod went on doggedly. "But back on Earth they
didn't believe in danger from the pyramid-people. Whether
they'll believe us now or not, I don't know. Certainly it'll take
time for them to get ready to fight — if they do.
"But we're ready to fight now. We just got licked, and badly,
but we did so much damage that there's a chance the pyramidpeople leaders will decide to end their danger immediately by
wiping out all races that even promise to achieve civilization.
That's what I'm afraid of. If we go on fighting it's going to be
bad but ~~"
He stopped, uncertain what to say next Joe stood up.
"Anybody that argues," he said belligerently, "is going to get
his head knocked off, I seen the dead bodies on that planet"
There was silence. Presently Rod said, "Then I suppose we'll
get to work. We're going to make a new weapon and then
we're going to find out where those pyramid-people have their
home planet Then we're going to smash it and them. And
we'll all probably get gray hair in the process."
There was no discussion. Later the colony leader of the
little people came to Rod and touched him and asked earnestly. "Why did you discuss? Are you not the leader? Why
did you explain and why did your friend threaten?"
"That," said Rod drily, "is what we call democracy."

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

The flat Trap

T

H E R E was a dark universe unguessable hundreds of millions of light-years in extent. There was a wandering thing
in it, a small thing by comparison with the heavenly bodies
of star-studded space. In the Earth's solar system it would
have been an asteroid, perhaps.
It was barely eight miles through. Its mass cou!d not be
measured because it was not a substance which normally
existed in normal space. Perhaps it could be created there.
Perhaps it was. Possibly it was some unimaginable end-product which remained when the neutronium core of a dwarf star
decayed and ceased to be matter that the other universe could

Gravity did not effect it. Magnetism did not draw it. It had
no electric conductivity nor did it change the dielectric constant of emptiness. But it was matter of a sort and it could be
alioyed with metal.
Rod verified that fact with samples taken in through the
air-lock while tractors held the air from flowing out. Ha gave
it to the small folk, saying that it was probably the substance
they had deduced from theory could exist.
The;r theory suggested other tests, which they made. They
went feverishly to work to make alloys. They tore apart the
tattered robot-ship with beams which were stronger than the
metal they required.
When the alloy was not too high in metal from normal
space they found that it was self-welding. Two bits of it, pressed
together, united solidly with the strength of a weld.
The small men joyously improvised a process which turned
out that alloy as a foil — and the painters on the ship worked
at their trade for the first time since leaving Earth. They
114

TKE BLACK GALAXY

115

coated one side of the foil with paint so that it could be stored
in rolls without welding itself back to solidity.
Stored it was — placed in storage where no thief or race of
thieves imaginable could come upon it It was piled on the
shattered remnant of the drone-ship's plating, anchored to. the
dark-space object by a tractor with a field of its own to retain
it and a generator from the colony to keep it in being.
There were two other generators available. They had been
on the drone. There was also the pyramid-ship's power device.
The small men had taken that apart and found a surface-treatment of the metal, which to them explained everything. They
essayed to give the theory to Rod but he was impatient
"You say it's a matter of a spherical field practically the
diameter of the galaxy, with constants calling for the assumption that space is elastic and can be compressed. All right. It
warps so it must be elastic. If it can be compressed the doppler effect on island-universe spectra simply proves distance
and not retreat but let it go.
'That's all right — but when you talk about the selective
flow of power in a force-field to surface-treated plates because
of molecular changes created by the treatment —" Rod shrugged.
"I'll want to know it sometime. The main thing is that the
whole-field will go off instantly the generator's smashed. I'm
not going to try to understand right now. I'm already trying
to get some of your math and my head is creaking with the
load."
He was trying to check the calculations on a device the
. colonists were building in their store-room lab. It would, they
assured him, create a force-field large enough to shift the entire asteroid into normal space.
The mathematical statements had been translated by Joe and
he had — as an electrician working on modern equipment —
a mathematical training which once would have implied a

116

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

master of arts degree. But this math was beyond him and he
translated it blindly. Rod was having trouble with it.
In the end he accepted what was not wholly clear because
what was clear was so evidently right He wanted to get at the
Stellarie? force-field generators again. He expanded them to
their absolute maximum size. At the new adjustment, the ship
would carry a four-mile sphere of normal space into the dark
universe when the field went on.
Then he went back to normal space with the ship. She had
then been in the dark universe for a long long time and humans
and small people alike crowded to the ports to look at the
stars. It was strange to see the hunger of both races to look
at far-distant suns which now so peculiarly meant home to
them.
He'd told Kit his immediate plans and she was ready with
half a dozen of the little folk, all solemnly holding hands. The
Stellark floated at random amid the stars. Twitterings.
They say, Rod," reported Kit shakily, "that there aren't
any pyramid-people around. Space is empty around here. It's
nice, isn't it?"
"Pleasant but not what we need," said Rod. "We'll try
again."
The jet-drive went on and the ship went into dark space
and came out again light-years away. The little folk solemnly
strained for a sense of the emotions of the murderers. Nothing.
A second dive and a leap of light-years and a third listening
search. A fourth —
Excited twitterings. Hands touched Rod. "There are many
of the murder-race! Many!"
"Which way?" demanded Rod. "Can you tell? Do they know
we're here?"
More flute-like noises.
"They are bored. They know nothing. They are — they $r«t
yonder."

FHE BLACK GALAXY

117

A small unhuman hand gestured. Little folk watched avidly
as Rod sent a tractor-beam with infinitesimal power groping
for the space-ships the small people perceived.
"Got the line," he reported. "Tell me if they're warned."
He swung the Stellaris. Jet-drive. A dive and instant emergence from blackness. Nothing. The switches crashed and
crashed again. The enemy ships were invisible. Their presence
had been detected by the psychic sense of the small people and '
verified by tractor.
"Very near," said the high-pitched notes. "Very near! Very,
very near. They are frightened! Quick!"
Rod sent the ship ahead in a desperate leap and the field
closed in. The fully-expanded field was like a gigantic net
which closed about the Earth-ship.
There was a shrill uproar. The little folk clamored, "They
are frightened. They are helpless! They do not know what has
happened!"
Rod grimly and squeamishly changed the controls on the
Stellaris' bow-weapon.
"I never could kill a rat in a trap," he said savagely. "Herel
You do it!"
He put the warm, non-human hand of the leader of the little
round colonists upon a switch.
"Throw it — and they'll die."
There was a tumult of shill voices. The Steliaris had winked
out of other-space and instantly vanished into it again. But
with her in her vanishing had gone the contents of a four-mile
sphere of emptiness. As once she had carried air to the dark
universe, now she carried — nothing, on the first attempts.
But this time the force-field had enclosed a pyramid-ship
inside it with the Stellaris, Once before such a vessel had been
dragged into the illimitable dark but the crew of that one had
been dead. The crew of this was yet alive.
The little folk shrilled at one another in a terrible joy. Their

118

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

leader trembled with his satisfaction as he savagely threw the
switch which sent a beam of utter deadliness into the captive
enemy.
It was a trivial payment for the millions upon millions of
their fellows but the small people were filled with impassioned
joy. They felt — they telt! — the murderers of their race
blasted out of life.
"The answer," said Rod, seeing Kit's expression, "is that
their power-supply only works in normal space. We ought to
know that. So when I snatched them out of the natural universe into this one their power went, their weapons were useless and I think that even the gadget that destroys their starmaps failed to work. At least, that's what I'm after!"
He went to the air-lock, in which were mounted tractor and
pressor-beams and a powerful mounted fight. With tractors the
enemy ship was brought alongside the Stellaris. The two airlocks were lined up.
And — this was the ticklish part — while tractors again
kept air from escaping Rod and a welder cut through into the
pyramid-ship and went into the revolting reek which was its
With hand-flashes Rod and those who would help him made
their way to where only molten metal and charred paper had
remained on the other ship they'd searched. But here — here
were shining unfamiliar instruments and infinitely ingenious
star-maps and all that could be needed to navigate a pyramidship the length and breadth of the galaxy.
Rod had Joe and two others load themselves down. He himself carried precious maps. They returned to the Stellaris. A
dozen of the small men followed them back to the ship from the
blasted enemy, but it was significant that not one of the round
men carried a single object as a trophy. Their hatred of the
killers of their race was too great to let them look at even a
memento without rage.

T H E ELACK GALAXY

119

The Stellaris headed back through dark-space for the asteroid of dark-space matter. Rod and the colony mathematicians
pored over the maps and astrogation instruments. But they
knew the principles by which such things must work and the
secrets came easily.
By the time they were near the asteroid the matter was
settled. Rod returned to normal space and checked his observations. The colony power-technician by then had worked out
a field-flow instrument to detect the power-field of the enemy
and to locate its center. His observation checked with the
star-maps. Everything checked.
The ship was filled with fluting sounds. The round small
colonists were strangely moved. They knew that their dead
cities, their dead world, their dead race would soon be avenged.
But Rod, touching hands for technical reasons, heard distressed
discussions in the back-ground.
The small people had craved vengeance with a fierceness
close to insanity, as long as they had little hope of it. But now
they had savored it. They had known fully the helpless,
screaming panic of the crew which had had to be killed.
It could not be spared.
Descriptions of either of the two races in the Stettarls could
not be allowed to go back to the leaders of the pyramid-folk.
So the pyramid-ship's crew had to die. But a discussion went
on in the Earth-ship with mounting distress.
To destroy a race because it had destroyed one's own might
be just and proper — but it made one a murderer too.
And the small people were an inherently gentle folk.
The preparations for moving the dark asteroid to normal
space were almost complete when something like a deputation
of the colonists came to Rod. The round men were very unhappy, but very much in earnest Rod touched hands and the
shrill sounds about him were somehow very solemn.
"We ask," said the leader unhappily, "that we be taken to

120

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

a near planet we find on the alien's star-maps. Aa we read the
maps, we should be able to live tliere. We owe you our lives
and any hope OUT race can have oi surviving through us and
our children.
"I! you ask it, we will remain and help you even to the destruction oi the murderers ot our kin. But unless you ask we
prefer to try to build up a new civilization without protection.
We have tasted revenge — and we do not like it."
Rod regarded them steadily. "I don't like killing, either," he
said grimly. "I weakened just now. I gave the task to one of
you. But I am wondering now if a fleet may not be going
through one solar system after another, wiping out the life to
be found there.
"I am wondering if such a fleet has reached my home planet
y e t I am wondering if the fifteen of us humans on this ship
are the only human beings stilf alive — as you are the only
living members of your race. I don't want to leave my race in
danger for one instant if it's living.
"And if it's dead," he added harshly, "I want it to be avenged
before I find out! I don't want to keep on living while I hate
creatures I have spared. But I'll take you to the planet youVe
chosen. We need some fresh observations anyhow."

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Nova!

I

VERYTHING was quite ready when the Stellsris went a
bare thousand miles from the strange thing it had made
of an asteroid, and returned to normal space. Then, with
e jet-drive to set its course and establish a velocity, it dived
ick to darkness to increase that velocity, and came out j e t
;ain into the space where suns flamed grandly, surroun^g^

T H E BLACK GALAXY

121

by their families of planets. They were near their destination.
This also was a sol-type sun and it had seven planets. The
nearest was red-hot from its proximity to its sun. The second
was an arid waste, the third a small and pock-harked cinder.
But the fourth was green, with great oceans and clouds floating above its continents and ice-caps at its poles.
"There is a race here," said apologetic twitterings in Rod's
ear, "It is still barbarous, knowing metals but using no power,
according to the markings we deciphered on the star-map. It
will be long before it should cause the pyramid~peop!e concern. Perhaps we may help and guide the people."
Rod said nothing. He made a planetary approach with
something approaching professional skill. In hardly more than
minutes the Sfellaris settled down into atmosphere.
"Rod!" cried Kit. "A city!"
She pointed and Rod swung the ship — so unwieldy in air
— into a near approach. It reached the city. It hovered over
the city. It was a city, past question. Its ways were paved
with quarried stone, its buildings were of massive, cyclopean
architecture and it was barbarously magnificent.
But it was definitely barbarous. The great buildings were
palaces and temples. The people lived in small structures, most
of which plainly had gardens attached to them. There were
cultivated fields and pasture-lands outside it. There were crude
wooden ships tied to the wharves where a river wandered
through it.
As the Stellaris descended Rod saw half-furled, sails. Sails
had not been used on Earth except for sport in two hundred
years. But he saw no movement
The Stellaris touched ground. Very grim indeed, Rod led
the way to the airlock. He opened i t
There was a smell in the air. It was the smell of death.
"These people were hardly more than savages," said Rod

122

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

very quietly, "and they were alive no more than two or three
days ago. They haven't even motors! By what we can see they
must have lighted their homes with flames, burning the fat of
gnimals, or petroleum.
"They had no fliers, no ground-vehicles except —" he pointed — "that was a vehicle, with an animal pulling it. And these
people were killed because some day they might have made
a space-ship. The pyramid-folk are frightened- We've frightened them.
"They're wiping out all intelligent life that can challenge
them even a thousand years from now! If you want to spare
yourselves the grief of killing these fiends, go ahead! Get out!
Quickly! I've got work to do!"
But none of the small people moved to land.
Their leader touched hands with Rod.
"We have decided again," his shrill notes said. "We fight.
Not to avenge our dead but to protect those who will never
know that we lived. Pleases! Make haste/"
The Stellaris rocketed skyward and went into blackness,
then sped madly to the dark asteroid with her jet-drive and
tractors together striving fcr the utmost speed.
In an hour the force-fields were shrunk so that only the
Stellaris was included in them. But before that time and under
their shielding, the foil-rolls were unrolled. As they touched
the dark mass they were welded inseparably to its surface.
The other devices needed also were welded fast and the Stellaris anchored herself solidly with tractors, and a pressor irrevocably thrust home the master-switch.
Instantly from the ports of the ship — from which glaring
lights had shone — there was only the blackness of empty
dark-space. The asteroid had vanished. But the Stellaris remained anchored to it and the Stellaris stayed in dark-space.
The ship waa with its creation but in dimensions parallel to
those of the universe of stars. There was reason.

T H E BLACK GALAXY

,

123

There were three vision-plates in the ship's control-toom,
which reported from the asteroid as they had reported from the
drone. Starlight shone on the metal of the ungainly object's
surface for the first time since time began.
The report the vision-eyes sent to the dark universe was
beyond all expectations and beyond the experience of any save
members of the race which made shining ships and used them
for unwarned murder. It was terrifying. And it was sublime.
The asteroid reached normal space with a velocity which
was inherent — and which was above the critical speed of the
alloy-plates now welded to i t Those plates bit hard into the
substance of the new universe. They were of the stuff which
sent pyramids at deadly multiples of the speed of light.
Other-space matter and normal-space matter, alloyed together, were an unholy compound which consumed the energy
of gravitation and of magnetism and of the energy which is
electrostatic stress. Perhaps it even consumed the energy of
light. And all of that energy it transformed into motion, having a velocity in miles-per-second to begin with.
It sped at a mounting speed which turned all visible starlight to violet, then turned all heat-rays to blue. And still its
rate of progress grew. It sped faster until light itself had no
meaning and radio-frequency radiations were light and then
even they were nothing.
It hurtled onward and the television-screens saw all the universe in that unimaginable glow which is the slow pulsation
of the hearts of suns, taking hours to the beat, but now raised
in frequency to a strange and eerie glow. And still the speed
Rod worked controls, his eyes shining like coals. There
would be but one chance to use this weapon, this bolt of othermatter from another space, traveling at a rate beside which
light-speed was imperceptible. The accuracy of the shot must
be absolute. There must be no deviation of the thousands of a

I
124

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

hair. And the time was very, very short.
Actually, the thing happened in seconds.
The sun the aliens' star-maps pictured lay ahead. It was a
giant sun, so huge and fierce that the aliens' inhabited planet
lay two-hundred-million miles away. It was toward that sun
that the other-space projectile sped. It was miles in diameter,
but it could be controlled.
It moved at five thousand times the speed of light but Rod
had precious moments in which to observe its course and aim
it, seconds in which to adjust the aim, fractions of seconds in
which to make sure.
Then he cut loose the anchoring tractors and the Stellaris
floated on while the hurtling thing went unguided.
The Earth-ship returned to normal space far beyond the
solar system of the pyramid-makers. And the thing was already
finished. But the light had not yet reached this spot.
Those on the Earth-ship had time to line the ports, staring,
and see the giant sun and even to glimpse the shining specks
which were its worlds before the spectacle began.
They did not see the missile strike. No eyes could follow
the mass which struck at thousands of millions of miles per
second, with all the stored energy in its impact that it had
absorbed from the linkage-fields across its path. They could
not even tell where it had struck.
They saw only that the great sun swelled suddenly and
swelled again with a monstrous and terrible deliberation, then
seemed to pour out into all space as if to devour it utterly.
The timing was like the seemingly slow-motion process of
water falling over Victoria Nyanza falls.
Actually it was of incredible vehemence and unthinkable
force. The free energy within the sun had suddenly been
tripled by the arrival of that supernal missile, which sank to
the sun's very heart before its atoms could explode.
The sun literally detonated. Flaming ravening star-stuff shot

THE BLACK GALAXY

125

outward at thousands of miles-per-second. A planet was engulfed — a second. A third, fourth, fifth and sixth.
Those on the Stellaris watched the sun become a nebula, a
mass of incandescent gas filling a globe five-thousand-million
miles across. And no planet lived in that inferno — no gigantic
generator of power, able to supply thousands of murder-fleets
light-millennia away, could still be functioning. The planet of
the pyramid-ships was gone. Its sun had blown itself to vapor.
And no pyramid-ship anywhere in the galaxy had power.
Those in motion past the speed of light stayed in motion.
There was no power in them to brake below the critical speed
of the alloy of which they were made. Those below the speed
of light had no power to rise to i t Those in planetary atmospheres fell heavily in the ground. Those grounded stayed
aground.
But most of the murder-fleets out upon the errand of wholesale massacre so lately commanded and not yet completed —
most of them drifted on unendingly. A few suns acquired
small fleets of pyramidal satellites. One or two planets captured brightly-polished moons.
And of course there were some meteoric falls, which, when
excavated, disclosed half-fused artifacts and dead aliens with
bulbous heads and attenuated arms and legs. But most of the
pyramid-ships simply drifted on — and on — and on.

When the Stellaris got back to her own solar system it was
necessary to be very careful. Not because of fear from any
Earth-defense but lest she do damage. The bow-weapon had
to be turned off completely. Tractor and pressor scanningbeams could not be used, of course, when nearing a planet
with so precariously poised a civilization as Earth's.
And then it was distinctly quaint that as she lowered heavily
into atmosphere Earth-Government planes darted upon her,

126

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL

firing furiously, and had to be pushed away with pressors as
the ship went tiredly to ground.
Then there were investigations and vast excitement and
much indignation. Rod Cantrell, said solemn individuals in
Earth Government, had departed from Earth without authorization in the only vessel capable of space-navigation and defense of the human race against certain strange alien spaceships which had plunged to their destruction upon the Earth's
surface.
Who knew, said these indignant people, how many more
alien ships were floating about outside the Earth's atmosphere,
preparing for invasion and the capture of Sol's fairest planet?
Rod said curtly that there were no more alien ships about.
Glowering a little, he made his report. Those who had been of
the unwilling crew of the Stellaris substantiated it. The small
round people of the planet of dead cities told in their fluting
voices what had become of their race. Earth Government gave
them a space-ship, ultimately, and they went back to build up
In the end the court-martial at which this testimony came
out was ended and Rod Cantrell was formally absolved of all
penalty for having been on board the Stellaris when a shortcircuit threw it into space.
He was cleared of all censure for having saved the ship and
those in it and no blame — so the verdict ran — lay upon him
for having fought the murderers of a thousand civilizations and
for having certainly prevented the ending of humanity.
And then, as a separate and necessarily slow process, there
began the tedious, red-tape-filled process of rewarding him. In
the course of a year or so he would undoubtedly be given a
medal.
But he was not concerned. A month after the Stellaris' return to Earth there were fluting sounds in the anteroom of the
quarters he occupied. The leader of the colonists from the

T H E BLACK GALAXY

127

planet of dead cities wished to confer with him. Rod liked the
little round man but he begged off.
Kit said, "Why'd you do that, Rod? He's a nice little
person."
"I know," said Rod. "But d'you remember how little attention I paid to you while we were off in the Stellaris?"
"I certainly do!" said K i t
"I was busy," Rod explained smiably. "But I just got leave
for our marriage and a honeymoon. And I thought that since
I neglected you so much before — well — I thought I'd put
everything else aside and pay a little attention to you now."

Anyone For Doomsday?
Not You!
Not Us!
But it COULD happen, for anything is possible. And anything that is possible—and can make a good story—goes
into the pages of GALAXY Science Fiction.
Doomsday is only one possible future out of many:
The conquest of other planets . . .
Invasions of Earth . . .
Other dimensions . . .
Immortality . . .
Strange and exciting future civilizations that
have their roots right in the present . . .
You'll find all these and a lot more in GALAXY, the
magazine of ideas brought vividly to life!
For 12 convincing issues, send $3.50
or $6.00 for 24 issues,
TO

GALAXY Publishing Corp.
421 Hudson Street
•
New York 14, N. Y.

