****

The Skinner
[Spatterjay 01]

By Neal Asher
Scanned & Proofed By MadMaxAU
****

1
In any living sea on any world there are always creatures whose fate is integral to
the gastronomic delight of other . . . creatures. Boxies might more correctly be
described as lunch-boxes, such was the purpose they served in the sea - and they
knew it. Feeding upon occasional shoals of vicious plankton - which would make
the experience of swimming for a human akin to bathing in ground glass - and the
dispersing remains of those many other creatures which, at some point, always
served as an entree, the boxies swam at high speed and with a kind of nervous
determination. Only by keeping moving like this could they reduce the frequency
of leech attacks on their nerveless outer bodies. Only swift movement kept them
from the sickle-legs of prill and the serrated claws of glisters, or from the mouths
of larger leeches, which would swallow them down whole. However, a successful
survival strategy for a species was not always so successful for all of its individuals:
a boxy shoal increased with each addition of fry from each hatching of eggs laid
on the stalks of sea-cane and decreased with each attack upon it by a hungry
predator, and therefore old age was not a common cause of death in it.

The reif sipped at his clear drink through a glass straw and seemed to have his attention focused
beyond his companion, at somewhere in the middle of the opposite wall. Erlin supposed he must
be drinking one of the many chemical preservatives he used to prevent his flesh falling from his
bones. The man who had just joined the reif sat with his back to Erlin, who now noticed that he
had something on his shoulder. When this something took off to do a circuit of the room, she
was fascinated. It was an insect as large as a severed thumb and the drone of its wings was loud
in the subdued atmosphere of the shuttle lounge. The man was obviously indentured to a Hive
mind, for the flying creature had to be a hornet from Earth - the eyes of a Hive mind. What the
hell could bring a reif and such a man here, together? Erlin picked up her coffee and began
walking across to them, till a thickening of the air and a vague feeling of disorientation made her

pause.
From taking one step to another, Erlin realized that the safety field had tripped: a rough
entry into atmosphere. But then, in her experience, things got steadily rougher from now on. She
glanced to the windows that slanted out at forty-five degrees from the outer edge of the lounge.
The shuttle was now circling above the honeycomb which was the Polity base on the island of
Chel, and she observed how the sea surrounded the island in concentric rings of varying shades
of green, as of split agate. The sea was calm down there, so what had tripped the safety field
must be one of the many storms that ripped through the thick upper layers of cloud. Finally
reaching their table, she turned her attention fully on the seated pair.
‘Mind if I join you?’ she asked.
There was little discernible reaction from the reif, but the man grinned at her and
gestured to an empty seat. He wasn’t bad-looking, Erlin thought, and his manner was pleasant,
but he was not the man. Her man was somewhere down on the sea below. She placed her coffee
on the table, then pulled out the seat, turned it, and sat astride it with her forearms resting
across its back.
‘I’m curious to know why a reification should want to come here, and why someone
indentured to a Hive mind,’ Erlin noticed the man frown, ‘should come here also.’ She looked with
interest at each of them in turn, then glanced at the other passengers occupying the lander’s
lounge. It was clear that fear or disgust had cleared a wide space around the reif and his
companion, and embarrassment had cast a pall over general conversation. Many of them were
now trying very hard to appear not to be listening. Erlin shook her head as she focused her
attention on the reif. He was no cause for disgust. He didn’t stink, as reifs were popularly
believed to, nor was he any cause for fear - some of the augmented types here in the lander
could have torn him limb from limb. But to Erlin he was a source of almost painful interest. What
purpose had driven this man to want to continue functioning after his own death?
‘I am not indentured,’ said the reifs companion, then took up his drink from the table
before him and sipped.
Erlin turned to study him. ‘What?’ she asked
‘I’m not indentured,’ he repeated succinctly, putting down his drink.
‘Oh, I see,’ said Erlin, inspecting him.
He wore jeans tucked into the hard-wearing boots of an environment suit, and a loose
cloth shirt, which was open at the neck to expose a Maori tiki charm. There was no visible sign of
augmentation on him, but that did not mean he was without it. Below unruly blond hair, his
features were handsome and hawkish, and Erlin thought it likely he’d had his face restructured in
the past, but long in the past, because character now showed through and had softened the
aseptic beauty of the cosmetic job. In his left ear, he wore a single diamond stud - which was
probably his Hive link transponder.
‘Were you indentured?’ she asked him.
‘Two years,’ he replied. ‘And those ended about twenty years ago.’

‘Two years . . . that’s the usual sentence for killing a hornet, isn’t it?’ said Erlin.
The man nodded and grinned, before reaching for his drink again. Erlin observed him for a
moment longer, then curiosity drew her attention back to the man’s companion.
The reification was clad in a utile monofilament overall of bland grey, and he had a
smooth lozenge of metal hanging from a chain around his neck. He had obviously been a
heavy-worlder when alive. Now his muscles were stringy on his thick skeleton, his hands bony
claws, and what was visible of his face, under a half-helmet augmentation, was that of a grey
mummy. Erlin next studied the aug: it was golden, had a cartouche inset into its surface, and
had, extending from the inner side of it and curving round under the reif s one visible eye, an
irrigator fashioned in the shape of a cobra with its hood spread. The reif s eye was blue, and it
seemed to be the only part of him that was remotely alive.
Of course, she could see now what might have brought these two people together: the
fear and disgust of the others here. Most people had yet to dispel their atavistic fear of large
stinging insects, and most did not like to share the company of corpses, no matter how
interesting the conversation might prove to be. More than anything else in any world, Erlin
wanted something to maintain her interest. She wondered just what stories there might be here.
The reif dropped his glass straw back into his drink and, with slow precision, he leant
back. As he turned his blue eye upon her now, Erlin imagined she could hear the creaking of his
neck. There came a clicking gulp from deep in his throat, then he spoke in a surprisingly mild
baritone, his words slightly out of sync with the movement of his mouth. But then, Erlin thought it
unlikely that his vocal cords actually generated his voice.
‘Many would seek immortality here,’ he said, and deliberately tilted his head to peer at
the circular blue scar on Erlin’s forearm. It was an easy conversational gambit to turn attention
away from himself. Erlin pretended no reaction to his words, but suddenly felt very hot and
uncomfortable. The secret of Spatterjay had been out for many years, and immortality was a
commodity in a buyer’s market. Why did she feel guilty?
‘Many would find it and wish they hadn’t,’ said Erlin. Just then, the hornet droned back
from across the room and Erlin could not help but notice how the other passengers flinched away
from it, then tried to appear as if they had not. There was much nervous laughter in its wake. As
it settled again on the man’s shoulder he merely glanced at it, then reached into the top pocket
of his shirt and removed a small vial. From this he tipped a puddle of syrup on to the tabletop.
The insect launched from his shoulder to the table, where it landed with a noticeable rattle, then
it walked stiff-legged to the puddle to sip. Erlin saw that the creature’s thorax was painted with
luminous intricate lines, as of a circuit diagram. They must mean something to someone - but not
necessarily anyone human. On the table also lay a shoulder carry-case for hornets. Inside the
case was another hornet, still as if sealed in clear liquid plastic.
After a brief silence the man said, ‘There’s a place, you know, where people live in the
bodies of giant snails which float in the sky suspended from gas-filled shells.’
Erlin absorbed the comment with almost a feeling of delight. At the sound of the next
clicking gulp, she turned back to the reification.
The reif said, ‘On Tornos Nine, people live under the sea in giant mechanical lobsters. It’s
all for tourism, really. Every lobster contains its own hotel and restaurant. There are few private

lobsters.’
The man laughed. Erlin switched her gaze between the two of them. She wondered if the
reif would have smiled, if he could. She replied, ‘On the ships here you have to wait for your
mainsail to fly to you and take the mainmast. Through the mechanisms of the ship, it controls the
fore and aft sails, and all you have to do is feed it. Every sail has the same name.’
The reif finally lifted the gaze of his one watery eye from its study of her scar.
‘What name is that?’ he asked
‘Windcatcher.’
‘You have been here before,’ he said. It wasn’t a question.
‘You know that.’
‘So have I, a very long time ago.’
With a deprecatory grin the man said, ‘I’ve never been here before.’ He held out his hand.
‘Janer.’
Erlin clasped the hand he offered.
‘Erlin,’ she said.
Janer nodded and smiled, and only reluctantly released her hand.
‘You’ll have to excuse me for a moment. I just want to see this.’
He stood and moved over to the slanting window, to watch as the shuttle finally came in
to land. Erlin turned expectantly to die reif.
There was no clicking gulp this time before he spoke. ‘Keech,’ he said, and did not offer
his hand, which, considering his condition, Erlin felt was only polite.
The hornet watched and listened.
****
‘Land is at a premium here,’ said Erlin as the three of them later walked down the shuttle ramp
to a curved walkway running parallel to a parking area around the edge of the landing pad. She
felt buoyant now, though that was probably due to the higher oxygen content in the air and the
lower gravity she had felt immediately on stepping from the shuttle’s grav-plates. She scanned
these distantly familiar surroundings. The sea made a continual sucking hiss underneath the
huge floating structure upon which the gun-metal wing of the shuttle had settled, and the air
was thick with the smells of cooling metal, decaying seaweed, and of virulent aquatic life.
‘Just islands and atolls, no continents, and no island bigger than, say, the Galapagos
islands on Earth,’ said Janer.

‘Yes,’ said Erlin, ‘and there are other similarities too, though you’ll find the wildlife here
somewhat. . . wilder.’
‘Wilder?’ Janer echoed.
Erlin grimaced. ‘Well, it’s not so bad on the islands,’ she admitted.
‘But bad in the sea?’
‘Look at it this way: most Hoopers are sailors, but few of them can swim.’
‘Right,’ said Janer.
Rank upon rank of aircabs were parked here along the edge. Beyond them, the sea was
heaving but not breaking, and underneath that surface Erlin knew the water would be writhing
with leeches, hammer whelks and rurbul, glisters and prill. And all of them would be hungry. She
gazed up at the misty green sky and wondered at her foolishness in returning here, then she
followed her two companions off the ramps, her obedient hover luggage trailing along behind.
Keech was intent on getting to the first cab before all the other passengers swarmed off
the shuttle. When there came a hissing crack, followed by a stuttering as of an air compressor
starting, Erlin noted how the reif snapped his head round and moved his hand to one of the many
pockets of his overalls, and how Janer dropped into a semi-crouch. She studied them for a
moment longer as they warily surveyed their surroundings, then they slowly relaxed.
‘Over here,’ she said, and led them to the rail along the seaward side of the parking area.
Below this rail, the foamed-plascrete edge of the floating structure sloped steeply down into the
sea. Erlin pointed to an object like a metre-long chrome mosquito that was walking along the
plascrete, just above the waterline. She then pointed to a disturbance out in the water. Pieces of
shell and gobbets of flesh were being pulled at and rabidly denuded by dark, unclearly seen,
anguine shapes in the water.
‘Autogun,’ explained Keech. ‘What did it hit?’
‘Well, out there, probably a prill or a glister. Most of the large lethal molluscs here are
not swimmers,’ Erlin replied.
‘Charming,’ said Janer.
Keech stared for an interminable moment, but offered no further comment. Instead he
turned and continued on towards the nearest aircab.
The vehicle was an old Skyrover Macrojet with a ridiculous and unnecessary airfoil
attached, and its pilot was all Hooper in attitude and appearance.
‘The three of yah?’ he asked. He remained inside his cab as he cleaned his fingernails
with a long narrow knife that Erlin recognized as a skinning knife, and she tried not to inspect too
closely the memories that evoked.
The Hooper’s skin was pale, and the circular scars on his arms and down the sides of his
face were only just visible. She supposed that, like all Hoopers on the Polity base, he was on one

of the Intertox family of drugs to keep the fibres of the Spatterjay virus in abeyance. Usually it
was the bite of a leech that caused infection but, even though the virus could not survive for a
long time outside of a body, no one was taking any chances. Polity scientists felt that, despite
the so-far-discovered huge benefits of the virus, it might still be some kind of Trojan. Erlin
herself had not been infected by the bite on her forearm. Like many other viruses, the Spatterjay
virus could be transmitted by bodily fluids, and she knew precisely when she had contracted it.
‘All three,’ replied Keech to the Hooper.
The Hooper looked askance at him, then stabbed the knife into the dash of his vehicle.
After a moment he transferred his attention to Janer, then to the hornets in the transparent box
on Janer’s shoulder.
‘Can they get out?’ he asked.
‘Only if they want to,’ said Janer.
‘Look like nasty buggers.’
Erlin bit down on a burst of laughter. That from a Hooper on a world where just about
every creature was a nasty bugger out for its plug of flesh.
‘I assure you they are harmless unless forced to defend themselves,’ said Janer.
The Hooper studied the hornets more closely. ‘They got brains then?’
How’s he going to explain the hive mind? Erlin wondered.
‘They are the eyes of the hive,’ said Janer.
‘Oh, them . . . hornets, ain’t they?’
‘Yes.’
‘OK, stick y’ luggage in the back and climb in. Y’want the Dome?’
‘Please,’ said Erlin as she stood aside to allow Keech to take his hover trunk around to the
back of the cab. As he moved past, she caught a slight whiff of corruption. He glanced round at
her, and perhaps it was her imagination that she was able to read a look of apology in what
small movement his face managed. After dumping his backpack on top of Keech’s trunk, Janer
went forward and quickly climbed into the front beside the driver. Erlin gazed around before
stowing her own hover luggage. She was here now, and she would carry on through with her
intention, though sometimes she felt simply like . . . stopping.
****
‘Erlin Tazer Three Indomial,’ said Keech as the aircab rose and boosted over the pontoons and
floating pads of the shuttle port.
Janer glanced over his shoulder. ‘I thought you looked familiar. You’re the one who
opened that particular box of. . . leeches.’ He shrugged at his little joke.

The hornets, Erlin saw, scuttled about in their carry-case and moved tail to tail so as to
take in every view.
Janer peered down at them in annoyance, then gazed ahead through the screen at the
winged shapes that glided in the haze over the island, like embers in jade smoke. He went on,
“There was quite an uproar after your studies were published and, as I recollect, the Warden
here had to limit runcible transmissions. Big rush to come and live for ever.’
‘Big rush for an easier option, but there never is one of those,’ said Erlin. ‘Our technology
can extend life indefinitely, but even now there are . . . drawbacks. The rush of people here was
of those searching for something beyond life extension. They were searching for miracles.’ She
noted how Keech, at the word ‘miracle’, reached up to rest his skeletal fingers against the
lozenge resting on his chest. Perhaps it had some religious significance.
‘How does it operate here, then?’ Janer asked.
‘The bare facts?’ Erlin asked, sensing the man had more than an intellectual interest in
the subject. He nodded and she went on, ‘The viral fibres bind every life form here . . . They’re
the leeches’ way of maintaining their food supply. They are very efficient parasites, though it can
be argued that what happens here is a perfect example of mutualism. Nothing dies unless
severely injured, and I mean severely.’
‘It is . . . logical,’ said Keech.
Erlin had to agree.
‘Surely the death of the prey is preferable?’ said Janer, puzzled.
‘No,’ Erlin told him. ‘Isn’t it preferable for the leeches to be able to harvest their meat and
keep the prey alive to be harvested again? Though they don’t suck blood, the leeches are aptly
named.’
‘Why’ve you come back?’ Janer asked.
‘Just looking for someone: a Captain I knew. We have unfinished business.’
The Hooper turned and gave her a strange look but said nothing. The Captains were the
weirdest Hoopers of them all.
‘Why are you here?’ Erlin asked Keech. The reif did not react for a moment, then he
slowly shook his head. Erlin waited a little longer, then returned her attention to Janer as he now
turned to inspect her over the back of his seat. She knew that look.
‘What about you?’ she asked.
‘I go where the mind directs. The ultimate tourist.’ He grinned.
‘No resentment?’ she asked.
‘Once - but only at the beginning.’

Erlin nodded. ‘You said you’d served out your indenture twenty years ago?’ She was
curious: once people indentured to a Hive mind had served out their time, they were usually
grateful to be rid of their little companions, particularly as those who made the mistake of killing
a hornet usually possessed some deep-rooted aversion to the insects. Hive minds also had a
reputation for sending their human servants into some really sticky situations.
‘Why carry on?’ she asked.
‘Adventure. Money. In the last twenty years I’ve not often been bored, Erlin.’
She studied him more closely. He had originally struck her as being rather naive, perhaps
not even out of his first century. She decided to reassess that judgement. Once, disease and
accident had been the greatest killers of humankind; now the greatest killer was boredom,
usually leading to the latter of the first two causes. Perhaps Janer was much older than she had
first thought; perhaps he had the same problem as herself.
‘Erlin?’ said the Hooper abruptly, the content of the conversation apparently only just
penetrating. ‘Thought so . . . It’s the skin.’
Erlin smiled to herself at a remembered conversation aboard a Hooper sailing vessel
called the Treader. Peck, the 180-year-old mechanic, had been attacked by a leech and it had
unscrewed a fist-sized lump of flesh from his leg - a lump of flesh he had, after beating the leech
to pulp, subsequently screwed back into place. The wound had healed in minutes.
‘Doesn’t that strike you as a little odd?’ Erlin had asked him.
‘Who you callin’ odd? At least I ain’t got skin the colour of burnt sugar. Bleedin’ Earthen,
always callin’ us odd.’
Peck had been very odd after his second . . . accident, but Erlin, even now, didn’t like to
think about that too much - and wasn’t even sure she believed it had really happened.
‘Do you know Ambel?’ Erlin asked the Hooper.
‘Who don’t?’ was his reply.
With a complicated manipulation of the airfoils, he put the aircab into a spiralling glide.
The three passengers gazed down at the long, partially artificial island below them. Around the
much larger central geodesic dome of the Polity base clustered many smaller ones - as if the
island had been blowing bubbles in the sea. There were also a few smaller ones at the centre of
the island’s widest stretch: transparent spheres dropped into the deep dingle that grew there.
Erlin could just make out the groves of peartrunk trees speared with the occasional tall yanwood,
and she reflexively rubbed at the scar on her forearm. A leech dropping from a peartrunk tree had
been her first close encounter with the appetite of Spatterjay life forms. Later, Ambel had saved
her from the persistent attentions of a creature innocuously called a frog whelk. Without his
intervention, it would have taken her hand off. She gazed across the wide sea, remembering that
other island where, if she could believe Ambel, the body of something which had once been a
man was living an independent existence. It would apparently live well enough, but would have
no intelligence. Ambel kept the Skinner’s head in a box.

‘The gating facility was closed, down here,’ said Keech.
‘Heat pollution,’ Erlin told him. ‘The Warden had it moved to Coram after an explosion in
the hammer-whelk population around the deepwater heat sinks.’ She also remembered that
Coram, the moon they had so recently quit, by shuttle, had been named by the runcible AI - an
artificial intelligence which was also the planetary Warden. ‘Coram’ was actually short for
‘coram judice’, which, it turned out, meant ‘in the presence of the judge’ in some ancient Earth
language. It was a name she supposed indicative of Warden’s opinion of itself.
‘They had a gate here, then?’ said Janer distractedly.
‘It was established on-planet when the Polity arrived here. They had it here for about fifty
solstan years before moving it. That was two hundred solstan years ago,’ she replied.
In the roof of one of the largest dome, a hatch irised open and the Hooper brought his cab
down through it. Earth light illuminated the inside, stark in contrast to the soft green light of
Spatterjay. Forests and crops grew in neat patterns around a small city of processing plants and
a single sprawling arcology like a giant plascrete fungus seemingly nailed to the ground by
gleaming hotel towers. ‘Dome-grown food’ the Hoopers called what was produced in the fields
here. It was what, if they did not have access to Intertox, stopped them becoming more like the
Skinner.
With a cycling down drone of thrusters, the Hooper landed his aircab on a neatly mown
lawn, near the edge of the arcology, and the three disembarked.
‘How much?’ Erlin asked, leaning into the open window.
The Hooper paused for a moment as he calculated how much he might get away with
asking for. Erlin groped in the pocket of her jacket and pulled out a wad of New Carth shillings.
The two notes she proffered he quickly took and, obviously pleased, he got out of his cab to
unload their luggage. Janer appeared bemused and Keech, of course, had no expression at all.
Erlin understood that the both of them hadn’t realized they might need hard currency. She felt
they had a lot to learn about this place, and was about to comment on this when Janer beat her
to it.
‘Perhaps we need a little guidance here,’ he said, glancing at the reif. Keech showed no
reaction to this either. Erlin was quick to reply; she had nothing to lose by being helpful.
‘I have to do what I have to do here, but you’re more than welcome to accompany me
until you find your feet,’ she said, turning to study them. Keech gave a brief nod in reply and
Janer grinned at her. Feeling slightly uncomfortable, she turned away from that grin.
‘You know that Polity law does not apply outside the main dome,’ she said.
‘It should do,’ said Keech.
‘Sometimes,’ added Janer.
Erlin continued, ‘Try defining assault or murder to a Hooper. They just laugh at all our
rules. The way it works here is that the older a Hooper is, the more authority he has. This by dint
of the fact that he knows so much more than you and that if you disagree with him he could

probably tear your arms off. Ambel, the man I’ve come here to find, is old. I once saw him tow a
deepsea-fishing ship with just a rowing boat. His boat was specially strengthened, and the oars
made of ceramal composite.’
‘How old is he?’ asked Keech.
‘Seven centuries, minimum. He said he came here just after the war, but I wonder about
that. Some of the early Hoopers are reticent about their pasts, and the viral fibres were very
advanced in him.’
‘Yeah,’ said Janer, grinning. ‘I’ve heard plenty of stories like that.’
Not looking at him, Erlin went on, ‘His skin is mottled with leech scars overlaid one on the
other. He’s so packed with fibre it’s impossible to take blood samples from him. I frankly doubt
he even has any blood inside him. If ever he’s wounded, the wounds close just like that.’ She
held up her hand and snapped it shut into a fist.
‘You believe him?’ asked Janer.
‘At first I didn’t, but I was with him for a number of years and I eventually ceased to
doubt.’
‘Perhaps . . . Hoop is still alive?’ said Keech.
Erlin thought about the head kept in a box on the Treader and refrained from comment.
‘That’s it then,’ said the Hooper, standing next to their pile of luggage.
‘Thank you,’ said Erlin. She clicked her fingers and her hover trunk separated itself out
from the pile of luggage and moved obediently to her side. It had surprised her that Janer used
merely a backpack, but now she realized he must be a seasoned traveller and so only carried a
few essentials. Keech, however, could not possibly have carried his trunk very far, it being the
size of a sea-chest.
‘Luck,’ said the Hooper, climbing back into his cab.
‘Wait.’ Erlin turned back to him and he paused at the door. ‘Do you know where I can find
Ambel?’
‘On the Treader.’
‘Where is the Treader?’
The Hooper shrugged. ‘Nort Sea and the Skinner’s Islands. Sou’ at the atolls. East in the
Sargassum or West over the Blue Wells. Buggered if I know.’
It was not the answer Erlin would have liked but it was the kind she expected of a
Hooper.
‘Thanks for you help,’ she said dryly.

‘This Ambel,’ said Janer as the cab rose into the air above them and tilted towards the
hole in the Dome, ‘something more than clinical interest?’
‘You could say that,’ said Erlin. ‘We go this way now.’
She led them down paved walkways from the lawns, through neatly laid-out rose gardens,
towards the looming metallic wall of the arcology. Daffodils bloomed in bunches, neatly
circumnavigated by robot mowers that munched their way across the grass like iron beetles.
Some of these flowers were old-Earth yellow, but the rest were blue and violet. Ahead, wide
arcades and boulevards cut into the wall of the arcology, and here there were more gardens and
lawns, from which sprang coconut and fishtail palms, fuchsia bushes and the occasional
pineapple plant - this diversity of life, as Erlin well knew, genetically adapted to survive the odd
conditions inside the Dome.
‘I thought you said land was at a premium here,’ said Janer, scanning about himself.
‘It is,’ Erlin replied. ‘All of this,’ she gestured ahead of them, ‘is sitting on ten metres of
foamed plascrete, which in turn is sitting on a thousand metres of sea-water.’
‘Ah,’ said Janer then, ‘busy little raft they have here.’
Amongst these gardens strolled all manner of people: seasoned travellers who lived only
to use the runcibles and briefly see new worlds; altered humans - catadapts and ophids and the
like; and Hoopers nervous in these garden surroundings, with the rolling gait of those more used
to having a deck under their feet.
Erlin said, ‘A lot of the people who come to see this world get no farther than this. Many
come here not realizing that Polity law doesn’t extend outside the Dome itself. They come here
for the immortality you mentioned, and discover that they feel very mortal once they step out
into the Hooper’s world.’
‘You did,’ Keech reminded her.
‘I like new worlds, new experiences. You gain nothing without risking something.’
‘Trite,’ said Keech. ‘There should always be law.’
Erlin glanced at him as they moved into one of the boulevards, and then she gestured to a
pyramidal metrotel entrance situated near the end of it.
‘I’m staying here for tonight. Unless you have other plans, I suggest you stay here as well.
Tomorrow, if you like, we can get equipped. It would be a good idea if you both bought some
hard currency, as you won’t get far here without it.’
‘Which is preferred?’ asked Keech.
‘New Carth shillings or New yen. Don’t bother with the Spatterjay skind - the exchange
rate for it goes up every day.’
‘How quaint,’ said Janer.

Once they had entered the pyramidal metrotel Janer insisted on paying for all their
rooms, by smart card at the automated check-in desk. Erlin reached down to her hover trunk and,
into its miniconsole, punched one of the room codes the screen showed them - slaving the trunk
to the hotel AI. For a moment she watched while it trundled off, then she checked her watch.
‘Down here at about nine, then, solstan?’ she suggested.
‘Definitely,’ replied Janer, and Keech gave his characteristic sharp nod.
Without further pause, Erlin headed for the room the hotel AI had allocated her.
‘Don’t forget that currency,’ she said, glancing over her shoulder. As she entered a lift,
she wondered what had possessed her to take up with these two. Loneliness, maybe? When she
reached the entrance to her room, her trunk was there ahead of her. She followed it in through
the door, then slumped on to the large bed provided. Tucking her hands behind her head, she
stared at the ceiling and said, ‘AI, I’d like some information about reifications’.
‘Can you be more specific than that?’ the hotel AI asked her.
‘Well . . . didn’t the practice originate from some sort of religious sect?’
‘It originated from the Cult of Anubis Arisen. It was their conjecture that souls do not
exist, and that there is nothing more sacred than the body. They hung on to life for as long as
they possibly could then, when they died, had themselves preserved and kept moving by use of
the cyber technology of the time.’
Erlin recalled the decidedly Egyptian design of Keech’s aug and eye irrigator. ‘They were
brain-dead though, and Keech is sentient,’ she said.
There came no reply then from the AI, as its privacy restraints had cut in. It could not
discuss other hotel guests with her.
‘Reifs nowadays are often sentient - to all intents alive,’ she persisted.
‘The cult of Anubis Arisen is still extant, and now has access to mind-recording and
mimetic computers. Some of those who have been technically dead can be repaired and brought
to life using some of the newer nano-technologies.’
‘With those mind recordings and mimetics . . . are they alive?’
‘The contention of most is that they have become AI. The lines become blurred and the
arguments heated when reifs with partial use of their organic brains are discussed. On the
whole, reifs are uncommon. Most physical damage to human beings can be repaired, and most
humans with mind-recorders choose memplantation in an android chassis.’
‘How do you explain Keech then?’
The AI didn’t.
****

Once alone in his room, Keech opened his trunk and removed a clean pair of monofilament
overalls, which he laid across his bed. Almost reverently, he removed his lozenge pendant and
placed it on top of them. Then, moving with great care, he took off his used overalls and dropped
them on the floor, before turning to a mirror on the nearby wall and inspecting his grey and
golden reflection. As well as the half-helmet augmentation over his face, an area from under his
armpit to his waist and then his groin was also enclosed in golden metal. This metal was deeply
intagliated with Egyptian hieroglyphs. He stood perfectly still as he studied them, until his
irrigator sprayed his right eye. He did not blink, but turned back to the trunk. Now he removed a
golden case made in the shape of a small sarcophagus, closed the lid of the trunk, and placed
the case upon it. In the surface of this case was an indentation ideal for accommodating the
lozenge he had placed on the bed. He ignored this, though, and instead freed two nozzles, which
came away trailing coiled tails of clear tubing. These nozzles he plugged into two sockets in the
metal covering his side. Through his aug, he sent the activation signal to this device that really
kept him from rotting away: his cleansing unit.
One of the coiled tubes turned dirty blue as the unit drew preservative fluid from his
vascular system, filtered out a sludge of dead bacteria and rotifers, corrected certain chemical
imbalances, then pumped the fluid back into him. The fluid in the return pipe was liquid sapphire.
After a few minutes, a row of red-lit hieroglyphs on the unit began, one at a time, to flick to
green. When the last glyph changed, the tubes cleared of liquid and he detached them and
returned them to the unit itself. Next, he turned a disk on the unit and withdrew a cylindrical
container filled with the same blue fluid. He turned to the mirror again and, using a swab that
detached from the head of the container, he wiped himself from head to foot, at the last partially
detaching his aug to swab at the skin concealed underneath. The now exposed left half of his
face was ruin eaten back to bone, and set into that bone was a ring of triangular copper-coloured
contacts.
Keech stared for a moment at the wound that had killed him before snicking his aug back
into place with a wet click, then reaching down to press some pads on the metal enclosing his
side. This shell lifted with a slight hiss and he detached it completely and put it on top of his
trunk. The side of his body now exposed was mostly transparent synthetic skin under which could
be seen organs repaired with synthetics, a network of blue tubes spreading from the two nozzle
orifices, and rib bones that had been burnt black. After a brief visual inspection, he swabbed this
area down too. When he had finished, he replaced the metal shell, then returned to the bed to
don the clean overalls and his lozenge pendant. After yet another inspection of himself in the
mirror, there sounded that dry click from his throat, and he spoke.
‘Hotel AI, I wish to take a sum of a thousand New Carth shillings from my account, in hard
currency. Do you have this facility?’
‘I do,’ replied the hotel. ‘There is an auto till in the wall to your left. You are aware that a
thousand shillings may be much more than you will require here. The exchange rate against the
Spatterjay skind is very high.’
‘I am aware,’ said Keech, ‘but I may be here some time.’ He took a smart card from his
pocket and inserted it into the slot in the wall. A hatch immediately slid open and the auto till
poked his card back out at him. Behind the hatch rested a stack of hundred-, fifty- and
ten-shilling notes. There was also a cloth bag containing coins. He opened this and took out one
transparent octagonal coin, which he brought up to his eye. In an approximation of surprise, he
raised the brow of this eye. He hadn’t seen one-shilling pieces in a very long time - centuries in
fact.

****
Janer lay back on his bed with hands folded comfortably behind his head. He thought about Erlin
and felt a vaguely pleasurable buzz at the prospect of getting to know her. She was classically
and strangely beautiful, with her white hair, black skin, and blue eyes, yet Janer felt sure her
appearance was not due to cosmetic alteration. These combined features were too much at odds
with each other to be anyone’s natural choice. In his experience cosmetic alteration fell into two
camps: the extreme where people went all the way into something like catadaption or
ophidaption, or the subtle one, where they just had some small alteration made to their
appearance to make it more pleasing. More likely, he suspected, her appearance was the result
of a past genetic alteration in her family line, as no doubt was her intelligence. This was how it
was for most people now. He closed his eyes and summoned up an image of her to contemplate.
This didn’t last though, and his mind began to wander.
Nothing from the link at the moment - which meant that the Hive mind was preoccupied.
That was good, as he didn’t feel much like talking. There had been no communication from it for
a number of hours now, but that was nothing unusual. The mind controlled a huge conjoined hive
of something like a billion individuals, so it had plenty of other tasks on which to focus its
attention. Janer considered how things had changed since the days of paper nests and maybe
just a few hundred hornets.
Back then it had come as one shock in many when arrogant humanity had discovered it
wasn’t the only sentient race on Earth. It was just the loudest and most destructive. Dolphins and
whales had always been candidates because of their aesthetic appeal and cute stories of
rescued swimmers. Research in that area had soon cleared things up: dolphins couldn’t tell the
difference between a human swimmer and a sick fellow dolphin, and were substantially more
stupid than the farm animal humans had been turning into bacon on a regular basis. As for
whales, they had the intelligence of the average cow. When a hornet had first built its nest in a
VR suit and lodged its protests on the Internet, it had taken a long time for anyone to believe
what was happening. They were stinging things, creepy-crawlies, so how could they possibly be
intelligent? At ten thousand years of age, the youngest Hive mind eventually showed them. The
subsequent investigation had proven, beyond doubt, that groups of nests thought as a single
mind, not with the speed of synapses, but with the speed of slow pheromonal transfer. The nest
in the VR suit had been linked, at that rate, to many other nests. It had communicated using the
anosmic receptors inside the suit, and this had taken it many months. Now, every hornet carried
a micro-transmitter, and the speed of Hive-mind thought had become very fast indeed.
Of course, immediately after this revelation, there had been a scramble to find more of
the like, and all the other social insects of Earth were intensively studied. Disappointment after
disappointment finally brought home the fact that hornets, like humans, were a bit of an oddity.
The only social insects that came close to them were the wasps, but they came in at the level of
a chimpanzee as compared to a human. Bees, it turned out, did have Hive minds, but they were
alien beyond the interpretation of the most powerful computers; their communication was
limited to the ‘now’ - the concepts of past and future being beyond them. Ants had no Hive minds
at all.
Janer considered how he himself had been plunged into this strange world: his payment his service to this mind - for killing a hornet that had tried to settle on his shoulder in a crowded
ringball stadium. It had been tired, that hornet, searching for somewhere to land and take a rest,
tempted by the beaker of Coke Janer had been drinking. His reaction had been instinctive; the

phobic horror of insects had risen up inside him and he had knocked the hornet to the ground and
stamped on it. The court judgement had come through the following day, and not having the
funds to pay a fine, he had signed up for two years’ indenture. Killing a hornet was not precisely
murder, as each creature was just one very small part of the mind. There were stiff penalties,
though.
Janer sat up, swung his legs off the bed, then stood and moved over to the window of his
room. The view was a mildly interesting one, between tower blocks and across crop fields and
hydroponics houses, towards the wall of the Dome. It wasn’t the view he wanted, though. Now
he wanted to see outside the Dome, now he wanted something of more interest. In his two years
of being indentured, there had been no shortage of that, and it was the main reason he had gone
directly from indenture-ship to paid service for this particular Hive mind.
‘What’s out there?’ he asked.
When there came no response from his Hive link, he shrugged and returned to his bed.
He knew something about what lay beyond the Dome itself, and anything else there was to know
he would find out soon enough.
****

2
The others, clustering like sheep on the small islet, fed by leaping into the sea and
sinking through passing shoals of boxies, snapping up one or two of the creatures
during the descent, but that was not enough for this particular whelk. Perhaps
more intelligent and adventurous than its fellows, it had found an excellent
feeding-ground some distance from the islet. Here, opposing faces of rock walled
a passage through an undersea ridge, and the whelk had learnt that at certain
times this passage swarmed with shoals of boxies. It did not know anything about
tides or how it was that, when the moon was not in the sky, the apex of the ridge
broke the surface so it acted as a barrier to the eternal migration of the strange
little fish. Nor did it understand that the passage was the only way through the
ridge. All it did know was that if it waited for long enough on one of the rock faces,
there would be a cornucopia of mobile dinners just about when it was beginning to
feel hungry again. It also found that by leaping from face to face through passing
shoals, it could gobble up many more boxies - before it reached the bottom —
than by simply falling through a shoal. Of course there is no such thing as a free
lunch - someone is keeping a tab. The whelk grew faster than its own shell, and
soon its tender pink body was bulging out around the lid-like clypeus that had
otherwise kept it safe. A small leech, which had also discovered the bounty of the
passing boxy shoals, eventually dropped on to the dispeptic whelk, wound around
its shell and, extruding mouth-parts like the head of a rock drill, reamed in through
tender flesh and fed.

Ambel had nightmares of a sea of shifting leeches, and dreams of a thousand years of better
days. The wind from Deep-sea bulged the sail, and the sail was content with the lumps of

rhinoworm it had eaten that evening. Dawn’s green light threw those lumps into silhouette,
where they were being digested in the sail’s transparent gut, and it brought Peck hammering at
Ambel’s door.
‘There’s turbul coming under! Turbul coming under!’
Ambel sat upright and distinguished the distinctive thumping coming from the hull, as the
shoal of turbul passed under it, from the usual ratchet and clack of the ship’s mechanisms. In
something of a daze, he gazed around his cabin and inspected the meagre requisites of his
existence. His blunderbuss was secured with hide straps in one corner, next to the cupboard
containing powder, shot, and the extensive toolkit for the weapon’s maintenance. A narrow
wardrobe contained his plasmesh shirts, trousers, and reinforced boots - the only clothing that
satisfied his requirements of durability. Below the oval brass-rimmed portal was a shelf on which
he had stuck a few ornaments with clam glue: an ancient piece of re-entry screen polished like a
gem, a miniature human skull of faceted flint, and a cut slave collar. His gaze slid across his desk
strewn with maps held down with a satlink position-finder fashioned in the shape of a
preruncible calculator, and came to rest on his sea-chest. So easy to accumulate so much in the
course of a long life. He stared long and hard at the chest then gave a half-shrug as he tossed
his covers back.
‘Turbul!’ shouted Peck again. ‘Turbul!’
‘One moment,’ Ambel replied.
He put his feet over the side of his bunk, stood and walked to the wardrobe to take out
his neatly folded clothing. Back at the bed, he dressed, then sat down and carefully pulled on
and laced up his boots. Standing once again, he walked to the door and carefully opened it. He
had to do everything carefully, did Ambel. A moment’s inattention could have him inadvertently
ripping off someone’s arm or putting his elbow through the ship’s hull.
Peck was hopping from foot to foot in his excitement to get back to the lines. He had a
piece of rhinoworm in one hand and a bait-plug cutter in the other. Purple blood was dribbling
from the meat and in his agitation he was spattering his long hide coat, canvas trousers, and the
surrounding woodwork. Ambel gestured for him to get on. Peck eagerly nodded his bald head, a
crazy look in his greenish eyes, and then he turned back to his fellow crewmen on the deck. Here
there was much yelling and swearing, and there were many heavy wet creatures thrashing about.
Ambel looked past Peck just as Pland hauled in a turbul the size of a canoe and leapt on top of it
to stop it from flicking itself over the side again. The turbul was much the shape of a canoe, in
fact. Its head was the head of a caiman, and all around its dark-green body, bright-blue fins
seemed to have been scattered at random. Its tail was a whip ending in a fin that resembled a
hatchet.
‘Yahoo!’ yelled Pland as the turbul bucked underneath him and tried to throw him off,
then, ‘Keep still, yer bugger.’ He was indifferent to the wide gash the turbul had opened in his
back with the lashing of its tail. Ambel stepped over and caught hold of the turbul’s snapping
jaws in one hand, then with his other hand reached over and flicked it firmly between the eyes
with his forefinger. There was a dull thud as of an iron bar hitting a log. The turbul’s eyes
crossed and its body went limp.
‘Thank you, Captain,’ said Pland as he dismounted. ‘Reckon you can pull this’n? He’s a bit
big for me.’

Ambel shrugged, took a firmer grip on the turbul’s jaws with his right hand and put his
left hand on the flesh behind its head. He pulled, and with a ripping sound the head pulled out of
its socket with the spine following. As he continued to pull, the tail and fins drew into the
turbul’s body, finally to disappear. When Ambel repositioned his grip halfway down the turbul’s
spine for one last heave, the creature’s flesh came off like an old sock, leaving him holding a
straggly mess of head, spine, a baggy sack of internal organs, and the fins and tail - all still
joined. He held this up in front of himself for a moment and gave it a couple of shakes. The eyes
uncrossed and the spine, fins and tail began to writhe. The end of the tail whipped at Ambel’s
face but he easily caught it.
‘Naughty,’ he said, then tossed the turbul over the side. In the water the skeletal creature
swam around for a moment before sticking its head out above the surface and issuing a noisy,
snorting neighing. It then dived and swam onwards with the rest of its shoal.
‘Remember, lads, we only need enough for fifty pickle barrels!’ Ambel shouted to the rest
of his crew as they hauled in smaller turbul and pulled them similarly. One after another,
stripped turbul swam away making those indignant snorting noises. Soon the deck was scattered
with slippery tubes of meat sliding about on the acrid turbul chyme. While baiting a gleaming
hook Ambel contemplated how so very slowly Polity technology was filtering into their lives.
Ceramal hooks that never seemed to get blunt now, when he could remember the days of carving
them out of bone. At least the bladder floats were still the same. Stepping back a little so that he
had room to cast his line out, he nearly tripped over on a sliding turbul body.
‘Anne! Barrels and vinegar!’ he bellowed - but not too annoyed as he knew his crew
tended to get distracted at moments like this.
Anne shot him an irritated look, reeled in her line and hung it on a hook fixed to the rail,
then called a few of the junior crew to join her. Hopping over turbul bodies, she led them to the
hatch leading to the rear hold, slid it aside then swiftly climbed down. Two others followed her
down into the hold, and two remained on deck to swing across a winch arm and feed the rope
down.
‘Reckon that’s it,’ said Pland, holding up his latest catch. This turbul was long and thin, its
body pocked with leech holes. The thumping against the hull of the ship was abating now and
becoming difficult to distinguish from the clunking of the mast chains. Ambel pulled up his own
latest catch, inspected it for a moment, then unhooked it and tossed it back.
‘End of the main shoal now,’ he said. ‘Just the leech-hit.’
Peck reluctantly pulled in his own line and coiled it, then, from a locker below the rail
where most of the ship’s hunting gear was stored, he removed a long and lethally sharp panga.
Ambel moved over to join the juniors and help them swing across the barrels Anne and the
others had loaded into a cargo net. Once the net was on the deck, they rolled the empties to one
side. Ambel then broke open a sealed barrel and the rich smell of spiced vinegar wafted out,
almost drowning the acrid smell of turbul. Meanwhile, Peck had started cutting the turbul tubes
into neat rings of flesh.
‘Good run,’ he said, sawing away enthusiastically.
‘Good run,’ agreed Ambel, taking up the lacework of rhinoworm steak, which was all that

remained of their bait, and heading towards his cabin. Peck watched him go, his knuckles
whitening around the handle of the panga. When he returned his attention to the turbul meat, he
hacked at it savagely.
****
The line, in this case, was a glassite strip set in the ground, running across under the arched exit
from the Dome. Janer had a puzzled expression as he stood staring at this strip, his identification
card held loosely in his hand.
‘No real barrier here, nor any form of customs. All that was at the runcible installation on
Coram,’ said Keech.
‘But what about the other side - the Spatterjay side?’
‘The Hoopers don’t give a shit about things like that,’ said Erlin.
On the Polity side of the Line, a neatly slabbed path ran between fields of giant maize
and plantations of pomegranate trees. Janer looked round at the trees, then down at the line
again. On the black earth of the Spatterjay side lay the burnt husks of this planet’s equivalent of
vermin: the stinking remains of some kind of bird, a spiral shell the size of a man’s head, and
some flat decaying remains the size of a man’s leg, which had to be one of the famous leeches.
Janer took this all in. He glanced up at the small laser mounted in the apex of the arch, then at
the hornets in their carry-case on his shoulder.
‘It’s monitored,’ said Erlin. ‘I don’t think an AI would like to end up indentured to a Hive
mind, do you?’
‘The mind has never viewed this world before,’ said Janer. ‘Its worry was not about its
units crossing the Line now, with me, but about them returning across it, should the mind wish to
send one back alone.’
‘I would think the automatics could distinguish, but you can ask at the gate. There’s sure
to be one of the Warden’s subminds in attendance.’ Erlin gestured to the side of the arch as the
three of them advanced. At the gate itself, Janer looked up in the air, as most people did
instinctively when addressing a non-visible AI.
‘Warden, my Hive mind has expressed some reservations about your automatic
bug-zapper. Will it distinguish between hornets and Spatterjay life forms?’ he asked.
‘Of course it will,’ replied a somewhat irritated voice. ‘Only humans make that mistake.’
Janer muttered something obscene and stepped out of the Polity. With her amusement
barely concealed, Erlin followed him. Keech had no expression on his half face, even when the
laser and attached eye swivelled to follow his progress.
Beyond the gate was a wide street lined with peak-roofed wooden buildings, many of
which were shops and drinking dens. A market sprawled across the earth road, and Hoopers
were enthusiastically hawking their wares to other Hoopers, and to the Polity citizens who had
dared to come across the Line. Erlin gestured to a stall where wide green-glass terrariums
contained the writhing and glistening shapes of leeches.

‘You can buy the bite of a leech there for a few shillings. Cheap immortality you’d think,
but a bit of a rip-off when all you have to do is walk into the dingle and stand under a peartrunk
tree for a while.’ She glanced round at Keech. ‘I don’t suppose it would work for you though.’
Keech clicked dryly for a moment before speaking. ‘That is debatable,’ he said.
‘Would you try it?’ asked Janer. He was giving the stall a strange look.
‘To become immortal I would first have to become alive,’ Keech replied.
Janer glanced round at him again and wondered what he meant by that, but of course the
reif s face was unreadable. Erlin led them on.
‘That’s the place we want,’ she said, pointing at the plate-glass window of a shop set
between a bar and a cooper’s establishment almost concealed behind the stacked barrels. Over
the window of the middle shop was mounted a long barbed harpoon.
‘Big fish they’ve got round here,’ observed Janer.
‘You could say that,’ said Erlin, pausing at the shop entrance. As she pushed open the
door, a dull bell clanked and two Hoopers inspecting something in a glass cabinet glanced up
before turning back to each other and continuing their conversation.
‘You can pay in stages, Armel,’ said one. ‘I’ll trust y’ on a ship oath.’
‘I’ll think ‘bout it,’ replied Armel, and with one last wistful glance at the case he hurried
past the three newcomers and out of the shop. The shopkeeper rubbed his hands on his
shirtfront before coming over to them. He grinned widely.
‘Polity?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ said Erlin cautiously, ‘but we’ve been here for some time.’
The man’s grin lost some of its exuberance at this.
‘How can I help?’ he asked.
Janer surveyed the wares in the shop. In the glass case was a neat selection of projectile
guns the like of which he had only ever seen in museums. Around the walls were also
sharp-edged weapons of every description. There was enough armament here to equip a small
medieval army.
‘Stun guns and lasers,’ said Erlin.
The shopkeeper’s grin widened again and he gestured to the back of the shop.
‘Are you sure we need this?’ asked Janer.
‘You saw that shell at the gate?’ Erlin asked him.

‘Yes . . .’
‘It was the shell of a frog whelk. One of those sees you, it’ll try to take a chunk out of you.
It could take your hand off with one bite. Hoopers view them as amusing little pests. And there’s
much worse.’
From a locked cabinet the shopkeeper produced three hand weapons with belts and
holsters.
‘Y’ can have lasers and stunners separate, but I got these,’ he said.
Erlin picked up one of the weapons and inspected it dubiously. Keech stepped beside her
and took up another weapon. He knocked back a slide control, opened the bottom of the handle
and peered inside, then slammed it shut.
‘QC laser with slow burn, wide burst . . . the lot,’ he said. He glanced at Erlin. ‘These’ll do
all you need.’
‘QC?’ Janer queried.
‘Quantum cascade; standard solid-state,’ Keech replied.
‘What about stun?’
Keech tapped the stubby barrel set below - and off-centre of - the main mirrored barrel.
‘Ionic burst - good for up to about five metres,’ he said. ‘And,’ he studied the three weapons, ‘J
will not be requiring one of these.’
Erlin eyed him thoughtfully for a moment before turning back to the shopkeeper.
‘How much?’
‘Two hundred shillings each.’
Janer thought he must have got it wrong: surely he meant two thousand shillings?
‘You’re a robber and a thief,’ said Erlin. ‘I’ll give you two hundred for two of them.’
‘I’m a thief! I’m a thief! One seventy-five each, with the belts and holsters.’
‘Seventy-five each and I’ll tell no one how you robbed us.’
‘One hundred and fifty each, and for that I make no profit at all.’
‘One hundred, and may the Old Captains forgive you.’
‘I have a family! I have mouths to feed!’
‘One hundred.’
The shopkeeper’s expression was one of outrage, but that expression swiftly disappeared

when Erlin turned to leave. He caught hold of her arm and she turned back to him.
‘One hundred and twenty-five and you must tell no one how you have robbed me,’ he
said.
‘Agreed,’ said Erlin with a smile.
Janer opened his wallet, but before he could remove any money, Keech laid one bony
hand over it. ‘You neglected to mention the required power cells. Does your price include them
as well?’ he asked.
‘You are all thieves!’ shouted the shopkeeper.
Keech stepped back and left the bargaining to Erlin.
****
With the door to his cabin firmly closed, Ambel sat on his bed and stared over at his sea-chest,
the bait meat held in his right hand like a bloody hankerchief. He tilted his head as if listening to
something, then shook it in annoyance, before abruptly rising and stepping across his cabin to
stand before the chest itself. With his free hand he opened the lid and took out an oblong box a
metre long and a third of that wide and deep. This he placed on his table then took a key for the
lock from his top pocket. After unlocking the box, he returned the key to his pocket, then stepped
back a bit before flipping up the lid. The thing inside did not leap out, though there were signs of
movement.
It was blue and filled the box. It was a head. Once it had been a human head, but now it
was so horribly enlarged, stretched out and distorted that it was difficult to recognize it as such.
It was more like the head of some bastard offspring of a baboon and a warthog. Ambel stood and
glowered at it as it shifted in its box, and one of its insane black eyes blinked open and returned
his look. It was still alive, and he questioned the impulse that made him keep it so. That the
historian, Olian Tay, had offered him a fortune for it, he now knew as incidental - he wasn’t
keeping it for her. Perhaps he kept it out of sadism. No one could be more deserving of
punishment than this . . . individual. Ambel dropped the piece of bait meat in the box and
slammed the lid shut. Next time he looked, he knew the meat would be gone, as the Skinner
retained a tenacity for life. After wiping his hand, Ambel locked the box then placed it back in his
sea-chest before slamming and locking the lid of that. He left his cabin speedily, as one glad to
be away from some unpleasant but necessary task. Peck was standing just outside, gazing at him
strangely. He held the panga in his right hand and was spattered with purple blood and flecks of
turbul meat. Even to Ambel he was a disquieting sight.
‘Turbul all chopped, Peck?’ Ambel asked.
The crewman took a moment to reply. ‘How ... is the bugger?’ he asked.
‘Alive,’ said Ambel. ‘Still alive.’
Peck nodded slowly. ‘Can still hear ‘im muttering,’ he said.
‘We’ll always hear that,’ said Ambel, reaching out and carefully slapping Peck on the
shoulder. ‘Let’s get that turbul pickled and stowed, man.’

As Ambel walked past Peck, the crewman stared at the door to the cabin with his face
screwed up in an expression that might have been remembered pain or might have been longing.
‘How many barrels?’ Ambel asked Anne as she lowered a full net down to the hive of
activity in the hold.
‘Twelve in all, with enough spare to do us for a week or so. Good run,’ she added.
Ambel studied her face. The leech scars there had not detracted from her rugged
attractiveness, and her long black hair showed not a speck of grey despite her many years. The
virus affected different people in different ways. Some became wrinkled prunes with grizzled
hair; some, like Anne, stayed at their peak; others lost all their hair and sometimes their teeth
too. Ambel himself had been like Anne, long in the past. Over the numerous years since, he had,
like many of the Old Captains, incrementally increased his muscular bulk. Now he had cropped
white hair, a young-looking but wide face, and the overall appearance of someone who could
snap deck timbers between his fingers - and it wasn’t a deceptive appearance.
‘We going after another run?’ Boris asked from below.
‘Nope, lad,’ said Ambel. ‘It’s a night moon and we’ve still got time to get to the sands. I
don’t want all our barrels filled with turbul. It only pulls down a few skind and the market’ll be
flooded.’ He looked up. ‘We go east,’ he spoke loudly so the sail could hear him.
‘Amberclams?’ asked Pland, picking bait meat from under his fingernails with a skinning
knife.
‘Amberclams,’ Ambel confirmed.
‘That’s a relief,’ he said. ‘I thought you were thinking of a hunt.’
Ambel grinned at him, then went below to help Boris and the juniors stow the barrels.
****
The voice from his Hive link had a hint of buzzing behind it but Janer reckoned that was just
showmanship. Hornets did not communicate by buzzing, and Hive minds certainly did not. He
suspected that this ersatz buzzing was the mind’s idea of a joke.
‘I would like you to travel with this Erlin. I find her interesting,’ the mind told him.
It wasn’t an instruction any more. The mind had ceased to issue instructions when his
indenture had run out two decades back. The request, though, was backed by the promise of
unlimited credit, travel and lack of boredom, and for Janer boredom could be a problem, as it was
for so many Polity citizens now.
‘I thought you wanted me to stick with the reif,’ he whispered, conscious of the people all
around him.
‘The reification, I suspect, will go with her. If he does not, he will find her again in the
future. His story and hers connect.’

‘You haven’t told me his story yet.’
‘In good time, in good time. Let us watch this fight for the present.’
The two Hoopers facing each other in the dirt ring had stripped naked and oiled
themselves from head to foot. The crowd was baying for blood, yet there seemed an insincerity
about their shouting.
‘You note that they strip off their clothing first,’ said the mind.
‘So?’ said Janer.
‘Their bodies repair themselves. Clothing has to be repaired.’
Janer absorbed that and nodded to himself. A passing tout assumed the nod was for him
and he turned to Janer.
‘Domby or Forlam? Shillings, yen, dollars - or skind if you have to. What bet?’
The man was short and powerfully built. He seemed to have none of those distinctive
Hooper leech marks visible on him. Janer recognized his accent as off-world.
‘What are the odds?’
‘Domby’s a three-fifty and Forlam a one-fifty, with an impressive list of recent wins.
Thirteen to one on Domby for an E, and ten to one on Forlam for a pop. Either of them drops from
a vaso, and you lose. The fight is two hours limited.’
‘I’ll put ten shillings on Domby for an E,’ said Janer.
‘Very good, sir.’ The tout looked worried as he wrote out a betting slip and accepted
Janer’s ten-shilling note. Others in the crowd were eyeing Janer speculatively.
‘That was a high bet here,’ said the mind. ‘Your average Hooper would have to work half a
year for such a sum.’
‘Really. If you know that much, perhaps you can tell me what Es, pops and vasos are,’
said Janer.
‘An E is an evisceration and a pop is a burst eye. A vaso is when one or both of the
contestants collapse through loss of blood,’ the mind replied succinctly.
‘Oh, very nice. What are my chances of winning?’
‘You heard the odds.’
Janer glowered at the two hornets in their case then returned his attention to the fight.
Domby, whom Janer presumed to be the one showing the most leech scars, had stepped into the
ring with a long curved dagger in each hand. Forlam then stepped in to face him. His weapons
consisted of a stiletto and something that looked like an ice-axe. As soon as they were face to

face, someone rang a dull-sounding bell. The volume of the shouting immediately increased as
the opponents began to circle and feint. Domby was the first to get a hit. He opened Forlam’s
arm through to the bone, and blood jetted for a moment before abruptly ceasing to flow. Forlam
backed away then leapt forward to jam his stiletto in Domby’s stomach. In reply, Domby cut
Forlam’s ear so it was hanging by a thread. Forlam managed a low blow that cut Domby’s
scrotum in half. Five or six more blows followed before the two parted and circled again. Janer
stood with his mouth open and a sick feeling in his gut as he watched Forlam shake his head in
irritation and with his forearm press his ear back into place. When the Hooper moved his arm
away, the ear remained in position again, if slightly askew. On the other side of this dusty arena,
the crowd had parted round an off-worlder who was spewing vomit on to the dirt. Janer was a
little harder than that. He’d seen some horrible things in his time, but this . . .
Domby and Forlam went at each other again. There was blood all over the ground. Not
huge amounts, as all their wounds bled for only a short time. Janer noticed that the wound on
Forlam’s arm had nearly closed and that Domby’s scrotum was back together.
‘Illuminating, isn’t it,’ said a voice at his shoulder which he first took to be the mind’s
until he turned to see Keech standing next to him. He was also glad to notice that those who had
shown interest in him earlier when he had opened his wallet were now nowhere in evidence. The
crowd had parted round Keech just as it had around the vomiter.
‘That’s one way of describing it,’ said Janer. ‘Erlin found her Captain yet?’
‘He’s not here, but she’s still trying to find out where he went,’ the reif said. He nodded
towards the fight as another hideous wound was inflicted - and ignored. ‘It takes little
imagination to visualize the damage these people could do off-world, had they the inclination,’
he said.
‘But they don’t,’ said Janer.
‘No, most of them don’t.’
It took an hour for the fight to reach its climax. By that time, there were pools of blood
everywhere in the dirt and Forlam was heading for a vaso. Janer did not see the move that ended
the fight. Forlam had his back turned so Domby was hidden. The roar of the crowd alerted him
before Forlam turned, dropping his weapons as he tried to prevent his intestines dropping out.
‘I think I’ve won some money,’ said Janer as the crowd began chanting ‘Full! Full!’
‘What does that mean?’ Janer asked.
The Hive mind replied. ‘It means full evisceration, though I believe that to be a misnomer.
According to the rules of this kind of match there only has to be one clear loop of intestine,’ it
said.
‘What?’ said Janer, not quite taking in what he was being told.
Domby continued after Forlam, and Janer soon found out precisely what the mind had
meant. He came close to losing the beer and sandwiches he had consumed a couple of hours
before. It wasn’t so much the sight as the smell that did it. When he finally felt sure he had his
nausea under control, the crowd was heading off in pursuit of various touts, and Keech was

watching him impassively.
‘You’d better hurry if you want to collect your winnings,’ the reif suggested.
Janer nodded, looked around for the tout, whom he now saw surrounded by a small group
of winners, and clutching his ticket he went over to collect. As he drew close, two ugly-looking
Hoopers suddenly stepped in front of him. Both of them had knives like Domby’s.
Janer halted, then stepped back. ‘OK. OK, I don’t mind,’ he said. A hundred and forty
shillings was not worth the risk of suffering what had happened to Forlam. Nevertheless, the two
thugs kept coming at him. For half a second Janer considered running, then he swung a fist at the
nearer of the thugs. The man’s head turned with the force of the blow, but otherwise he seemed
unaffected. He grinned at Janer as if to indicate that the blow had now freed him of any
restraints.
‘Fuck,’ said Janer. This was going to get nasty. He stepped back slightly, spun on his heel
and drove a thrust-kick straight into the man’s stomach. He might as well have kicked a tree for
all the effect it had. He backed off, trying not to put too much weight on a knee that was already
beginning to ache. The thug was still grinning that same grin. Behind him, his companion just
stood with his arms folded, and was smiling with nasty expectation.
‘Can’t we talk about this?’ Janer suggested.
The thug slowly shook his head, and then abruptly moved in. Janer readied himself for the
fight of his life. Suddenly there was a flash and a low thud. The leading thug staggered back and
sat down. He peered with perplexity at the smoking hole in his stomach then glared past Janer.
Janer glanced round as Keech stepped up beside him. He was holding in his skeletal hand a
chromed gun similar in appearance to a Luger, only heavier, and with a longer barrel. He next
shot the second thug, and put him on the ground too.
‘I’ll go for headshots if either of you tries to get up,’ warned the reif. The first thug, who
had been considering just that, sat back down again.
‘Get your winnings,’ said Keech. ‘I hate people reneging on bets.’
Janer stared at Keech, then at the weapon the reif held. This was why he had not required
one of the QC lasers; what he held was a JMCC military-issue pulse-gun. Janer now cast his eye
over the two thugs. One of them was poking a finger into the hole in his body, to see how deep it
went. The reality of Spatterjay was rapidly coming home to Janer. Perhaps it had not been such a
good idea to put the weapon he had purchased earlier in his backpack.
He took out his slip and advanced on the tout, who stared at him for a moment then
began to reach into his jacket. A hand, deeply cicatrised with leech scars, reached down and
caught the tout’s wrist.
‘Now now,’ said a pleasant voice.
Janer gaped at the owner of that hand. This Hooper was big, shaven-headed, and blue
with leech scars. He wore hide trousers and a thin shirt. Even his muscles had muscles. Janer
wondered if he would even notice a punch delivered by an off-worlder. This one looked as if
bullets would bounce off his skin and knives would bend and break on him. There was a

boulderlike solidity about him, and a stolid assurance.
‘Captain Ron,’ said someone in the crowd, and there was almost reverence in the voice.
‘I think you should pay the man,’ said Captain Ron.
‘Yes, yes.’ The tout dropped his moneybag in his eagerness to get the money out. He
stooped and quickly retrieved it before counting out notes and change with shaking hands. Janer
accepted the money while keeping half an eye on the Captain, who was gazing with ponderous
insouciance back at the ring.
‘You all right there, Forlam!’ the Captain suddenly bellowed.
A groan came from that direction.
‘Soon have you back together,’ said the Captain. He gazed round at the crowd. ‘Anyone
found his fingers yet?’
‘Got ‘em, Captain,’ someone yelled.
‘Get ‘im back to the ship then and tell Roach to thread ‘im up.’
Janer just could not take in what he was hearing. He knew Hoopers were very hard to kill,
but this was ridiculous. He glanced round to see Keech approaching, while the two Hoopers he
had shot had moved off into the background. They seemed unperturbed by wounds that would
have killed an off-worlder, but were now pensively watching Captain Ron. Janer guessed they
were hoping the tout wouldn’t call for them. It did not require much imagination to guess what
the result of such an encounter would be.
‘I’d like to buy you a drink,’ Janer said abruptly.
With a vague smile, Captain Ron turned back to him.
‘Now that could work out expensive,’ he said.
There was laughter from the other Hoopers.
‘Well, I’ve had a bit of luck today,’ said Janer.
‘All right,’ said the Captain. ‘I’ll see you in the Baitman.’ He cast a baleful look at the tout,
then at his thugs, who ducked their heads and tried to appear unconcerned. ‘And he better get
there safely,’ he said loudly. Then he sauntered off.
With Keech at his side, Janer surveyed the people around him. All he could find were
friendly expressions. The two thugs had already gone. The tout was slinking away, as if hoping
not to be noticed.
‘Obviously not someone to mess with,’ said Janer.
‘You remember what Erlin said?’ asked Keech.

‘Remind me.’
‘He, I would guess, is an Old Captain, and has authority by dint of the simple fact that he
could tear your arms off.’
‘Yes, I remember now.’
****
The Baitman was a ship-Hoopers’ drinking den, and no other off-worlders were present when
Janer and Keech entered. Looks of vague curiosity were flung in their direction, before
conversations resumed. Keech and Janer walked up to the bar, behind which sat a Hooper who
seemed only skin and bone, with white curly hair. He was bending over a board on which chess
pieces and small model ships were positioned. That he seemed to concentrate even harder on
the board when they entered was obvious to Janer. He rapped on the bar with his knuckles. The
barman glanced up at them with an albino’s pink eyes.
‘This place is for ship Hoopers,’ he said, and returned his attention to the board.
Janer was at a loss for a moment, then he started to get angry. Before he could say
anything, Keech spoke up.
‘Then we are in the right place to meet Captain Ron for a drink,’ said the reif.
The barman stood upright, and only then did Janer realize how tall he was.
‘Ron invited you?’ He was studying them carefully.
‘I invited him, and he suggested here,’ said Janer.
The barman’s gaze flicked from Janer’s face to the two hornets, in their box on his
shoulder, then to the reif. He inspected Keech for a long while, with a puzzled expression, then
clearly decided not to ask. He put two pewter mugs on the bar, uncorked a jug, and filled them
both. Then, from a rack behind the bar, he took down a two-litre mug and filled it with the same
liquid. The vessel had ‘Ron’s Mug’ engraved on it. Janer picked up the mug in front of him and
took a gulp.
‘It is best to approach such things with caution,’ said Keech, removing a glass straw from
his top pocket and stooping to take a careful sip of his own drink.
‘Ung,’ Janer managed.
‘Sea-cane rum,’ added Keech.
‘You can drink it?’ Janer said, once he had his breath back.
‘My stomach is atrophied but I have a filter system which can remove impurities from
high-alcohol beverages. What is pumped round my veins is alcohol based,’ replied Keech.
‘Why do you always use a straw?’

Keech gestured towards his mouth. ‘My lips, though having enough elasticity to mimic
speech, do not have enough to form a seal.’
‘You’d dribble,’ said Janer.
Keech gave a measured nod.
Janer went on, his curiosity piqued, ‘How do you speak, then?’
Keech tapped his half-helmet augmentation. ‘It’s generated from here. With what little
movement my mouth does have, the illusion is completed,’ he said.
Janer nodded, then took another, more cautious sip of his drink. He noted how the
barman had not made a move on his chessboard since the commencement of their conversation.
Understandable, as this had to be a fascinating interchange.
‘What about taste?’
‘A saporphone imbedded in the roof of my mouth transmits taste information to the
mimetic computer in my aug and to what remains of my organic brain.’
‘But you can’t get drunk?’ said Janer.
‘No, I cannot, but I don’t feel that to be a disadvantage. In most situations I find it
advisable to keep a clear head.’
Keech imparted this information with clinical detachment. Janer studied the reif as he
thought carefully about his explanation. Keech was partially alive, since he had some functioning
organic brain. The part that was not functioning was made up for by a recording of his previous
living mind being run as a program in his augmentation. Thus it came down to the fact that
Keech was a corpse made motile mainly by AI-directed cyber systems.
‘Why don’t you implant in a Golem chassis?’ Janer asked.
‘This is my body,’ said Keech, as if that was answer enough, and returned his attention to
his drink. As Janer watched him, the Hive mind took the opportunity to interject. ‘The cult of
Anubis Arisen believes physical life to be sacrosanct and that the life of the body is the only life.
Perhaps Keech believes that too, though I doubt it.’
Janer did not get a chance to ask the mind to explain that comment, as Captain Ron just
then crashed into the Baitman like some stray piece of earth-moving equipment.
‘Good sail to you!’ said the Captain, stomping up to the bar and taking up his mug to
drain it in one. He slammed the mug down on the bar so hard the timbers leapt. The barman
waited for dust to settle before refilling the mug. As it was being refilled, Janer noted that it had
a bloom on its metal surface identical to that left on ceramal after it has been case hardened.
Obviously simple pewter would not prove suitably durable.
‘That hits the spot,’ said the Captain.
Janer looked on in awe, wondering about the durability of this man’s intestine, before

carefully taking another sip from his own mug.
‘I have to thank you for your intervention back there,’ he said, blinking water from his
eyes.
‘Don’t like cheats.’
Janer gestured to Keech. ‘You and him both,’ he said.
Ron looked at the reif and nodded, his expression slightly puzzled. Keech, Janer supposed,
would be a puzzle to most Polity citizens, let alone the denizens of an Out-Polity world like this.
Ron drained just half his mug this time and Janer dropped a ten-shilling note on the bar.
‘Got anything smaller?’ asked the barman.
‘Just keep pouring,’ said Janer. He felt drunk already, but warily slid his mug back on to
the bar. ‘In fact,’ he said, ‘drinks all round.’
‘You told me to remind you if you ever did this again,’ the Hive mind whispered to him.
‘Shaddup,’ said Janer and Captain Ron gave him a puzzled look. ‘Sorry, not you.’ He
pointed at the hornets on his shoulder. ‘Them.’
‘Hornets,’ said Ron. ‘Insects don’t do so well here.’
‘Why’s that?’
‘The filaments clog up their air holes.’
Somebody laughed at this, and when Janer looked around he found that others in the
Baitman had gathered behind them, and that the barman was pouring more drinks. He drank
some more from his own mug and noticed subliminally that Keech had retreated into the
background and was now carefully seating himself at one of the tables. The reif might appear
fragile in this company, but Janer now knew how deceptive that appearance was.
‘Not as clogged as your air holes, you old bastard.’
Janer glanced to one side to see Erlin standing at his shoulder.
‘Erlin!’ bellowed Ron. He reached past Janer and picked her up, but carefully. Janer
noticed that the Hooper showed not a trace of effort. He might as well have been lifting an
origami sculpture.
‘Careful, Ron,’ said Erlin. ‘I’m only a ninety Hooper.’
‘You’ve come back for Ambel?’ said Ron, still holding her off the ground. After a moment,
he realized what he was doing and carefully put her down.
‘I have. We’ve unfinished business. Do you know where he is?’

‘Last heard, he was out at the Sargassum.’
‘Who’s going out there?’
Ron grinned at her. ‘The turbul’s good out there this season,’ he said.
Much of the rest of the evening was a blur to Janer. He remembered Keech joining in a
conversation about Jay Hoop, the ancient piratical founder of Spatterjay after whom the planet
was named, and he remembered later finding himself lying under a table. There was also a
vague memory of being slung over Ron’s shoulder, a long walk through darkness, then puking
over a wooden rail into an oily sea. Then blackness.
****

3
In emerald depths the frog whelk, crippled by the leech that had wormed inside its
shell to feed upon it, had lost all its survival instincts as it crawled painfully along
the stony bottom, through forests of sea-cane and prill-peppered waters. Said
instinct being the minimum requirement for plain existence in this savage sea, it
did not last long, of course. Crawling into what it thought was a flock of its fellows,
it sank down like a weary pensioner and uncoiled its eye-stalks. Only when it
observed the patterns of those shells surrounding it, and sensed the vibration
thrumming through the seabed, did it realize its fatal mistake: the whelks
surrounding it were hammer whelks. Panicking, it thrust down its foot and tried to
leap away, but such was the damage done to it by the leech that all it managed to
do was tip itself over. The hammer whelks closed in on this unexpected bounty
extruding feet like brick-hammers to pound their victim’s shell. Soon the water
clouded with chyme, small fragments of flesh, nacreous glitters of shell and one
slowly turning eye-stalk, like a discarded match - which was snapped up by a
passing turbul.

Keech paid his hotel bill and, with his hover trunk in tow, he left the Dome and made his way into
the Hooper town. As he walked, he saw Erlin walking ahead of him, also with her luggage in tow
and Janer’s stacked on top of it. Rather than catch up with her he turned down a side road and
took a track leading out of the town into the dingle. Either side of the track, peartrunk trees
quivered to the movement of small leeches in their branches, and frogmoles chirruped and
burped from little pools in the centres of ground-growing leaves as big as bedspreads. A stand of
putrephallus plants broadcast their presence before they came in sight, and Keech turned off the
anosmic receptor in his nose. Attracted to the bright red tips of the stinking plants, a couple of
baggy lung birds flapped about and honked noisily. They looked to Keech as if they were about to
fly apart, like something ill-made by an apprentice creator. They were sparsely covered in long
oily feathers between which showed purplish septic-looking flesh. If these birds had the
appearance of anything recognizable, it was of half-plucked crows that had been dead for a week
or more. He moved on, down the slope of the island via a path of crushed quartz spread over
black packed earth, and out beyond the edge of the dingle and on to a strand of green sand
scattered with drifts of multicoloured pebbles. There he ordered his trunk to settle and open, and

he began to remove its contents.
Keech’s muscles did not work, in fact none of him worked, except for half of his brain and
one eye. Completely stripped of his flesh, the AI Keech would still exist - a skeleton with motors
at his joints and other pieces of hardware affixed to his bones and, of course, the aug. The items
of Keech’s survival therefore consisted of his cleansing unit and two spare power cells for the
cyber mechanisms that kept him moving. Along with these items, he now removed a black
attaché case, a pack of clothing, and a small remote control. These had filled only a small
portion of the trunk. Keech closed the lid, stepped back, pointed the remote and pressed a
button.
The trunk rose half a metre from the ground and the lid split in two along its length.
These two halves, along with the adjoining sides, folded down into cranked wings. The front then
folded itself down at forty-five degrees and from its top extruded a curved screen. From under
the seat, now exposed in the centre of the trunk, a steering column and control console whined
forwards and up into position below the screen. Keech stepped in to detach cylindrical thruster
motors from each side of the seat - revealing the AG motor underneath - and to reattach them at
the ends of the wings. The back of the trunk tilted out to make a luggage compartment and
Keech put his belongings in this before mounting the hover scooter thus created. He would have
smiled had he been able to. He pressed a touch-plate on the console and spoke.
‘This is monitor Sable Keech registering AG transport on Out-Polity planet Spatterjay,’ he
said.
From the console a mild voice replied, ‘According to my records, monitor Keech, you are
dead.’
Keech paused for a moment - that was a very quick interception by the Warden.
‘That is correct,’ he said.
‘Oh, I’m glad we’ve cleared that one up,’ said the AI Warden on the distant moon of
Spatterjay. ‘But perhaps you can provide some further explanation?’
‘My monitor status remains unchanged I take it?’
‘It does.’
‘Then I am not required to give an explanation.’
‘No, you are not.’
‘I’m a reification,’ said Keech. ‘I would have thought you’d already found all that out, if
not when I first came through the runcible gate, then at least when I crossed the Line to come
out here.’
‘Yes, I see that now. I don’t monitor all inward runcible traffic unless it comes with an
attached record. The Dome gate was being run by one of my subminds at the time, and it did not
see fit to inform me of your arrival. I must have words with it.’
Keech let ride the fact that he thought it unlikely that he had not come through with an

attached record.
‘I am clear to use AG transport, I take it?’ he asked.
‘You are, monitor Keech.’
‘Thank you,’ said Keech.
After running a diagnostic on the console, he thrust the column forward and, blasting up a
cloud of sand, shot out over the sea.
****
With something of smugness in its attitude, the Warden observed the planet through a thousand
pairs of artificial eyes. After a brief scan, it refined this fragment of its attention to just one pair
of eyes and the complex little mind that operated them. On an atoll on the opposite side of the
planet from the main human settlements, and where no human had set foot, waves lapped
gently at a beach of jade and rose-quartz pebbles. Below the pellucid waters off this beach, the
stony bottom was alive with movement. Swarms of infant hammer whelks shifted in a slow and
intricate dance, their shells glinting like coiled pearls, and leeches oozed between them
searching for softer prey. A disturbance where the bottom dropped into emerald depths had the
whelks clamping themselves safely to the stony bottom and the leeches turning as one to
investigate.
Out of boiling foam rose the baroque shape of a seahorse the length of a man’s forearm,
leeches hitting its iron-coloured skin and falling away. It rose from the sea and, seemingly
balanced upon the surface with a coil of its tail, it slowly revolved and took in its surroundings
with topaz eyes. Only someone with a very sophisticated underspace detector could have heard
the communication that followed, and even then it would have taken a mind superior to that of
the Warden to decode it.
‘SM Thirteen, you were instructed to transmit yourself to Dome Gate One for your
assigned watch, and I see now that this did not happen,’ said the Warden.
‘Sniper took that watch. He had some business to conduct through the local server. And I
have my so very important studies to complete,’ replied the Warden’s thirteenth submind, from
its odd drone body.
‘Why then have I received no report from Sniper?’
In the pause that followed, the Warden considered then rejected the idea of subsuming
Thirteen, of reintegrating the little mind with itself in order to get at the truth. But the Warden
had found from long experience that an amount of individualism in its subminds allowed them to
originate insights it never experienced by itself.
‘Nothing of significance to report?’ suggested SM13.
The Warden sensed agitation in the little mind and allowed it to stew for a few
microseconds.
‘The arrival of a dead monitor pursuing a seven-century vendetta I do consider to be

worthy of note,’ it said.
‘Well that’s not my fault,’ said the seahorse drone. ‘Take it up with Sniper. It wasn’t my
decision to employ an obsolete war drone, even if it was once a hero.’
The Warden did not answer this. It withdrew and did a brief search in the local server.
That SM13 and the war drone Sniper both had accounts with the Norvabank evinced in it some
surprise, though only some. The third account it found there, by tracking past transfers, gave it
more than some surprise. It would have to watch this situation very closely; it might lead to
questions about the rights of humans to exist on Spatterjay.
****
Janer woke with a sick feeling in his stomach and the apparent evidence that a small animal had
expired messily in his mouth, probably squashed by the farrier who was making horseshoes in
his head. He shoved the tangled blanket off, sat on the edge of his bunk, and tried to figure out
where he was. The wooden room he lay in was moving, and loud snores came from the Hooper
lying in the bunk opposite. Janer stood, swayed for a moment, and then abruptly sat down. His
detox pills - one of his most important survival items - were in his backpack, but where the hell
was that? His nausea abruptly increased its hold on him and he quickly stood and staggered to
the door. Immediately outside the door there was a short corridor terminating at a ladder. He
moved towards this and, for no immediately apparent reason, staggered into one wall, then back
across the wooden flooring straight into a door. He shook his head. What the hell was that
sound? From all around him came racketing and clacking sounds, creaks and groans. Upon
reaching the ladder, he unsteadily climbed up it towards greenish light, then stumbled out of the
deck hatch to a wooden rail, and retched into the sea below. As he did this he realized he had
done so before, and remembered where he was: on board the ship.
‘Good morning,’ Erlin cheerfully called.
Janer got control of his retching - there wasn’t much to come up anyway - and glanced
round from the rail to where Erlin and Captain Ron stood, behind the helmsman, on the upper
deck that formed the roof of the forecabin. He pushed back from the rail, lost his balance, and
stepped back into the mainmast.
‘Watch yer feet, asshole!’
The voice came from below him. He stared down at a large flat head on the deck itself, a
mouth full of sickle teeth, and demonic red eyes that gazed at him impassively. He rubbed his
face, then, running from this head, he tracked a long ribbed neck that rose up the mast behind
him, to an expanse of veined pink skin spread out on the spars of the central mast, cutting out
half the sky. This skin was braced with long thin support spines that issued spidery gripping
claws at their joints. Ropes of muscle ran down these spines, also along the long heavy wing
bones, and knotted into a huge keel of a chest, above which lumps of something unidentifiable
were being digested in a transparent gut. The creature hung upside down like a bat, as it turned
itself to the wind.
‘Oh shit,’ Janer said and quickly moved away from the mast and back to the rail. From
here he could see how, whenever the creature moved, its movement was replicated in the fore
and aft masts, which supported sails of a more commonplace fabric. The clacking sounds heard
below the decks, he realized, derived from this motion.

‘His name is Windcatcher,’ the Hive mind told him. Janer blearily inspected the two
hornets in their transparent box, as if searching for some sign of irony.
‘Never let me do that again,’ he said.
‘That’s what you said last time it happened. Unfortunately, I no longer have any control
over your actions. Not that I had a great deal when you were indentured.’ There was definite
irony in the voice this time.
Janer returned his attention to Erlin and Ron, who were watching him with some
amusement.
‘Where’s my backpack?’ he called.
‘Under your bunk,’ Erlin replied.
Janer walked shakily to the hatch, pausing to let a woman climb out, who grinned at him
before moving off, carrying a bucket of something that looked like grease and smelt like
something that should have been buried. He climbed back down the ladder, swallowing on a rush
of saliva. Once in the cabin he went quickly to his bunk, pulled out his pack from underneath,
found his detox pills, threw a couple of them into his mouth, and swallowed them dry. He then
sat and waited for them to take effect.
The Hooper in the adjacent bunk snored and grunted, then, with muttered imprecations,
turned over, allowing Janer a good look at his face. It was Forlam. Janer stood up and gazed at
Forlam’s right hand, which lay on top of the blanket. The last time he had seen it, that hand had
been merely a stump with just the stub of a thumb sticking out of one side. Now the fingers had
been reattached with rough-looking stitches, which also extended in a line up the Hooper’s
forearm to his elbow, closing a surgical cut Janer surmised had been made for the retrieval of
severed tendons, for, as Janer knew from personal experience, tendons were like taut-stretched
elastic, and severed in such a place, would have snapped back up inside Forlam’s arm.
Underneath these stitches, just as underneath those around Forlam’s repositioned ear, were red
lines of scar tissue, so it was apparent the needlework was no longer needed to hold the flesh
together. Janer wondered if Forlam could eat yet, and it suddenly came home to him hard just
where he was and the situation he was in.
Within a few minutes the sickness had receded enough for him to realize he badly
needed to empty his bladder. Luckily he had noticed the lidded bucket underneath his bunk, and
did not have to look far for relief. Afterwards, feeling somewhat better, he returned up to the
deck.
‘There’s fresh water over there,’ called Erlin, as Janer stood blearily surveying his
surroundings. He went to the barrel by the back wall of the forecabin and gulped down a couple
of ladlefuls. The water tasted coppery, and accelerated the effect of the detox in his stomach.
Abruptly he felt buoyant, happy, and it occurred to him that the water might also be helping
residual alcohol from his stomach into his bloodstream. He peered up at Erlin, who was leaning
on the rail staring down at him.
‘Where are we heading?’ he asked, when at last he felt able to speak.

‘The Sargassum,’ she told him. ‘Last known destination of the man I’ve come here for:
Captain Ambel.’
‘Oh.’ Janer paused to gulp another ladleful of water and then gazed around the deck.
‘Where’s Keech?’
Erlin shrugged. ‘Gone his own way, as far as I can gather. He wasn’t in the hotel this
morning, but left a message saying he had certain things to attend to, and that perhaps we
would meet again some time. I’d say that’s the last we’ve seen of him.’
‘Shame, he was interesting,’ said Janer, remembering something the mind had said. He
dropped the ladle back into the barrel, scanned about again then went on, ‘What’s a sargassum?’
‘Where the turbul gather to breed,’ Captain Ron interrupted from behind Erlin.
Erlin eyed Janer sympathetically. ‘It’s an area of the sea where sea-cane and sea nettles
grow thick enough to form into islands. Turbul are a kind of fish, and they deposit their nymphs
on the underside of those islands. Ship Hoopers always head out there at this season to harvest
the turbul,’ she explained.
‘Harvest?’ Janer asked, vaguely recalling a previous conversation.
Erlin smiled, turned to say something to Ron, then made for the forecabin ladder, and
climbed down to get nearer to Janer. She inspected him with amused sympathy then pointed
towards the stern of the ship.
‘Roach is hand-lining for boxies for our lunch. Come and see, and perhaps you’ll begin to
understand.’
Janer followed where she led, giving the sail’s head a wide berth as he went. He saw now
that not only did the creature control the movement of the fore and aft masts by some hidden
linkage, but it also adjusted the fabric sails with cables gripped in some of its spider-claw hands.
Janer swung his gaze along the full length of the ship, estimating it to be at least fifty metres
long, with a beam of fifteen metres. There weren’t many crew visible but, knowing nothing about
sailing ships, he did not know how many might be required to navigate it, nor how many were
unnecessary because of this weirdest of rigs.
Roach was a short raggety Hooper with a furtive look about him. He sat like a pile of dirty
washing at the edge of the deck where there was no rail. He glanced up at Erlin and Janer, then
hauled in the line het had trailing over the side of the ship. It came up with a boxy on the end,
which he removed from the hook and tossed into the wooden bucket at his side. Boxy was an apt
name for this fish, Janer thought. It had a purple and white cube-shaped body with eyes at the
front and a tail sticking out the back.
With a gesture at the boxies already caught, Erlin asked Roach, ‘You mind?’ Roach looked
sneaky for a moment as if estimating what he could get for one of the fish. He then glanced
towards the Captain, thought for a moment, and made a noncommittal gesture. Erlin picked up
one of the fish.
To Janer she said, ‘Spatterjay life forms have evolved to survive being fed upon by the
leeches - to have their flesh harvested by leeches.’ She dug her finger in behind the boxy’s eyes,

hooked and pulled. The eyes, at the wide point of a small triangular head, the spine and sack of
internal organs, and the tail, pulled from the surrounding cube of flesh like a cork coming out of a
bottle.
‘Look,’ said Erlin, and threw the essential part of the boxy back into the sea. Janer
watched it hit the surface of the water and lie there for a moment. He was just about to ask what
she meant when the boxy wriggled, then wriggled again, and shot away into the emerald depths.
‘They don’t die,’ she told him, and to his horror she took a bite out of the cube of flesh she held.
‘Here, try some.’
Janer took the still-warm lump of flesh and stared at it. He glanced down at Roach, who
was watching him with a ratty smirk, then he took a small bite and, gritting his teeth against his
rebellious stomach, chewed and swallowed. The meat slid down and seemed to settle there with
a sudden heat that dispelled his nausea. He was surprised at the effect and took another bite.
After swallowing this too, he tried to identify the taste.
‘Spicy . . . like curry . . . and bananas,’ he said.
‘It’s loaded with vitamins, proteins and sugars - and the virus of course, but don’t worry
about that. The virus can’t survive human digestion, just as it can’t survive long exposure to the
air. Your usual methods of contracting it are either through a leech bite or by sexual
transmission.’ Erlin seemed uncomfortable at mentioning the latter method. ‘Are you on
Intertox?’
Janer shrugged. ‘I’ll take my chances,’ he said, then remembering part of a drunken
conversation the night before he asked, ‘Tell me, with food like this so easily available, why do
they bring out here what they call “Dome-grown” food?’
Erlin smiled at a memory of her own, and Janer felt almost jealous of it. She said,
‘Dome-grown foods are Earth foods and the varieties grown here contain many natural
germicides - toxins even - that inhibit the growth of the viral fibres. Hoopers have possessed the
facilities for growing them since the days of Jay Hoop himself, and lucky they did or they
wouldn’t have survived. They enjoyed more variety when the Polity finally arrived. Garlic is
particularly good. Hoopers like garlic. They’ve grown it here for nearly a millennium.’
‘You’d have thought they wouldn’t want to inhibit the growth of those fibres.’
‘Slow growth is better than fast - that way you don’t go native,’ Erlin replied.
Janer waited for an explanation but none was forthcoming. He finished off the boxy meat
first, and was about to pursue the matter when he heard a pitiful squeaking and looked down.
Roach had opened a cast-iron bait box and was now baiting his hook. The creature wriggling in
his fingers, in its attempt to escape being impaled, had the appearance of a miniature trumpet
with a wading bird’s legs and webbed feet.
‘Let’s leave him to it,’ said Erlin. ‘It can be dangerous for an off-worlder to stand near a
Hooper while he’s fishing.’
‘What do you mean?’
Erlin pointed at the bait box.

‘One of those things could chew into you like a drill bit. They’re difficult to remove once
they get started.’
Janer nodded and stepped back. The little trumpet-things were leaping up and down in
the box and, though they had no eyes, they seemed to be watching him. Roach showed no
particular caution of the creature he held as he finally impaled it on a gleaming hook. As it let
out a bubbling squeak, Janer saw the others in the bait box quit their squeaking and sink out of
sight. He nodded to the crewman before following Erlin, but so intent was Roach on getting his
line out, he did not notice.
Erlin went on, ‘Besides, there’s all the other things Roach might bring up on his line.
There’s frog whelks and hammer whelks down there, not to mention glisters and prill. And
there’s always leeches of course.’
Janer had no idea what most of these things were, and was not sure he wanted to find
out just then.
As they came opposite the mast Erlin gestured at his belt. ‘You’re not carrying your
weapon. I suggest you do,’ she said.
Janer nodded, then his attention was caught by a shoal of somethings sliding past the
ship, just below the surface. At first he thought they might be dolphins, then he realized they
were huge leeches.
‘Why do people want to stay here?’ he asked. ‘It seems a hellish place.’
Erlin was thoughtful for a moment before replying. ‘For Hoopers it’s what they’re
accustomed to. Only in recent years have they become aware that they can leave. They stay
because of the benefits they see. If they live long enough, they’ll end up like the Old Captains:
practically unkillable, almost inured to pain, utterly at peace with themselves.’
‘Seems they’d have to survive for a long time to attain that,’ said Janer, still watching the
leeches.
‘Yes,’ said Erlin. ‘There’s also the fact of the economy here - something that with our own
benefits we tend to forget. A Hooper has to work for a very long time to be able to afford
passage away from here.’
Janer turned to her, the words ‘afford passage’ registering in his blurry mind.
“I suppose this particular little jaunt is not for free?’ he said.
Erlin smiled. ‘No, I suggest you see Ron soon and negotiate a price.’
Janer looked up at the broad back of the big Captain. ‘I don’t suppose that negotiation
need involve me calling him “a robber and a thief”, should it? I don’t fancy the idea of him
getting annoyed with me.’
‘Old Captains infrequently lose their tempers – too dangerous,’ Erlin told him. ‘You can
call him what you like so long as you pay him. I’m sure you won’t want to disembark just here.’

Janer once again studied the passing shoal of leeches. He searched for something more
to say to keep the conversation going. ‘Tell me,’ he said, ‘do the leeches die?’
‘Yes and no. They’re preyed upon too, and as easy to kill as anything else here, but they
don’t actually the of old age. When fertilized, they divide into segments, which then collapse into
a large encystment, or egg. That egg will attach itself to the bottom of a sargassum, and out of it
will eventually hatch thousands of cute baby leeches.’
‘Nice. What about the males?’
‘No males, really. The leeches are hermaphroditic . . . sort of.’

‘Same immortality as all life.’
‘Yes, it is that.’ Erlin nodded, lost to her own thoughts. Janer saw that she had now gone
away from him and, thinking of nothing else to ask, he quickly returned to his cabin for his gun,
deciding right then that he would be very careful here. It was apparent to him that this was a
place where recklessness could soon get you dead.
****
On the great monolith of stone surrounded by empty ocean, Sniper reached out with one
triple-jointed arm, clasped the bishop in his precision claw, and moved it halfway across the
board. Keeping one palp-eye on the game he turned his other to the three objects that lay on a
sheet of slightly putrescent skin spread on the rock beside the board. One of these objects was
an explosive slave collar with Prador glyphs etched into its dull grey surface. A brief ultrasound
scan revealed the information that the film of planar explosive inside it was still active even
after all this time. This meant that at the antiquities sale on Coram this item would fetch over a
thousand New Carth shillings. The two other objects were even more interesting and of greater
value, as slave collars had already been found in their hundreds over on the Skinner’s Island. One
of them, Sniper recognized as a very early nerve-inducer, despite the fact that most of its
ceramal casing had corroded away. The other was a mass of corrosion which the war drone had
identified, after scanning, as a projectile gun. This last item, despite its terrible condition, would
fetch a mint, as it was likely a weapon carried by either Hoop himself or one of his comrades.
Sniper hunkered down on his six crustacean legs and returned both eyes to the game as his
opponent made a move.
‘How much you want for them?’ the war drone asked as he registered a possible danger
to his queen in eight further moves.
Sniper’s opponent lowered to the stone the foot-talon he had used to move his knight,
and blinked at Sniper with demonic red eyes. The sail, with his pink-skinned wings wadded into
an intricacy of folds and spines that bore some resemblance to a monk’s habit and some to the
excess of Elizabethan clothing, and with his long neck hooked like a question mark as he
observed the board, grinned his crocodilian grin and exposed a kilo of ivory.
‘Two thousand, and you fit the augmentation for me here,’ he said.
Sniper, who had the appearance of giant crayfish fashioned of polished aluminium, tilted

his armoured head in acknowledgement.
‘There’s the alignment program - I wrote it myself. And that, Cheater, will cost you,’ said
Sniper.
Windcheater turned his head and eyed Sniper suspiciously as the war drone made his
next move.
‘You didn’t tell me about that,’ the sail accused.
Sniper raised his head and stared at the sail. Below the war drone’s angled-back
antennae and cluster of sensory bristles, two mirrored tubes shifted apart, coming to point
sideways now and leaving a matt square tube centred on the sail opposite. This was the nearest
the drone could come to a grin, having in place of a mouth an antiphoton weapon - and the
business ends of a rail-gun and a missile launcher.
‘Musta slipped my mind,’ Sniper said.
‘Why do I need this alignment program?’ Windcheater asked, his talons rattling his
impatience and splintering up flakes of the stone.
‘Your brain ain’t exactly human-shaped. Put the aug on you now and the nanonic fibres’ll
turn your head to mush looking for the right connections.’
‘How different is my brain, then?’ Windcheater asked.
‘Upside-down and halfway down your two spines. Your cerebrum is in a linked triad round
your oblongata, and there’s other things in there ain’t even got a name yet.’
‘Better than human?’
‘In your case, just. Your friends . . .’
Sniper gestured with his heavy claw at the other sails gathered on the far side of the rock
and gave a clattering shrug. Windcheater studied his fellows.
‘Put it this way,’ Sniper went on, ‘even auged-up, any sail called Windcatcher ain’t gonna
win any chess matches.’
Sniper moved a heretofore-ignored pawn and emitted a satisfied hum.
Windcheater peered at the board and shook his head slowly. The way he exposed his
teeth this time could not easily have been identified as a grin. ‘I didn’t see that,’ he said.
‘I guess not,’ said the war drone as he settled to forty-five degrees on his back legs. With
his precision claw, he reached under himself and with a metallic click detached a chromed object
the shape of a broad bean, but five centimetres long. He passed the object to his heavy claw and
held it up between the two razor points.
‘Got the alignment program loaded and ready to go. It’ll take only a few minutes to link
in, and about an hour for all the control programs to upload. After that hour you’ll be able to

direct-access your account through the local server, and to download information on just about
anything you want ... all unproscribed technologies, learning programs, you’ll be able to buy
things and have them delivered by remote drone, you’ll be able to make investments, and you’ll
be able to communicate with just about anyone in the Polity.’
Windcheater’s mouth was hanging open now and his bifurcated tongue was licking
across his many teeth. One talon was rising up off the stone as if he wanted to grab the aug
right now.
‘I think that’s more than enough in exchange for these few corroded objects,’ Sniper
finished.
Windcheater’s mouth snapped shut and his red eyes narrowed. ‘One and a half
thousand,’ the sail said.
‘I’m being generous if I offer you five hundred,’ replied Sniper.
‘Twelve hundred, and remember that there’s more where these came from.’
‘Being as it’s you, I’ll go to six hundred.’
Windcheater rocked back on his talons and let out a frustrated hiss. ‘I’m fairly certain I
saw a sealed box of five Prador thrall units,’ he said.
‘Where?’ Sniper enquired.
‘The Skinner’s Island - you know, that place the Warden has expressly forbidden you to
visit.’
It was Sniper’s turn to hiss. ‘All right, I’ll give you eight hundred, and I’m being more than
generous.’
‘Twelve hundred, I said.’
‘Slightest pressure and this aug could pop like a boiled amberclam.’
‘Eleven hundred then.’
‘Don’t want me to make a mistake while fitting this, do you?’ asked Sniper, giving his
antiphoton grin.
‘I’ll go no lower than a thousand. I know you can get that for the collar alone,’ said
Windcheater.
‘OK, you got me there,’ said the war drone.
Sniper lowered his heavy claw, released the aug from it, catching it in his precision claw.
He held the aug out and Windcheater bowed low with his head poised above the chessboard.
Sniper pressed the device against the side of the sail’s head. There was a brief snicking sound,
and Windcheater jerked his head to one side.

‘Feels sort of—’
The sail did not complete what he was about to say. His eyes crossed. He jerked back,
fell on his rump, and sat there making strange hissing and grunting sounds, his foot talons
clenched into fists. While Sniper observed this odd behaviour, his own two antenna abruptly
flicked upright. ‘Oh hell,’ the war drone said, just managing to draw the putrescent skin over the
three objects he and the sail had been bargaining for, before the Warden fully linked in and
could gaze through the drone’s eyes. The Warden’s presence was huge, and Sniper frantically
opened excess processing space so that it was not so invasive. Fortunately, the presence pulled
short of complete invasion of the war drone’s mind.
‘I see that Windcheater has acquired an augmentation. I hope, for your sake, that it is
properly aligned, as even your heroic record will not exempt you from reprogramming if you’ve
scrambled his brain, Sniper,’ said the Warden.
‘I know what I’m doing,’ said the war drone.
‘Do you? I often wonder about that. You’ve been a free drone for five centuries now.
That’s a long time to have been out on your own.’
Sniper hissed. ‘I work for you. I ain’t gonna become one of your subminds.’
‘Well, let’s not replay old arguments. Let’s instead look at the fact of your working for me.
What you do on your own time is not my concern, unless it infringes on Polity law - you know,
laws like those covering the trade in cultural artefacts and dubious technologies. But when you
fail to report to me the arrival of Sable Keech here on Spatterjay, I do wonder if you’re properly
attending to your duties.’
‘Sable Keech,’ said Sniper. ‘Oh.’
‘Oh, indeed. I take it that you were not physically present at the gate, and had a submind
of your own keeping watch there?’
‘Well . . . yes.’
‘Then I suggest that the next time you do something like that you give said submind more
sophisticated programming. It should have informed you of Keech’s arrival.’
‘Of course, Warden,’ said Sniper.
The Warden paused for a little while before continuing. Always there was this temptation
to subsume the mind it was in contact with, as that way the information the mind contained
would be instantly accessible. It also had a sneaking suspicion that Sniper was not being exactly
straight about something. Yet the Warden could not subsume Sniper without the war drone’s
permission, him being a free individual.
The Warden went on, ‘Now, when you have finished here I strongly suggest that you go
and join SM13, as it will be needing assistance with its hammer-whelk survey. That should keep
you out of trouble at least for a little while. I will link through Windcheater’s aug when it
connects to the server, just to check that what is on the other side of it still has some sentience.
Understand, Sniper, that we are no longer at war and you cannot break the law with impunity.’

Sniper’s antennae dropped back to their backslanted position, and the war drone let go
one long and metallic raspberry. Windcheater’s eyes uncrossed and his foot-talons unclenched.
‘Why do you do it?’ the sail asked. ‘You don’t really need the money.’
‘I’m a war drone, not a bloody flying whelk counter,’ said Sniper, and with a low grumbling
sound he rose half a metre from the rock.
‘I still don’t understand,’ said Windcheater.
‘I’m bored,’ said the war drone then, with a gesture of his heavy claw towards the
covered artefacts, ‘Keep them safe for me. I’ll be back when I’ve finished counting fucking
whelks.’
A blade of fusion flame stabbed from underneath and behind the war drone, and then he
shot away into the sky. Windcheater nodded once, then allowed his eyes to cross and his
foot-talons to clench once more. The other sails, all of them called Windcatcher, looked on with
the same blank lack of understanding as ever.
****
Keech controlled the scooter with a simple program set up in his aug, while he flipped up the
control console’s screen and activated it. The aug program kept the vehicle gliding five metres
above the sea and heading south, and as such it did not take up much processing space. Through
another part of his aug, Keech accessed the local server, downloaded a mapping program, and
relayed it to the scooter’s computer. He could easily have read the map in his aug, but
sometimes he preferred a more hands-on approach. Perhaps it was his age ... In a moment, the
screen indicated his present position on a 500-kilometre-square grid-map. Ahead of him was a
cluster of islets the map obscurely named the ‘Pepper Shells’, and east of him was an object
labelled ‘The Big Flint’. He was speculating on whether or not this meant Spatterjay had chalk
beds - out of which flint is propagated - when there was a sudden spray of water, a crashing
noise, and the scooter slewed sideways through the air.
Keech immediately took manual control and turned the scooter to prevent it tipping over.
As the scooter rapidly decelerated, he glanced sideways and wondered just for a moment if he
was hallucinating. The head of a pink rhinoceros, at the end of ten metres of wormish body that
was being dragged through the waves, had clamped its beaked mouth on the scooter wing, just
behind the port thruster. The scooter’s AG units whined as it tipped and Keech found himself
looking into angry little blue eyes. He quickly pulled the column in the opposite direction and
boosted the starboard motor. There was a growling rumble and more sea spray shot in the air.
The scooter rose, and tilted further. The rhinoworm’s body came clear of the water, then the
creature abruptly let go and dropped back into the sea. Keech shut off the motors and let the
scooter regain its stability, then he slammed the motors on full as the head of the worm rose out
of the sea again. The Pepper Shells were now off to his left. He turned the scooter towards them,
chose one and headed for it as quickly as he could, now careful to keep the scooter more than
ten metres above the sea’s surface.
There were at least fifty islets, all no larger than fifty metres across. Keech slowed the
scooter and eased it down to the centre of the largest of them. He saw that his landing area
consisted of worn stone inset with quartz crystals of every shade imaginable. Scattered loosely

on this surface were broken shells and fragments of pink and white chitin like broken porcelain.
The scooter crunched on these as it settled. Keech dismounted and immediately inspected the
vehicle’s wing: there were scratches on the metal, but it was otherwise undamaged. But the
rhinoworm had come close to tipping the scooter over before its beak slid off, and from the
organic part of his brain Keech had felt a surge of emotion that felt very much like fear. He gazed
back out to sea and recognized the sinuous wave of the worm approaching. It was persistent; he
had to give it that. Movement close by then attracted his attention and he glanced down at the
shore close by to see a mass of spiral shells shifting about. Abruptly one of these bounced into
the air on a thick white foot like an anaemic tongue, and came in to land only a few metres away
from him. From this shell rose two eyestalks. As one, from all those down on the beach, rose a
small forest of similar eyestalks. He had never seen anything quite so ridiculous. But when the
shell nearest to him tilted back to expose a large circular mouth full of more moving parts than a
high-tech food processor, he quickly remounted his scooter and took off. As he passed over those
on the shore, a couple of them leapt up in the air and bounced off the underside of his scooter.
He raised it even higher above the sea as he sped for his destination. The creatures here would
have found his flesh unpalatable, but that would be little comfort to him.
With the rhinoworm and those things which he supposed must be frog whelks a couple of
kilometres safely behind him, Keech eased the steering column to rest and shut off the motors.
The scooter drifted along twenty metres above the waves while he again studied the map.
Twelve kilometres to go, and then he must go down again. He reached behind him to get hold of
his black attaché case, which he opened on his lap. From the objects inside, he selected a short
QC laser carbine to complement the JMCC pulse-gun at his hip. He also selected a tray with a
touch-control panel on the side. In this tray rested three innocuous two-centimetre-diameter
steel spheres. He then selected a program via the panel, and ran it. The three spheres rose out
of the tray and positioned themselves around him. Satisfied, he studied the disassembled
weapon that remained in the case. The dealer on Coram who had supplied it to him, had taken a
huge risk for which he had been well recompensed, yet Keech felt he would not be needing such
armament unless wholesale war broke out on Spatterjay. He closed the case and replaced it in
the luggage compartment before easing the steering column forward. The spheres held their
positions around him as he proceeded.
****
Lumps of coral protruded from the sea, like worm-casts of stone and Gothic arches. The sea
hissed and slurped between them, and past the banks of greyish sand mounded below. Through
his binoculars, Ambel studied a clump of sargassum that was slowly being broken up and sucked
through one of these channels. There didn’t seem to be any untoward movement on the clump,
but it would be best to be sure. He lowered his binoculars and glanced down at the main deck.
‘Peck, you’ll keep watch with Gollow and Sild,’ he called, nodding towards the two juniors
he had only recently hired, while reminding himself to memorize the names of the other recent
additions. ‘It’ll be me, Anne and Pland on the rakes.’ He then turned to Boris, who was at the
helm, scratching at his moustache and pretending disappointment. ‘You stay here, Boris, and
make sure there’s nothing nasty waiting for us when we come back.’
‘Aye, Captain,’ answered Boris as he eased the helm over and brought the Treader into a
deep-water channel between sandbanks. The sail, with its neck now curved in an ‘s’ and its head
about five metres above the deck, glanced back at Boris and at his nod turned its body out of the
wind, turning the fore and aft masts with it. It pulled on cables to fold the fabric sails, before
releasing the spars and drawing in its wings. The shadow it cast quickly receded from the deck

as it closed up, then hauled itself upright to perch on the fixed central spar. The Treader slowed
and at the bows two of the crew lifted the heavy triple anchor and heaved it over the side.
Greased chain ratcheted off the windlass until it bottomed, clouding the water of the channel.
They secured the windlass as the ship tugged against the chain and halted. Anne had meanwhile
opened one of the rail lockers and removed two long-handled rakes, a riddle, and some hide
sacks. These she tossed on to the sandy bank below, before jumping down herself. She was soon
followed by Pland as, with a whoop, he too leapt from the rail.
‘Give him another two hundred years and he might grow up,’ muttered Boris.
Ambel nodded in agreement, then gestured to the deck cannon bolted to the stern rail of
the forecabin. ‘That loaded?’ he asked. When Boris nodded, he went on. ‘Let off a shot if you see
anything nasty coming in. Preferably at it. We’ll get back sharpish.’ With that, he climbed down
the ladder to the deck and followed Anne over the rail and on to the sandbank. After Gollow and
Sild, Peck was last over the rail, landing in a crouch from which he slowly straightened while
pumping a shell into the chamber of his shotgun. He gazed about suspiciously, and then nodded
approval at the two juniors as they drew pangas from their belt sheaths.
‘Likely only be prill here,’ observed Ambel. Peck concurred but did not seem particularly
reassured. Ambel stooped to pick up the two rakes, and handed one of them to Anne. To Pland
he said, ‘You collect and sack ‘em.’ And with that, they set off.
Soon they had reached a lower level where streaks of yellow were smeared across the
fiat sand. This area was also pocked with little hollows, and as soon as Ambel planted one heavy
boot on the edge of it, squirts of water were ejected from these hollows and there arose a
crackling hiss.
‘Plenty here,’ he said. ‘You got the bait, Anne?’
Anne handed him a small bag closed with a drawstring. He opened it well away from his
face, but even so the smell was strong enough to make his eyes water. He reached inside the
bag and tossed a handful of its contents into the air ahead of him. Dried and flaked fish meat
snowed down across the sand, and as it settled it elicited further movement; further hollows
rapidly appeared and the occasional orange-lipped mouth opened at the surface. Ambel and
Anne stepped forward and began vigorous raking, drawing the long white-shelled clams from just
below the surface, into heaps. Pland came in behind them, selecting only those the size of a
hand to drop into the riddle. When this was full, he took it to a nearby pool, to clean the molluscs
of sand before tipping them into a sack.
‘Hey up! Look at this lad!’ shouted Ambel, hooking out a larger clam with the edge of his
rake. It was almost twice the size of the ones Pland was collecting. Ambel dropped his rake and
grabbed the mollusc before it buried itself again. It fought him for a moment, then came up with
a sucking hiss, waving its fringed foot in the air.
‘This is the one for me,’ Ambel said, stepping to the nearby pool to wash his trophy
before holding it up for all to see. He drew his sheath knife and inserted the blade between its
shells, twisted, then hinged the clam wide open. Inside he revealed a pint of quivering
translucent amber flesh.
‘Always best fresh, though I could do with some vinegar and pepper,’ he said.

A quick slice round with his knife and he tipped the whole lot into his mouth before
discarding the empty shells. He chewed at it for a moment, with orange juice running down his
chin, then swallowed, pulled a face, and reached into his mouth with his fingers. He pulled
something out, then swallowed the rest, before wiping his chin on his sleeve.
‘I’ll be buggered,’ he said.
Pland and Anne moved up to see what he had found. Peck tramped over as well, with the
two juniors trailing behind him as Ambel held up a small silver sphere for their inspection.
‘Pearl in the first clam of the season. Our luck’s in, lads!’
Anne and Pland nodded in agreement. Peck gave first the pearl then Ambel a suspicious
look before summoning to the two juniors and moving away again.
Ambel pocketed the pearl and stooped to take up his rake. ‘Come on, let’s get these
sacks full. I got a feeling this’ll be our best voyage yet!’
‘Tis good luck,’ agreed Gollow.
Peck meanwhile grunted and muttered something foul. Ambel threw him a glance of
annoyance before he got down to more raking. Peck had been sailing with him for a very long
time, and knew him a lot better than most of the crewmen.
****

4
The unexpected bounty of the crippled frog whelk had given the hammer whelks
much satisfaction and made them forget a cardinal rule of the seabed: heads
down and eyes up. In their excitement they hammered away at the bottom and
further stirred water clouded by their victim’s vital fluids. The passing turbul which
had snapped up a floating eye-stalk, ruminated on how tasty its snack had been,
and turned back to see what more it might find. Soon joined by its own fellows who quickly sensed the possibility of an easy meal - it descended on the spreading
cloud. The whelks, unable to see any more than a few metres through the murked
water, were still hammering away, when the first turbul went through with its
mouth open. Its fellows came arrowing after it and soon the water was further
clouded by juices and a rain of glittering broken shell, or the occasional intact shell
sucked empty. The turbul - not often having the chance of coming upon hammer
whelks unawares - had forgotten the cardinal rule that applied to the piscine
creatures of the sea: feed and run. But the approaching glisters had not.

Encircling the island were ridges of reef shaped like the ripples from a stone cast into water.
These reefs were navigable and it was possible to get to the island by ship, but few Hoopers
bothered, or so Keech had been told. It was this piece of information that had resulted in,
partially, his decision to bring his own transport here to Spatterjay. He came in over the reefs and

circled the island. Eventually he saw a wooden jetty and beyond it a track cut into the dingle.
From above, it was impossible to see where the track led, so he brought his scooter down on the
stony beach between dingle and jetty. The track was too narrow for the scooter, so he
dismounted and, with his carbine tucked under one arm and the three guard spheres following
him, he walked into the tree shadows. Immediately, on either side of him, he could hear things
moving in the foliage, and at one point caught sight of the glistening body of a leech the size of a
man, heaving past. Nothing attacked him though and he wondered if he was being over-cautious.
The track eventually led to a clearing. The earth here was completely bare of growth and
Keech assumed it had been poisoned, so verdant was the surrounding dingle. At the centre of the
clearing stood a short stone tower with satellite dishes mounted on a pylon on the roof. Also on
the roof, he could see the edge of an AGC of a very old design. In the walls of the building were
wide mirrored windows, and along one side was a conservatory with sun lamps mounted inside.
The glare of the Earthlight seemed harsh and crystal in contrast to the natural greenish light of
Spatterjay’s sun. To one side of this conservatory was a single steel door with an intercom set
beside it. Keech headed across the poisoned ground to the door. Only out here in the open could
he see the autogun on the roof tracking his progress. He ignored it.
The intercom buzzed and clicked then a woman’s voice babbled, ‘What do you want?
What do you want?’
‘Information,’ said Keech.
‘An important commodity, but all the same something that can be acquired in great
quantities from AIs, libraries, and even, dare I mention them, books,’ replied the voice.
‘You are considered the greatest authority on the history of Spatterjay.’
‘Yes, yes, yesss and I know who you are, corpsey. Deactivate your balls and enter.’ This
the woman followed with a giggle before going on in more sober tones, ‘My house won’t let you
in still armed, so be sure you are not, Sable Keech.’
Keech held up his hand, and through his aug transmitted an instruction. The guard
spheres settled in his palm and he placed them on the ground. He put his other weapons down
next to them and by the time he was standing again, the door was open. He entered a narrow
hall and stood still while a scanning light traversed his body. There was a long pause, then the
woman spoke again.
‘My house is a fucking moron!’ Another long pause. ‘You may enter now.’
The scanning light flicked off and the door at the end of the hall opened. Keech walked
through into a luxuriously furnished room that was walled with books. The woman sat at a desk
against one wall with a computer screen switched on before her. She spun round on her chair
and looked him up and down. He in turn inspected her.
She appeared young, but then that could be a matter of choice. She had long black hair in
a plait down her back. Her figure under her toga was lush and running to fat. Her skin had
Hooper leech marks on it and revealed somewhat more of a blue tinge than he had so far seen.
He guessed she had not been eating enough Dome-grown foods to prevent the mutation the
Spatterjay virus could cause. ‘Going native’ was the Hoopers’ way of describing it, and they were
most reticent about the result.

‘Why is your house a moron?’ Keech asked her.
The woman stared at him in open confusion, then after a moment seemed to recover her
senses. She shook her head and stared down at the floor of polished quartz.
‘It thinks all your metalwork is weaponry. Doesn’t realize it’s just to stop you falling
apart.’
She grinned at her little joke.
‘You’re Olian Tay,’ said Keech.
‘Yes I am!’ She leapt to her feet and suddenly had a manic look about her.
Keech watched her silently for a moment, before speaking slowly, enunciating every
word. ‘You need Dome-grown food. You are going native.’
Tay held her arms out in front of herself and inspected them. ‘Pretty blue,’ she said.
‘Very pretty,’ said Keech, then, ‘I won’t take up too much of your time. I just need
information.’
Tay turned and dropped into her seat again. ‘It’s all here; the definitive history of
Spatterjay.’ She waved her hand at the screen. ‘But you have to pay.’
‘I’m a wealthy man,’ said Keech. ‘I’ve had money invested for a very long time.’
Tay shook her head. ‘Money money money.’
She shook her head again then stared up into the corner of the ceiling.
‘What do you want?’ he asked.
‘Hungh?’
‘What do you want, I said?’
Tay’s gaze suddenly fixed on him and her soberness returned. ‘You’re right. I need
supplements.’
She stood and quickly strode across the room to a cabinet. She opened it and took out a
bottle, uncorked it and drank deeply. Draining it completely, she dropped it on the floor, and
then, as if forgetting that she was not alone, she dropped on to a sofa, lay back, and closed her
eyes. The thick smell of garlic permeated the air.
Keech walked to her and stood over her. She opened her eyes and glared at him.
‘Go away,’ she said. ‘Come back in an hour.’
‘Will your house let me back in?’

‘It will. It knows what you are now.’
‘And what is that?’
‘A cop who won’t even let death stop him from making that last arrest.’
Keech nodded and gave an approximation of a smile. He turned away and headed for the
exit, and before he reached it, Tay was already snoring. Taking up his weaponry outside the
house, Keech checked off the time in his aug and decided to look around. His patience had been
centuries long, and in some places was a matter of legend. Another hour or so would make little
difference to his quest. Ten minutes brought him to Tay’s museum of grotesqueries.
At first, Keech thought he was seeing some kind of storage tank half-swamped by dingle.
The thing was cylindrical, about ten metres high and three times that in diameter. There were no
openings visible to Keech in its dull blued-metal surface until he had walked almost past it. Then
he saw an archway nearly concealed by plaits of brown vines which sprouted silvery-green
leaves like hatchet blades. He checked the vines for any lurking leeches, turned on the auxiliary
light on his laser carbine, and then ducked inside, the guard spheres following like mechanical
blowflies. Inside he found he did not need the light on his carbine, as fluorescent light globes
were activated by his presence. For a moment, though, he thought he might need the other
functions of his carbine.
It stood four metres tall and looked like a man who had been stretched on the rack for a
hundred years. It was blue, monstrous, spidery and impossibly thin. Its hands were insectile and
its head was a nightmare. This model - for model it was - seemed like something out of Hindu
demonology. Keech advanced until he was standing right below it, and there gazed down at a
brass plaque set in the floor. The plaque said simply ‘The Skinner’. Keech moved past this weird
exhibit to examine the first of three rows of glass cases.
‘Full Thrall Unit’ read the first plaque, but did not well enough inform of this example of
Tay’s obvious taste for the grotesque. Inside the case was a seated human skeleton with its skull
bowed forwards. The top of the skull had been neatly cut away to show a metal cylinder that had
been driven in through the back of the skull. From this cylinder, metal spines, like bracing struts,
connected all around inside the skull, and from the end a glassy tube curved down into the spine.
The second display showed one of these cylindrical units completely disconnected and mounted
on a wooden pedestal. Further along was a bowed skeleton with a cylinder of grey metal clinging
to the back of the neck vertebrae with its jointed legs. The plaque here described this device as a
‘Spider Thrall Unit’. A touch-plate set into the plastiglass of the case turned the whole case into
a holographic display. Keech recognized ancient scenes from the Prador war - of humans killing
the mindless human ‘blanks’ that were the Prador’s slaves. He moved on to the next item, then
the next. These were all familiar to him as he had been alive at the time of the war, and had
been involved in police actions then. He had held a weapon like this one, he had tried to release
people from slave collars like those, and he had witnessed people dying in precisely that way . . .
The next case contained items that were more esoteric. ‘Ten-Week Viral Mutation’ was
etched into the plaque before a skeleton of a human that had made it halfway to becoming the
monster he had seen on entering this place. ‘Feeding Tongue’ was a pink tubular object
suspended in a jar of clear fluid. There was no other explanation. What else there was in the
case he never discovered, for then something in the third row of cases immediately caught his
avid attention.

‘Jay Hoop’ nicknamed ‘Spatter’.
The man was tall, handsome and saturnine, with black cropped hair and eyes that were
almost black. He was posing in an ancient environment suit, holding a short flack rifle that rested
on one shoulder. The details of the model were perfect, down to the small hook-shaped scar
below his right eye and the semiprecious stones sewn below the neck-ring of the suit. Keech
studied the model long and hard, then moved on to the next in the row of eight cases. He was on
his third circuit of the cases when Tay’s irritated voice spoke from an intercom.
‘Did you come here for information or to gawp? I’d have thought you knew their faces
well enough by now.’
Keech nodded to himself then returned to exit the arch. As he ducked out, he was lost in
thought until something thudded on his shoulder. The leech struck just as he slammed his hand
on it and pulled it away. One of the guard spheres went through the leech in mid-air, cutting it in
half and puffing out a spray of ichor. Stepping away from the arch, Keech triggered his carbine
and with one flash turned the two writhing segments to smoking ash. After a moment, he
reached up and touched his neck. His fingers came away wet with the balm that ran in his veins.
EXTERNAL CUT - MINIMAL: SEALING, came the message from his aug through his visual
cortex. Of course, he felt no pain, just an awareness of the damage done to him.
****
The sand banks and packetworm corals receded into the distance, but still the ship seemed
surrounded by islands. Seated on the stool he had brought out on to the main deck, with his
blunderbuss primed and loaded on his lap, Ambel watched a humped mass of sargassum drift
close past the Treader. On this tangle of rotting stalks and gourd-like bladders, swarmed
creatures like huge circular lice, and the clicking movement of their hard sharp legs could be
clearly heard across the water. It was for these that Ambel had loaded his ‘buss. Nasty-tempered
creatures were prill; Hoopers had been known to lose their lives to them, a rare event in itself.
The crew stood in readiness also. Peck had his pump-action shotgun out of its wrapping of oily
rags and Anne had her automatic. Pland had only a large hammer, and a cauldron lid he used as
a shield. His rifle had exploded the last time they’d had to fight off a swarm of prill, blowing a
lump out of his forearm. He had been very annoyed as he’d liked that rifle. Boris, of course, was
at the helm, but ready to leap across to the deck cannon. And the juniors, those of the crew who
had recently joined the Treader and had yet to become able to afford any armament that was
more effective, waited with pangas and pearwood clubs. The sail had rolled itself up to the
highest spar and was watching proceedings with great, if pensive, interest.
As soon as the smell from the sargassum reached the crew, there was an immediate
relaxing of the tension. The smell of rotting vegetation was strong, but not half so strong as the
smell of putrefying flesh. The prill that had not already fed were in the process of devouring a
large carcass lying tangled in the decaying weed. Ambel stood up to get a better look, and saw
the body of a huge crustacean, something like a lobster, but with more fins and adaptations to
oceangoing life. Its shell had the beautiful iridescence of mother-of-pearl.
‘Glister,’ said Peck, stating the obvious.
‘That shell’d fetch a skind or two,’ said Pland.

‘Nearly as much as a pearl,’ said Peck, giving Ambel a look.
‘You want to go get it?’ asked Anne.
Everybody laughed.
‘All right lads, back to your stations,’ said Ambel. He looked at the sail. ‘You too.’ The sail
unfurled its wings and grasped the spars. The light wind belled it and it turned the rig of the ship
in consonance with Boris’s spinning of the helm, and the mast chains and cogs clunked below.
Ambel went on, ‘Peck and Pland on the harpoons and ropes. You take the nest, Anne. ‘Nother
couple of hours and we’ll be out of this and heading for the feeding grounds, I reckon.’ Ambel
carefully eased down the hammer on his ‘buss and lowered its butt to the deck. The weapon,
which weighed half as much as a man, probably had more firepower than Boris’s deck cannon.
Anne moved to the sail’s head as it came down to the deck. She stepped on to it, grasping the
creature’s neck in her right hand, and it lifted her towards the crow’s nest.
‘Feeding grounds, I’ll be buggered,’ said Boris, mimicking Peck’s tone to perfection. As
she rose past him, Anne laughed then holstered her automatic.
‘Look at it this way,’ said Ambel, addressing them all after hearing the comment. ‘We get
a good haul and we won’t have to go out during all the ice season. It’ll be sea-cane rum and
Dome grub for a six-month.’
‘More like crawling ashore a stripped fish,’ muttered Peck.
Ambel looked at him. ‘Skin feeling a bit loose is it, Peck?’ he asked.
Peck swore at him, but the other senior crew laughed anew. Junior crew were puzzled by
this exchange, so Ambel assumed they had yet to hear Peck’s story. He smiled to himself. It was
always like this before a hunt. The lads would thank him afterwards. When had things ever gone
wrong, he tried to ask himself without irony.
The Treader continued on its course, its sail turning to catch the best of the wind and
muttering about feeding times, and the yellow and brown islands of sargassum slowly sliding
behind it.
****
Skin feeling a bit loose, thought Peck, and the thought made him itch. He scratched himself
whilst gazing back from the rail towards Ambel, as the Captain ducked into his cabin to put away
his blunderbuss. He didn’t know, in fact none of them knew what it was like. He glanced at the
fabric foresail and saw that it had snagged part of the way down its slide.
‘That needs sorting,’ he said to the junior who was helping him, and indicated the
jammed sail. The woman nodded to him and headed for the mast, taking up a hammer from one
of the tool lockers as she went. She quickly climbed the mast and hammered at the slide
mechanism until the lower spar dropped into place, pulling the sail taut. Peck lowered his gaze to
the cabin again and felt the overpowering need to reveal what had been hidden, something that
the Skinner had been about to reveal to him.

Come.
He could feel the call in the marrow of his bones and in the heart of everything he was.
What would it be like to be . . . like that? What secrets were hidden?
‘Those harpoons won’t sharpen ‘emselves, Peck,’ said Pland, in the process of coiling up
one of the harpoon lines as he strolled past. Peck glanced at his fellow crewman and wondered if
he felt it too.
‘Pland, do you—’
‘Peck! Those harpoons won’t sharpen themselves!’ bellowed Ambel as he stepped out of
the forecabin.
Pland grinned at Peck and went to untangle another line. Peck squatted by the rail where
the harpoons were racked.
‘Buggering leech hunt,’ he muttered to himself. The hold was nearly full of barrels of
pickling turbul meat, and they had four full barrels of amberclams which would spoil if they
weren’t back in port within the week. But Ambel always wanted that bit extra before the bergs
started sliding down from the north. Admittedly, they often did well, and because of this were
often in the chair at the Baitman. Their ‘luck’ had even once enabled them to afford a laser, but
with the rocky exchange rate of the skind, they had been unable to afford replacement power
packs for it, so had swapped it for a deck cannon. Luck. Peck snorted - how many times had he
seen Ambel do that pearl trick? Anne and Pland had only been with the Captain for the last thirty
years, so they were not yet wise to his ways. Still grumbling, Peck reached into the pocket of his
long coat and took out his sharpening stone. The harpoon blades weren’t that blunt, so there was
no point unscrewing them to give them a proper going over. Peck ran the back of his hand along
one razor edge until it bit in and there was a brief spurt of blood. Hardly need sharpening at all.
Come . . .
****
Tay was still lying on her couch when Keech walked in and stood before her. He glanced at one
of the chairs opposite her but did not sit until she waved him to it with an irritated gesture.
‘They’re self-cleaning,’ she said.
Keech blinked as his irrigator worked on his eye. It had been his experience that often
people did not like a walking corpse sitting on their furniture.
‘Information,’ she said. ‘I only trade in information.’ She closed her eyes.
‘I don’t know what I can give you,’ said Keech.
‘You know why I know your name,’ she muttered. ‘Give me something unrecorded. Give
me something about the eight that I don’t know.’
Keech was silent for a long while. Eventually he said, ‘Aphed Rimsc killed me and threw
my body into the Klader sewers. It took a week for them to find me, and six months of court

actions after that before they acted on my will and handed me over to the cult. Do you want to
hear about that?’
‘Thoroughly documented. You’d signed up as a member of the cult of Anubis Arisen some
years before. Limitations of mortality, I suspect. There was a legal suit brought to try and prevent
your reification, but the cult backed you all the way. I also know that same suit was brought by
Rimsc himself,’ said Tay. She had less of a blue tinge to her skin now.
Keech went on, ‘Rimsc died when the seal on his spacesuit failed outside the Klader
space habitat. His body wasn’t reclaimed because the resulting blowout flung him towards
Klader. He burnt up in atmosphere before anyone could get to him.’ Tay opened her eyes and
waited. Keech continued, ‘What is not known is why his suit seals failed. They failed because
they were eaten away from the inside, just as he was eaten away inside the same spacesuit.
Somebody put a pressure-activated vessel of diatomic acid in his oxygen supply. When his
oxygen got below a certain level, the vessel opened and flooded his suit with acid vapour. It
must have been a very unpleasant death, especially for a Hooper.’
Tay sat up. ‘There were rumours about it, but nothing was confirmed. You’d been reified
by then hadn’t you?’ she said.
‘Four days,’ said Keech.
Tay smiled. ‘What do you want to know then?’ she asked.
Keech moved over to one of the armchairs and sat. He steepled his bony fingers before
his face and regarded Tay with his single blue eye, as his irrigator sprayed, moistening the eye.
His face was immobile.
‘I know about Rimsc, Corbel Frane, the Talsca twins, Gosk Balem, and David Grenant. I
don’t know what happened to Rebecca Frisk or to Hoop himself. For two hundred years I’ve been
chasing rumours and myths. When they don’t come to nothing, they lead back here. Tell me
what you know.’
Tay looked up to the ceiling. ‘House computer, make a copy of the Rebecca Frisk file to
crystal.’
The computer on the desk beeped and a small crystal popped up out of the
touch-console. Keech glanced across the room at it. His face twitched and his eye irrigator began
working double time.
‘You know it was her and Hoop who started out together. From what I’ve been able to put
together they started as art thieves on Earth. From such little acorns . . .’ explained Tay.
Keech continued to stare at the crystal. ‘Tell me about it,’ he said.
Tay said, ‘Frisk walked into the ECS building in Geneva on Earth and told them who she
was. When this was confirmed she requested a mind wipe, which she was duly given. After that
they gave her a basic overlay personality and she was sent back here. The Friends of Cojan
snatched her halfway and fed her into a zinc smelter.’
Keech sat back. ‘The Friends are still about? They helped me trace Rimsc.’

‘No, they are not still about. This was three hundred years ago. ECS kept a lid on it, but
I’m surprised you didn’t know about it. You were an ECS monitor before you were killed. Surely
you had contacts?’
‘I never bothered much about her. She was the least of them. What about Hoop?’
‘No . . . Now I want something more from you. Tell me about Corbel Frane.’
‘I found him on Viridian, in a castle he had occupied for five hundred years,’ said Keech.
‘He was a living legend there, and it was difficult for me to get to him. The first time I managed
to get through his defences I cut him in half with an industrial shear. His staff sewed him back
together again and he was walking within one solstan year. I didn’t make the same mistake
again. I used junger mercenaries to assault his castle and when he escaped, I pursued him to the
summit of mount Ember. Even an old Hooper cannot survive immersion in magma.’
Tay nodded. ‘I like that,’ she said. ‘You realize I’m recording this meeting.’
‘I didn’t think otherwise.’
‘It doesn’t bother you?’
‘There is no statute of limitations on the things they did, and I am still officially an Earth
Central Security monitor. They were all under sentence of death, whether physical or mental.
Now, what do you know about Hoop?’
Tay abruptly stood and went to the wall cabinet. She removed another bottle of the
substance she had drunk earlier. This time she filled a glass before returning to the sofa with it.
‘Holodrama and VR has them as lovable rogues and dashing pirates. Time will do that to
even the most heinous of villains,’ said Tay as she collected her thoughts.
‘You’re telling me this? Hoop and his crew were murderers and thieves. They used this
world as their base and the immortality the virus here conferred on them, enabled them to
terrorize this whole sector for two centuries. They stole and they killed, and they sold humans to
the Prador cored,’ said Keech. His words were flat, without inflexion.
Tay looked at him carefully. ‘You were on the mission that came here at the end of the
war, weren’t you?’ she asked.
‘I was. And the things we witnessed here have made me what I am. I will not rest until
they are all dead. I will not stop.’
‘So there’s only Hoop for you to get. What happens when you do get him - when you’ve
killed him?’
Keech looked down at the lozenge of metal on its chain around his neck. ‘Option one is
that I die completely,’ he said. ‘I am exploring other options.’
‘That is a changer nanofactory?’ said Tay, pointing at the lozenge.

‘It is. Tell me more about Hoop.’
‘The mission you were on drove Hoop and his crew from here and scattered them. With
their wealth and the experience of a couple of centuries of life, they established themselves in
niches across this sector. The Talsca twins and David Grenant were hunted down and killed by
the Friends of Cojan. It’s believed they were lowered feet-first into boiling water.’ Tay stopped
talking when she saw Keech nodding.
‘I can confirm part of that,’ Keech said. ‘I knew Francis Cojan quite well. He kept a
holocording of the event that he showed me. But I only saw the Talsca twins on that recording. It
took them a long time to die and they died hard.’
‘I see . . . Gosk Balem returned here and died in the sea. Hoopers who were the direct
descendants of slaves the Eight kept here, or were original slaves themselves, threw him into a
leech swarm in Nort sea. That one is well documented. Frane and Rimsc were the ones you
tracked down. Frisk and Hoop fled from the sector and lived on a world in Prador space for fifty
years. That comes from Frisk. She left him there and just went and handed herself over to ECS.
Attack of conscience? There seems no other explanation.’
‘And Hoop? What about Hoop?’
Tay looked at him very directly.
‘Hoop is here,’ she said.
Keech said nothing. He moved not at all.
Tay went on, ‘A hundred and sixty-three years ago a craft was detected by the Warden. It
went into orbit and attempted a sea landing. It was a very old craft. Unfortunately the Segre
atolls got in its way and it crashed. The wreckage was found to be that of the Prador landing
craft Hoop favoured - the craft he called Bucephalus. There was blood in the craft and it was
Hoop’s. There was no trace of Hoop himself.’
‘It is not certain that he is still here then,’ said Keech.
‘It is. No spacecraft have come to Spatterjay since. The only way out is through the
runcible gate on Coram, and the Warden monitors that. Humans might forget criminal activity.
AIs forget nothing.’
‘He could be dead, then?’
‘He might have been injured enough to bleed, which is unusual for an old Hooper, but he
is the oldest Hooper in existence, perhaps a thousand years. What do you think?’
‘Rumours?’
‘I’ve heard a few. Some have it that he is operating as a ship captain. Others have it that
he went native and became something . . . horrible. Have you heard the legend of the Skinner?’
Keech gave a slow nod, remembering the thing in Tay’s museum.

‘The Skinner is a creature that lives on an island and traps any ship Hoopers who land. It
seems the one goal in life of this creature is to strip Hoopers of their skins and leave them to
suffer in agony for months. The story goes that a lone Captain and an off-worlder went to the
island and beheaded the creature, and that this Captain is now said to carry the living head of
the Skinner in a box on board his ship. This way the Skinner can never pull itself back together
sufficiently to cause the pain it once did. Its living body alone would just be that of an animal.
This all happened at the Segre Islands, which have for some time been known as the Skinner’s
Islands.’
‘And this creature, this Skinner, is supposed to be Hoop?’
‘Supposedly. Your best course of action now would be to speak to some of the Old
Captains. Tell them who you really are. They’ll respect that.’
‘Would a Captain Ron be one of the ones I should talk to?’
‘Oh yes, definitely.’
‘And a Captain Ambel?’
‘Yes, he and Captain Ron are two of the oldest.’
‘Original slaves?’
‘So it’s rumoured.’
‘Why aren’t there more of them?’
‘Many left Spatterjay. It’s an interesting world but it has its limitations for people entering
the latter half of a thousand years of life. Many stayed and died. This world is dangerous even
for Hoopers. Many more killed themselves. There’s a poison here manufactured from the
digestive tract of some of the larger leeches. It neutralizes the virus, and acts on the Hooper
body much like that favourite of yours: diatomic acid. A Hooper taking this stuff will come apart
in a matter of minutes - spectacularly.’
Keech stood and gazed towards the door. Then he stared at the data crystal Tay had
made him.
‘If you’ll permit me,’ he said, ‘I’d like to run some searches through your databanks.’
Tay smiled almost hungrily and gestured to her console. ‘Stay as long as you like. I’m sure
there is much more detail you can fill me in on.’
Keech watched her for a moment, then moved over to the console and sat down. He
pressed the data crystal back into place then viewed what it contained on the screen.
Tay stood and walked up to stand behind him. ‘Now,’ she said, ‘describe to me exactly
how it was when Aphed Rimsc killed you.’
****

The woman gazed out across the salt flats to where a plume of dust cut across a range of yellow
sandstone buttes. Soon this plume opened into a line, abruptly terminating as the approaching
transport turned to head in. like most Prador methods of transportation, this vehicle, when
revealed, bore a close resemblance to the passenger or passengers it carried. It was a ridged
teardrop like a spidercrab’s carapace, with antennae and sensor arrays mounted to the fore and
grab claws folded up as ribs underneath. Beyond this, though, the similarities ended. The
transport was bright red and had weapon turrets bulging from the sides. The pictographs of the
Prador language adorned every surface, and this vehicle could really move. Behind it the clouds
of salt crystals rolled on and settled, and as the vehicle came past the demesne, a double sonic
crash shook the crystal windows before the following cloud obscured the view.
The woman turned from the window and for a moment inspected one of her collection of
paintings. This particular canvas depicted a similar scene to the one she had just witnessed, and
it had been painted by the previous resident of this house, being, as far as she knew, nearly a
century and a half old. Next to this was a painting of a man and woman standing on a monolithic
rock and staring out to sea, while things that might have been seagulls circled above them. She
frowned at this picture before moving to the bar, pouring herself a drink, and then heading out on
to the balcony. Here she watched the transport slow and turn. The taste of salt in the air was
sharp on her tongue and she sipped her cool-ice to wash it away. Between two security posts the
shimmer-shield flickered and went out, and the vehicle coasted in over the blue grass lawns and
ornamental ponds. With the rumbling and decreasing whine of thruster motors, it settled by the
ramp provided for Prador visitors. The woman went back inside to her comunit to see if there had
been any communications yet.
‘Councillor Ebulan requesting audience,’ said the voice.
The woman looked at the face of the human blank on the screen and recognized it as one
she had herself provided. She couldn’t remember the female’s name, but then what did it matter
what name you gave a human shell? To the Prador, a blank like this would just have the title
‘Speaker’, as so many did.
‘I’m always glad to see the councillor,’ she said. It would have been impolitic to refuse to
receive him. Even with all her wealth, she was still regarded as a second-class citizen of the
Prador Third Kingdom. She finished her drink and went into her bedroom. There she discarded her
robe and moved to stand before the wall mirror. Still good, after all this time. She had made the
right choice with this body. The subject had been a beautiful woman with just the right
combination of athleticism and femininity. Before coring, she had apparently been the daughter
of an ECS monitor known to that damned Keech. A surprising discovery had been her virginity.
The woman smiled at the memory and went to her wardrobe to select appropriate garb.
Three blanks walked up the ramp before the councillor drifted out. Ebulan was an old
Prador and all his atrophied legs were gone. He was simply a carapace shaped like a flattened
pear with a scalloped rim. Antennae clustered round his fore, and an arc of blood-red spider eyes
arrayed the turret front of what might be called his head. Shell-welded to his underside were the
four polished cylinders of his AG units. Underneath the slow grind of his mouthparts had been
welded the hexagonal control boxes. The woman counted fifteen of them, which meant he
controlled fifteen human blanks. In Prador terms this was a sign of prestige: Ebulan was wealthy
enough to own fifteen cored humans and had the mental strength to run them all, through their
thrall units, simultaneously.
The central blank of the three - the speaker the woman had seen, now clearly identified

by pictographs tattooed on her body - stepped ahead of the other two. The woman noted the
armour on the other two, and the heavy hand weapons they carried. It wasn’t hard to work out
what they were for. Prador adults were meticulous about their personal safety. Prador
adolescents, who were slaves to their parents’ pheromones, and human blanks, had mostly
fought the war.
‘Greetings,’ said Speaker.
‘And to you, Ebulan. It’s been a long time,’ said the woman.
‘What is time?’ Ebulan asked through the mindless speaker.
The woman smiled and fingered the human-skin jacket she wore.
‘Obviously I am honoured by this visit, but I am also curious,’ she said.
‘A social visit,’ said Ebulan, ‘and a small return of favours.’
‘Then please, enter.’
The woman turned and led the way up the ramp. The three blanks followed her. Then
came Ebulan, and after him came three adolescent Prador. Two of these were a twentieth of
Ebulan’s size and each walked on six long legs. Folded underneath each of them were four arms
ending in their hugely complex manipulatory hands, and in front of them were their heavy crab
claws. These sexless creatures were loyal to their masters only while they remained sexless.
Most Prador now used humans rather than their own kin, who were unpredictable and could not
be as loyal as something mindless and under direct control. All high-level Prador like Ebulan had
guards of some kind, since Prador politics was never less than lethal. All of the cored humans
here, but for the speaker, were heavily armed. The third Prador adolescent was much larger than
the others, and his coloration was deep purple and yellow. The woman realized that this one was
not much longer for adolescence but unlikely to attain adulthood. No doubt he was soon due to
have his legs stripped and his shell broken, which was the destiny of most of his kind.
Settled in the room of her demesne especially reserved for Prador visitors, the woman
and Ebulan exchanged pleasantries for as long as it took Ebulan to have his blanks check out the
whole area and position themselves. Once he was satisfied a rival had not predicted the visit,
and no traps were laid, Ebulan settled down on his AG units.
‘Something has occurred,’ said Ebulan through the speaker.
‘Please tell me,’ said the woman.
‘The reification has returned, at last, to Spatterjay.’
The woman sat very still as a thousand memories shrieked for attention. She felt a brief
nausea as her central core went into nerve conflict with the body she had stolen.
‘Does this not interest you, Rebecca?’ asked the councillor,
Rebecca Frisk turned and gazed out of the crystal windows towards the salt flats. Keech always damned Keech. Even after sending her own body, fitted with the brain and spinal column

that had been in this current body, to ECS, she could not be safe while he . . . existed.
‘He’s still alive,’ she stated.
‘I wonder who you mean,’ said Ebulan.
Frisk glared at him. ‘I mean Keech.’
‘Problematical,’ said Ebulan. He shifted on his AG units as if uncomfortable.
Frisk ignored that and stared out of the window again. ‘Eight contracts and a hundred
subcontracts from them, and every one a failure. Two of them were taken up by Batian stone
killers. That bastard almost found out about me when he smeared them,’ she said. She turned to
Ebulan. ‘Does he know about Jay?’
‘This I was not able to determine.’
‘He will.’
****

5
Having the ability to taste one part in a million of fresh ichor in the water, also
possessing the thickest armour and the most efficacious mouthparts of any of the
marine predators there, glisters were rapacious predators and assiduous
scavengers. The four - a female and fertilizing males one to three — descended
from their slimy home underneath a clump of decaying sargassum, and with tails
flicking and flat legs extended as stabilizers, homed in on the delicious taste of
dead or dying whelks, and that slightly hormonal hint of turbul in a feeding frenzy that time in which the big fish became rather careless. The ever-spreading cloud
of broken shell, fragments of flesh and essential juices, had lured to its perimeter
a shoal of boxies, which fed with frenetic determination and a careful eye on the
surrounding depths. As the glisters closed, the boxies fled, but the great
crustaceans weren’t interested in giving chase to them. Instead, they ground and
chattered their mouthparts while contemplating the long meaty bodies of turbul
rolling and feeding on whelks - still oblivious to their surroundings. Leeches now
were also homing in to latch on to turbul for a moment, then ooze away with a
bleeding prize, and even prill were descending from above like flying saucers with
particularly vicious landing gear. And the glisters knew they would have to be
quick, before their potential banquet became a dispersed cloud of floating
canapés.

‘Atoll GCV 1232, beginning census scan,’ said SM13.
‘You only say that to irritate me,’ said Sniper, as they hovered above an atoll like a huge
apple core thrust down into the sea.

‘The Warden’s right, you know,’ said the iron seahorse drone. ‘You’re getting cranky in
your old age.’
‘And you think counting snails is a worthwhile pastime?’
‘No, but it’s amazing what interesting items you can find out here and what they’ll fetch
in the auctions on Coram, and it beats subsumption every time,’ replied Thirteen.
‘I don’t have to be wary of that. I’m a freed drone. I worked off my construction fees and
indenture centuries ago. If I want to become part of the Warden, I can. I don’t want to, yet.’
‘Planting stealth mines on Prador dropbirds was how you paid your way out, as I recollect.
You consider that a worthwhile pastime? Some of us are not so inclined to the martial
occupation. Perhaps you should try subsumption at least once, it’d straighten out a few of your
kinks.’
‘I’ve got kinks?’ Sniper paused for a moment. ‘What interesting items?’
‘Amberclam pearls, fossilized glister shell. I even found a vein of green sapphire once,’
replied Thirteen.
‘You never told me about this before,’ said Sniper.
‘Well, after the trouble I got into through snatching thrall units for you, I thought it best to
keep quiet for a while.’
After a contemplative silence Sniper said, without heat, ‘We gonna count these fucking
snails or what?’
The little drone turned towards Sniper with light glinting in its amber eyes, then it turned
its nose and tilted it in the direction of one side of the atoll.
‘I’ll go this way round and you go the other. We’ll meet on the other side. This is the last
one in sector fifty-two, then we can move on to fifty-three, which should be more interesting.
There’s molly carp there.’
‘Oh joyful day,’ said Sniper. ‘You know why the Warden wants this census?’
‘The way I got it was “A study to assess the long-term impact of runcible heat pollution
and on which to base any future plans for environmental restructuring”.’
‘Make-work,’ said Sniper, drifting down to the surface of the sea and lowering his back
two legs into the water. The scanning probes in his feet now operating, he slowly began to trawl
around the atoll. A subprogram he was running, now counted hammer whelks and catalogued
them according to size and species. Sniper then ran one of his military programs to work out the
minimum size of charge required to smash certain shells and kill their occupants. He did not test
his theories until SMI3 was out of sight. The trail of small underwater explosions the war drone
left behind him was also undetectable. Five hours later, the two drones met on the other side of
the atoll.

‘You know, I don’t get why you came here to work with the Warden,’ said Thirteen, as
they cruised on to pastures new.
‘Easy enough. I wanted to spend time on a Line world like this: more chance of some sort
of action. Nothing’s got out of hand in the Polity for a long time now, and things are boringly
peaceful. The few Separatist actions are normally flattened by ECS agents before there’s any
need to deploy war drones.’
Below them the water was the colour of jade, fractured by the occasional white wake
from some cruising sea leviathan. The sky was a lighter green shading to blue, and steel-grey
clouds held the setting sun as if in a broken pewter vessel. Sniper remembered a day when,
above seas very like this, he had been engaged in hunting down two inferior Prador war drones.
They had been of old utile design: just flattened spheres of armour wrapped around an AG unit, a
mind, and magazines for the antipersonnel guns they had welded underneath. Such was the way
of things: when a technology had been taken to its limit of efficiency and utility, you could make
it look pretty. This flying brooch next to him was definitely one of the latest examples of that. But
those Prador war drones had not reached that point.
Still with a feeling of satisfaction, Sniper remembered catching both Prador drones
against the cliff face where they had been hiding. He had spent an hour carefully herding them
until he could take them both out with one high-penetration missile. Of course, no one but
himself had appreciated the poetry of that moment. The humans and big-fuck AIs running the
clean-up operation had posited it as yet another example of Sniper’s flagrant individualism
during organized conflict. Sniper had always been the odd one out - from when his mind had
been incepted by a dying AI warship, up to and including his choice of a body-shape that scared
the shit out of most humans.
‘You’re ugly inside and out, AI,’ said a man who had been passing information to the
Prador, just before Sniper had snipped his head off.
‘Remembering the good old days?’ said Thirteen.
‘Yeah,’ said Sniper, and then began to hum a tune.
‘What’s that?’ asked Thirteen.
‘“Ugly Duckling”,’ said Sniper then, gesturing ahead with its heavy claw, continued, ‘That
one ain’t on the map.’
Surrounded by white water was a grey atoll poking out of the sea like the head of a man
tilted to one side.
‘Shit,’ said Thirteen.
Out of habit, Sniper studied the little drone to try and read its expression, but obviously to
no effect. That use of an expletive had been very un-submindish, but then SM13 had not been
subsumed by the Warden for quite a while, the last time being when it had been caught
snatching thrall units from the shore of one of the Segre Islands. Contemplating this, the war
drone followed Thirteen down when it changed course to sweep in around the atoll.
‘Packet-worm coral,’ said the little drone. ‘Must have been shoved up in the last year.’

The edifice had the appearance of something on the facia of a Hindu temple, only subtly
distorted until nothing was recognizably complete, just a wormish depiction of indefinable life:
limbs and bodies chaotically tangled in organic stone.
‘This mean another census?’ asked Sniper.
‘It does. We have to count whelks around every above-surface structure - that’s what the
Warden said.’
‘Great, I really look forward to it.’
‘Of course,’ said Thirteen, a laser projecting from its neck ridges to flash a gridded
overlay on areas of the atoll, ‘this structure is unstable. You note how top-heavy it is and how the
sea is wearing through that edge lower down?’
‘Yeah, I see it,’ said Sniper.
‘Not long before it collapses back into the sea, really.’
Sniper tilted in midair, smiled, and spat two cylinders from his square mouth. The
cylinders slammed downwards drawing black lines through the air, and hit into the sea under the
edge of the atoll. Underneath, the sea was lit by two deep-red detonations before spuming into
the air in a globular cloud. The atoll lurched sideways and with a growing hiss it slid into the
waves. Water flooded into the remaining hollow and all around the sea went opaque with
disturbed silt.
‘Now that is what I call environmental restructuring,’ said Thirteen.
‘Drone bonding, as I neither live nor breath,’ said Sniper, and they flew on.
****
Erlin leant on the rail shading her eyes against the green sunlight as she studied the distant
shapes on the sea. When she heard someone come up behind her, she expected to see Captain
Ron - but it was Janer. She checked to see if he was carrying his weapon, since she’d found, over
the short period they had been on board, that he tended to forget it. He grinned at her, drew his
QC laser from his utility belt, spun it round his forefinger, and then holstered it again. She shook
her head and gazed out to sea.
‘Here,’ he said, ‘try this.’ He handed her an image-intensifier from the other side of his
belt. She studied the device, noting that it had auto-tracking lenses and a magnification setting
beyond anything she would be likely to use. She nodded her thanks and brought the device up to
her eyes.
The nearest shape on the sea Erlin identified at a glance as a large clump of sargassum all decaying arm-thick stalks, translucent bladders, and wadded yellow sheets of foliar material.
Centering on the next shape out, she targeted it for the intensifier’s auto-tracking, and focused
on it - the intensifier now automatically correcting for shake. This shape was another clump of
sargassum, but moored to it was a ship. After a moment of study, she lowered the intensifier, the
chameleon-eye lenses whirring as they tried to keep the distant sargassum centred, and handed

it back to Janer. Janer clicked it off and held it in his right hand as he leant his elbows on the rail.
‘Any luck?’ he asked.
‘There’s a ship out there, but it’s not the Treader. It’s two-masted and a bit smaller.
Perhaps they’ll know exactly where it is,’ she replied, then turned to Captain Ron, who stood up
on the forecabin watching them, and pointed out the distant ship. Ron nodded and gave
instructions to his helmsman and to the sail. The sail muttered imprecations as it twisted its
body on the spars to match the rapid spinning of the helm. It seemed as if there was some kind
of ongoing competition between the helmsman and the creature. As the ship quickly heeled over,
Janer studied the sail as it performed its duties, the movable spars and mast clonking in their
greased sockets. He realized now that there were both fixed and movable spars that the creature
utilized, and earlier he had been shown the mechanisms that moved the two other masts: long
hardwood chains and hardwood sprockets, cog wheels and shafts running in bronze bearings.
When he’d asked the junior greaseboy why their ships didn’t have engines, the man had looked
at him as if he’d gone quite mad.
‘Why are they so low-tech here?’ he asked Erlin. ‘I mean ... I haven’t seen a single aug,
wrist comp . . . anything. Everything’s made of wood, solid metals, hide and organic fibres. Are
they tech breakers, New Luddites, or what?’
Erlin turned and studied the ship as if seeing it for the first time. ‘Money,’ she explained.
‘This is an Out-Polity world so doesn’t qualify for any assistance other than free medicare, but
that’s mostly not needed, and for reasons I don’t have to explain to you.’
Janer nodded. He’d not be forgetting that fight between Domby and Forlam for a long
time.
Erlin went on, ‘There’s also very little industry here, because there’s so few places to site
it and no easily accessible resources, and because of that this place is poor. You already know
what the exchange rate is with the skind. What we could buy for small change, a Hooper has to
work for months to acquire.’
‘Yes,’ said Janer. ‘You said something before about how difficult it is for them to leave
this place: they have to work for years to buy passage.’
‘And that’s the only reason. I don’t think the rumours of Polity suppression are true.’
Janer regarded her questioningly.
‘It’s been said that the Polity is scared of Hoopers,’ continued Erlin. ‘That ECS prevents
technological growth here, and makes it difficult for Hoopers to leave.’
‘Plausible though. Keech was saying about how much damage they could do off-planet if
they felt so inclined,’ said Janer.
‘True,’ Erlin nodded. ‘But an AI like Earth Central wouldn’t look upon them as an unhuman
threat. It certainly doesn’t look at Golem and boosted or augmented humans that way. Its usual
recourse is to recruit them.’
‘Hooper monitors; what a thought.’

‘No doubt an option that’s been contemplated. No, the reasons are mainly fiscal, and I’d
also say that ECS hasn’t tried to change that simply because noninterference is the safest option.
Trying to shove a culture up the technological ladder mostly leads to social and environmental
catastrophe. That lesson was learnt on Earth centuries ago.’
‘So they’re in a trap here?’ said Janer.
‘We might think so, but I don’t think they do. When the Polity finally reached here two
and a half centuries ago, a ground-base was immediately established, but the Hoopers have
been in no hurry to take advantage of the technologies on offer. They’re poor, but seem happy
enough.’
Janer nodded, reflecting on how that was always the blinkered view of the wealthy. He
glanced about at the few crew-members as they went about their tasks.
‘What sort of money do they earn?’
Erlin nodded towards Roach. ‘Your average senior seaman like Roach there gets about
two hundred skind as his share of a three-month trip out, and only then if the trip proves a
profitable one. That being said, they can buy the technology.’
‘So,’ said Janer, calculating, ‘something like a wrist comp, something your average
autohandler tech could buy for ten New Carth shillings, maybe an hour’s wages, would cost a
Hooper three months’ wages.’
‘Not quite, they can get them cheaper here: about a hundred skind,’ said Erlin.
‘Still a lot of money to them. What about the Captains? What do they earn?’
‘Their share is two to three times as much. Though even then they don’t seem inclined to
spend the money on Polity tech. Ambel could quite easily afford something like that.’ Erlin
nodded at the QC laser holstered at Janer’s belt. ‘He doesn’t bother though. He sticks with a
huge muzzle-loading weapon like a portable cannon. I’ve never really understood why.’
With the conversation turned to Ambel, Janer contemplatively studied Erlin’s profile. ‘Why
so desperate to find this Ambel?’ he asked.
‘I’m not desperate. If I don’t run into him on this trip I’ll head back to the Dome and wait
for him to turn up. It’s just a decision I’ve made,’ said Erlin tightly.
She glanced at him and he shrugged, bringing the intensifier up to his eyes. Obviously
this was a subject Erlin did not want to pursue.
‘There’s things that look like crabs running about all over that weed,’ he said.
‘Prill,’ she replied. ‘If we get attacked by them you’d best get below.’
‘Really,’ said Janer. Not being reckless was one thing, but he’d be damned if he was
going to spend all his time quivering in his cabin. That wasn’t life.

Erlin watched him as he rehung the intensifier at his belt, before reaching up to the
shaped transparent box on his shoulder. He gave the box a tug and it came free. With care not to
rattle about the two hornets inside, he lowered the box to the rail then ran his finger along the
side. The box flipped open. Erlin could not help feeling horrification as the two hornets took off.
She watched them fly and hoped they did not try to land on her. She looked at Janer queryingly.
‘The mind wants a look around,’ he explained.
One hornet shot off over the sea while the other buzzed around the ship. The crew
ignored the insects yet the sail was instantly curious; raising its head from the deck and tracing
the progress of the hornet that had remained with the ship.
‘Knowing that insects don’t live long here I wonder why the mind had you come,’ said
Erlin.
‘Now there’s a question,’ said Janer.
‘One, I take it, that you asked?’
‘Oh yes. I ask the mind all sorts of questions, and in return I get all sorts of answers. Not
always the answers I’m after, though.’
‘Could these hornets be . . . different?’ Erlin asked.
Janer was thoughtful for a moment as he gazed in the direction of the hornet that had
flown off over the sea.
‘They don’t live very long as individuals,’ he said. ‘These two are new ones - replaced
before they should have been.’ He tilted his head and listened. Erlin did not interrupt the unheard
conversation that was obviously taking place. After a moment, he turned to her again.
‘Altered,’ he said.
Erlin nodded. Hive minds had no compunction about such things. There were stiff
penalties for killing hornets, but they did not apply to minds killing their own hornets. This would,
after all, be like imposing a penalty on a human for killing a few of his own brain cells. She
looked at the hornet buzzing round the ship and noted how much attention the sail was still
giving it.
‘The crew know about hornets, but the sail doesn’t,’ she said.
‘It will learn,’ said Janer, uninterested, as he again took his intensifier from his belt and
raised it to his eyes.
Later that day the sail did learn, when it snapped at the passing hornet. It howled and
rolled itself up to the top of the mast. The crew spent the rest of the day trying to coax it down
again.
****
This time, the humped shape in the water was no drifting mass of sargassum, but a living

creature in search of prey. It was ten metres long and, judging by its girth of only a couple of
metres, it had not fed in some time. On its glistening ribbed back rode prill as hungry as itself.
Theirs was a parasitic relationship. When the giant leech attached to prey, the prill swarmed on
to it as well to slice off lumps of meat with their sickle legs. When the leech had fed and was
therefore unlikely to pursue more prey, the prill went in search of another mount. Ambel had his
blunderbuss resting on his shoulder as he gazed out at the creature. The rest of his crew had
armed themselves again.
‘Bugger ain’t picked us up,’ said Peck, and immediately the leech turned and started
heading for the Treader.
‘I wish you’d keep your bloody mouth shut,’ said Boris, rolling one end of his walrus
moustache between forefinger and thumb, before taking a firmer grip on the helm.
‘We may as well take this one,’ said Ambel. ‘It’s not going to leave us alone.’
His crew-members looked up at him dubiously, then Anne and Pland crouched to unstrap
the five-metre harpoons from where they were attached below the rail. Peck went over to the
opposite rail where Pland had hung the neatly coiled ropes, and came back with a couple. He
attached one end of each coil to one of the rings set in the deck. The other ends of the ropes
Pland and Anne shackled to the harpoons. Boris heeled the Treader over and the leech drew
closer. The prill leapt about excitedly on the monstrous creature’s back.
‘Pland, up here at the helm!’ Ambel shouted. Pland dropped the harpoon he had been
weighing and scuttled to obey. Boris released the helm to him and quickly moved to the deck
cannon. Glancing farther along the deck, Ambel shouted, ‘Gollow, send the young ‘uns below.
Could get a bit frantic up here!’ He watched as the junior crewman did his bidding, then frowned
as he and Sild returned to the deck. Their contracts had them down as working twenty years on
the boxy boats and only a few years out on harvester ships like his own. He considered sending
them below as well, then rejected the idea. They’d learn harsh realities soon enough.
‘Keep us just ahead, nice and easy,’ Ambel said, hefting his blunderbuss and sighting it
on the back of the leech. The crash of the ‘buss was shockingly loud and it released a great gout
of smoke. Three prill exploded into fragments. Others fell from the back of the leech then swam
to catch up with it.
‘Boris!’ Ambel bellowed, and the deck cannon bellowed in reply. More prill flew to pieces
and more fell in the sea. There were, however, still plenty left clinging to the back of the leech,
and it had slowed not at all. Ambel carefully rested his ‘buss against the rail before climbing
down to the lower deck and taking up one of the harpoons. He looked up at Pland and nodded.
Pland steered the ship into the path of the leech and the sail, at his nod, turned itself out of the
wind and hauled in the reefing cables for the fabric sails. The Treader slowed. With a couple of
thrashes of its long flat tail the leech was up beside the ship, and there was a grating
engine-sound as it tried to take a lump out of the hull. Ambel knew that it would rapidly lose
interest, and either dive or swim away. He leant over the side and stabbed half the length of the
five-metre harpoon into its body. Held out his hand for another, then another. Before any of the
prill could clamber on to the deck, he had put five harpoons into the leech so it stood no chance
of escaping. When it tried to rear up out of the water, Peck and Ambel drew the harpoon ropes
taut so it could rise no higher than the side of the ship.
After lashing the helm, Pland looked down as one prill clattered on to the deck. The

creature was the size of a dinner plate and had ten sickle legs sprouting from underneath it. Eyes
like red LEDs zipped around the edge of its carapace as it crouched for its next leap. Pland
snorted, and leapt before it could. His hobnail boots came down squarely on top of it, collapsing
it underneath him with a liquid crunch. Its spread legs quivered against the wood as he stepped
away knocking the mess from his soles. The next prill to leap aboard landed right in front of him.
He booted the creature towards Anne, who shot it once. The hollow-point bullet made just as
much mess as Pland’s boots, but by then the sailor did not need his boots as he had grabbed
hold of his hammer and cauldron lid and could do some real damage. Peck was taking the prill at
the rail with his pump-action shotgun. Ambel just used his fists and feet, and soon had a morass
of prill insides and shattered carapaces all about him. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw
Gollow and Sild standing back to back, thwacking at prill with their pangas. They seemed to be
doing well enough. The sail had rolled to the top of the mainmast and was keeping a wary eye on
proceedings. All the crew made certain no prill made it to the mast, as the sail would flee if the
horrible creatures started to climb toward it.
‘Ah yer bugger!’ was the limit of Pland’s exclamation when a prill jammed one of its
sickle legs into his thigh. He knocked it down on to the deck and, before it could recover, kicked
the creature into the rail where Ambel got it on the rebound and stamped it to slurry - before
turning to another balancing on the rail and punching it from the ship. Just then, Boris had
managed to reload the deck cannon and fire. The shot fragmented another load of the creatures
on the back of the leech.
‘Ahah!’ Boris yelled and frantically set about ramming another powder charge down the
spout, followed by handfuls of stones.
‘We’re winning, lads!’ Ambel yelled as he chased another creature down the deck and
jumped on top of it.
‘Boris! You bloody idiot!’ yelled Pland.
‘What!’ shouted Ambel, turning from another pool of quivering slurry.
‘He got two o’the ropes!’ yelled Pland.
Ambel turned toward the rail just as the spout-like head of the leech lifted into sight. This
head was just a long tube with a metre-wide mouth at the end. Inside the mouth was a red hell
of revolving rings of teeth and reels of chitinous cutting-disks.
‘Oh bugger,’ said Ambel as the top half of the leech oozed over the rail and went after
Anne. Anne leapt back and the leech cornered her against the wall of the forecabin. There was
real fear on her face. This was something no Hooper could survive. With her automatic held out
in both hands, she emptied the weapon’s magazine into the leech’s mouth, shell cases clattering
to the deck around her feet. Shortly after the empty magazine hit the deck and she was groping
at her belt for another one, sure she would have no chance to reload.
‘I’m coming!’ yelled Ambel. Anne saw him behind the leech with a harpoon in his hands.
The weapon came down in an arc behind the creature’s head just as it reached for her. The point
of the weapon went through. She saw it pass through the grinding mouth, out through the bottom
of the head, and punch through the solid deck timbers as she slapped her second magazine into
place. The leech heaved against the harpoon and the timbers creaked, but by then Ambel had
another harpoon, then another. By the time he was finished, the part of the leech that had oozed

over the rail had been stapled to the deck with three harpoons. With shaking hands Anne
recocked her weapon and quickly moved away from the cabin wall.
‘Thanks,’ she said to Ambel.
‘Think nothing of it,’ the Captain told her.
The last of the prill were those that had been knocked off the back of the leech earlier.
Boris sank most of them before they even reached the Treader and Peck continued to pick off the
rest. Pland went below decks and came back with a knife half a metre long, a bar of the same
length with flat pads at each end, some sets of hooks, and crampons. Behind him came the four
juniors who had been sent below earlier. They gazed about themselves at the mess on the main
deck, at the huge pinioned leech, and nervously fingered their clubs and pangas. Peck, while
reloading his shotgun with cartridges, glanced at them, then with a shout and a gesture directed
their attention to the rail locker containing the mops and brooms.
Pland and Ambel tied the crampons on their feet, and using these and the hooks, climbed
down along the slippery body of the leech to where it was widest. In true pirate fashion, Ambel
carried the knife clamped between his teeth. When the two of them reached their destination,
the rest of the crew moved to the rail to watch. Peck kept his attention on the water around the
great body, just in case any prill had been missed.
When Pland was firmly secure with his hooks, Ambel raised the knife and brought it down
to drive it deep into the glistening flesh he stood upon. The leech bucked and writhed, but could
not throw him as he held on to the handle of the knife and steadily pulled it back. In moments he
had opened a gash three metres long, to expose the leech’s innards. Pland quickly dropped into
the gash and braced it open with the bar. Ambel passed the knife down to him and looked up at
the spectators.
‘Where’s the rope then, y’slugs!’ he bellowed.
Gollow left his mop against the rail and scurried to get a coil of rope and hurled one end
down to them. The other end he tied to one of the deck rings. Anne stood over him as he did this,
then, satisfied with his knot tying, returned her attention to the sea. Pland, meanwhile, was
industriously hacking away with his knife. After a little while he reached up out of the gash and
Ambel placed the end of the rope in his hand. He took this and disappeared for a while longer.
‘Move it, laddy,’ said Ambel, just then noticing a glistening hump out at sea, turning and
heading in their direction.
‘Ready,’ said Pland.
Ambel reached down and hauled Pland out by his gore-soaked jacket. They retrieved their
tools and quickly climbed back on to the ship. Once on deck, Ambel reached over the side and
pulled the harpoons still imbedded in the body of the leech. The barbs tore out great lumps of
flesh, but it seemed as if Ambel was merely pulling corn stalks. He then pulled the harpoons
from the deck and the leech slid over the side, all the fight gone out of it.
‘Sail!’ Ambel yelled.
The sail unfolded and spread its wings, gripped spars and cables and with much

ratchetting and clacking, unreefed the fabric sails and turned the rig into the wind. The ship
slowly began to move. The rope Gollow had secured grew taut and the ship shuddered as the
leech struggled on the end of it. Abruptly the rope went slack and they left the maimed leech
behind. The second leech quickly closed in on it, the prill leaping up and down on its back in
anticipation.
‘Haul it in,’ said Ambel, and the crew got on with what he could have easily done himself.
On the end of the rope was something bulky, soon revealed, as they hauled it up the side of the
ship, as a greenish fringed organ with the end tied off with the rope, and veins hanging from it
like string.
‘That’s a good un,’ said Ambel with a grin, as the leech’s bile duct sagged over the rail
and flopped on to the deck. Then he looked contemplatively out across the sea. ‘No more today.
Get the deck cleaned and we’ll sort it in the morning.’
The reply to this was a concerted sigh of relief.
****
The sun had become a green dome nested in turquoise clouds on the horizon and the
temperature was dropping very quickly. As he went to his cabin to find his thermal suit, Janer
saw that no one else on the ship seemed to notice this cooling. The hornets were torpid in this
cold, but the Hive link was alive with speculation and interest. The main part of the Hive, and
hence the Hive mind, was many light years away on a planet that remained constantly warm and
comfortable for the insects. It was a world the hornets had claimed as their own and given the
simple name of Hive. People occasionally made the crack that it would be better referred to as
New Israel - while other people often asked them what they were talking about.
‘I would say that they were once lovers and that she has come back to renew their
relationship. Beyond that I have no idea,’ said Janer in reply to the mind’s question.
‘But surely this must stem from dissatisfaction?’
‘Yes, of course.’
‘But Erlin has heretofore led a most interesting and satisfying life,’ said the mind.
‘How can you know that?’
‘I have studied records of her travels and the places to which she has been, and this place
is only one of many. She has been at the forefront of xeno-studies for more than a century and
has made many important discoveries.’
‘All you’ve told me,’ said Janer, ‘is that she has led an interesting life.’
Thankfully the mind remained silent for a while, so he took the opportunity to pull on his
thermal suit.
When it spoke again the mind spoke with less certainty. ‘Interesting does not equate to
satisfaction?’ it asked.

‘Perhaps it does to you, but that is not necessarily the case with humans. I think you hit
the nail when you said she’s been at the forefront for more than a century, she’s probably bored,
looking for something she thought she once had, trying to return to a happier time.’
‘I see,’ said the mind. ‘It is said that the human condition is one of striving. This then is the
case. Success does not equate to satisfaction.’
Janer had gone at this discussion from every angle since he had been indentured to this
mind. It knew all his answers, but he had yet to know all its questions. It kept asking them in
different ways to try and gain a further nuance of understanding. He noted the change of
‘interest’ to ‘success’.
‘Satisfaction, for us, is only a brief thing. The man who acquires wealth does not reach a
point where he has enough. Success for us is more like acceleration than speed. Interest cannot
be maintained at a constant level.’
Let it wrap its antennae round that one, Janer thought. But the mind was quick with a
reply.
‘You cannot stop, then?’ said the mind.
‘No,’ said Janer. ‘Except to die.’ He climbed the ladder back up on to the deck.
On the other ship, lanterns and braziers had been lit and the smell of roasting meats was
drifting tantalizingly across the sea to them. As the sun finally drowned behind the horizon, the
pale orb of Coram slowly became visible through thin cloud, and everything turned to shades of
green and silver blue.
‘You ready?’ Erlin asked him as he moved to the rail to stand between her and Captain
Ron. Janer nodded, and watched Ron as the Captain snorted in the air and licked his lips.
‘I smell roasting turbul, boiling hammer whelk and, best of all, I smell barbecued glister.
Captain Drum lays on a good spread for his guests.’ Ron looked at Janer. ‘I’ll bet he’s got a barrel
of sea-cane rum on board as well.’
Janer grinned at that and ignored the muttering that came over the Hive link.
Roach and two other crewmen lowered a rowing boat to the sea then quickly scrambled
down a rope ladder to get into it. Ron turned to another crewman who had come out on deck.
‘Keep an eye on things, Forlam. I don’t want us back drunk to a shipload of prill.’
‘Aw, Captain,’ Forlam protested.
Janer studied him. He appeared perfectly fit and able only days after having half his hand
cut off and his intestines pulled out.
‘You do it, Forlam,’ said Ron. ‘I lost money on you this time and I reckon we might have to
go after sprine to compensate.’
There was a sudden silence after this comment.

‘Is that a good idea?’ asked Erlin, eventually.
‘Probably not,’ said Ron, turning to the rope ladder and clambering down.
‘What’s sprine?’ Janer asked Erlin before she followed Ron down to the boat.
Quickly Erlin said, ‘What’s most valuable on a planet is what’s most rare. Think about
Forlam and what happened to him.’
Janer halted where he was for a moment while he put the question to the Hive mind.
Hopefully he would get a straight answer from it.
‘OK, what’s most valuable here,’ he whispered.
‘I would have thought that obvious,’ replied the mind.
‘Well it isn’t to me. What is it?’
‘Death.’
Janer climbed down to the boat, sat down, and gazed over the side at the oil-dark water.
Glisters and prill bedamned.
‘Death,’ he said to Erlin.
Erlin turned and looked at him. She said, ‘Sprine is a poison that can kill Hoopers very
quickly. As such it is the most valuable substance on the planet to them.’
Janer nodded in agreement. He was old enough to understand the reasoning behind that.
What he wondered about was the reluctance of the crew to go in search of it.
‘Where does sprine come from?’ he asked the mind, for some reason not wanting to ask
these questions out loud with Captain Ron sitting so near.
‘It comes from the bile ducts of giant leeches,’ the mind replied.
‘Giant? What, like those ones I saw the other day?’
‘Bigger than that. They can grow up to thirty metres long in the sea.’
Janer gazed at the sea again and shook his head. It occurred to him that in some
situations the weapon on his belt would be of no use whatsoever.
****
The remarkable hostility of the life forms he found, wherever he managed to land his scooter,
was at first a source of amazement to Keech, but it was now becoming a source of extreme
irritation. It was not that he had any physical need to rest or cook himself something to eat.
What he had was a mental need to stop and take stock; to consider his future moves from a still
point. It seemed to Keech that there were no still points on Spatterjay.

Then he saw the rock glinting silver in the light of the moon. The edifice of stone looked
like a tower block displaced from a city into the sea. It stood a hundred metres above the waves:
a monolith of dark stone, flat-topped and sheer-sided. When he checked the map on his screen
he saw that the icon representing himself was now almost upon the ‘Big Flint’. He turned his
scooter towards it and boosted higher into the air. Here, through his aug, he initiated a
light-intensifier program - he did have the option of infrared, but there was no need for that in
the light of Coram. Around the rock’s base, he could see the usual clusters of frog whelks and
prill on steep beaches of flaked stone and shell. In the surrounding sea, leeches glistened in
weed-choked water. As he drew closer he saw that the stone of this edifice was indeed a deep
glossy black, and felt almost appalled at what this must mean: for a piece of flint this size to
form out of chalk beds would take an unimaginable period of time. There was nothing like this on
Earth.
Through his aug, he spat a very specific question at the local server. ‘How much longer
than Earth has Spatterjay had life?’
‘One point seven billion solstan years - approximate.’
Keech absorbed that as he circled the Big Flint. After two circuits he slowly, observantly,
brought his scooter in to land.
Pink shapes were gathered on the flat top of the monolith and a hundred heads on top of
long necks turned to watch him as he approached. He hesitated to land in a clear area to one
side of this gathering, until he drew closer. He then recognized these creatures as the strange
sails the ship Hoopers used. As far as he was aware, these creatures were harmless, so he
landed.
A hundred pairs of infernal eyes glinted at him in the darkness but, beyond this
observation, the sails showed no immediate reaction to him. He studied them more closely. They
were big; their bodies, with spined wings folded around and behind them, stood at well over two
metres and probably massed the same as at least three humans, and their ribbed necks and long
flat heads stretched another three metres above that. Below their bodies were splayed large
six-fingered foot-talons with which they gripped the rock to hold them secured against the wind.
Their necks swayed in that wind like stalks of grass, and the heads that topped them were
vaguely crocodilian with perhaps just a hint of praying mantis. Keech supposed that these
creatures had as much trouble as did he when they landed anywhere lower, hence their
occupation of the top of this rock. Also it explained their arrangement with the ship Hoopers. He
put them out of his mind and thought about what he must do next.
He must get to talk to one of the old ship captains, and to do that he must either return to
the Dome or seek one out here. Obviously these captains were reticent about their dealings with
Hoop, or rather the creature he had become, else Tay would have known more, or at least been
certain of her facts. He needed a friendly captain, then, and the nearest he had to that was
Captain Ron - or perhaps, through Erlin when she found him, Captain Ambel. In his aug, Keech
loaded four names into a standard search program and uploaded it to the local server. The
immediate response was two unknowns for the Captains, and the two last-known locations of
Janer and Erlin. He dumped this information, then reached out to his touch-console and put the
satellite comlink online. The connection was suspiciously quick and confirmed for him who was
curious about his activities.

‘How may I help you. Monitor Keech?’ asked the voice of Warden.
Before Keech could reply, a shuffling movement amongst the sails distracted him. All the
heads had turned inward to one of their number; one that appeared bigger than the rest. He kept
half an eye on them as he replied to the AI.
‘I’m trying to get in contact with Erlin Tazer Three Indomial, who at present is out on one
of the Hooper ships.’
‘Erlin Tazer Three Indomial does not carry a personal transponder at this time, and has
not filed intended destinations with me,’ came the reply.
‘How about Janer Cord Anders. He is with her at the moment.’
‘Janer Cord Anders does not carry a personal transponder either, and likewise has not
filed intended destinations with me.’
Keech paused for a moment, realizing, by the characterless tone, that he was not in direct
contact with the Warden itself, but that it obviously had one of its subminds monitoring his
transmissions. He was not sure if this was any more reassuring.
‘Janer Cord Anders is indentured to a Hive mind. Would it be possible to get in contact
with him through his Hive link?’ he asked.
‘Hive links are for privileged use only. I can put you in communication with the Hive
concerned, but it is up to that entity how you might proceed from there.’
‘Please do so.’
There was a pause and a strange buzzing issued from the com-link. During this pause,
Keech observed the bigger sail leave the group and begin to waddle over to him. The observing
heads of the others were swaying from it to him like spectators at a tennis match.
‘Yes,’ said an echoey buzzing voice from the link.
‘My name is Keech. I travelled with one Janer Cord Anders for a short time then recently
lost contact with him. I’m trying to get in contact with him again. Can you tell me his present
location?’
‘I could,’ said the Hive mind.
Keech hesitated for a moment, trying to work out what to say next. The sail creature was
only a few metres away from him. He drew his pulse-gun and rested it in his lap, as he had
recently returned the guard spheres to their case for recharging.
‘What is his present location?’ he asked.
‘I want something in return,’ said the mind.
‘And what would that be?’

‘On the next shuttle from Coram a package will be arriving for Janer. I wish you to pick it
up. When you have this package, I will give you his location at that time.’
‘What is in this package?’
‘This is none of your concern.’ The buzzing ceased and the link with mind clicked off.
‘You’re on our rock,’ said the sail, now looming over Keech.
Keech just stared up at the creature. He’d heard a little about sails, but not that they
were sentient. When he had been here before, there had been no ships and the sails had only
ever been distant shapes in the sky. As this sail now glanced back to its fellows, he noticed that
it had a silvery aug on the side of its head. He didn’t know quite what to make of that.
‘You’re on our rock,’ said the sail again, louder this time.
‘I take it you don’t want me here,’ said Keech.
‘That’s right,’ said the sail, nodding its head.
‘Then I’ll leave,’ said Keech.
‘Last human come here I chucked him over the side,’ said the sail.
‘A bit drastic, don’t you think?’
‘He thought so,’ said the sail. ‘Climbed back up and threw a rock at me.’
More evidence of the indestructibility of Hoopers.
‘What happened then?’ asked Keech.
‘Threw him off again and he buggered off,’ said the sail, nodding its head. It squatted
down with a slight sigh and tilted its head to one side. ‘You smell wrong,’ it said.
‘That’s because I’m dead.’
‘Dead?’ asked the sail, then, ‘But dead is . . . dead.’
‘I am a reification,’ said Keech.
The sail tilted its head and its eyes crossed slightly. ‘Oh,’ it said, obviously having
accessed its aug for information on the subject. A sudden thought occurred to Keech.
‘If you don’t mind me asking, how old are you?’
‘Dunno,’ replied the sail.
‘Did you know a human called Hoop?’
‘Yeah,’ said the sail. ‘He bounced.’

Keech just stared at it, and seemingly having made its point it rose up again, turned, and
waddled away from him. This sail then was at least seven hundred years old and could be ten or
a thousand times that. Keech holstered his gun and engaged the scooter’s AG. Soon he was back
in the air and heading for the Dome.
****
Captain Drum was another big thickset man like Ron, though he had a full head of hair that he
tied into a ponytail. He ebulliently welcomed them on board and told them to tuck into the food
provided. Over a large brazier, Janer noted a large lobster-like sea creature strapped to a metal
frame. It was moving as they roasted it, and making low gobbling sounds.
‘Not like a boxy,’ he said to Erlin.
‘Some creatures have evolved defences against the leeches. A leech cannot get through a
glister’s shell. Glisters in fact feed on leeches,’ she replied.
‘Do they have the virus in them?’
‘No, they’ve evolved in such a way as to exclude it. I think it’s connected to the fact that
the fibres normally only enter through wounds, and they don’t get wounded too often. Their
shells are very thick, and anything that’s going to break through is going to kill the creature.’
‘Why didn’t they kill this one before cooking it?’ Janer asked. The sound the glister was
making was beginning to make him feel a little ill. He accepted the mug proffered by one of
Drum’s crewmen and took a gulp. His eyes didn’t water this time. He took another gulp.
‘Glisters have psycho-active chemicals in their mouths and brainpans. The only way to kill
one, other than by roasting, is to smash its skull. Doing so releases these chemicals into its
flesh. Hoopers only kill glisters that way when they really want a party,’ said Erlin.
‘I think I’ve lost my appetite,’ said Janer.
‘That’s not the worst of it,’ said Erlin, pointing.
A cauldron had been set over a wide brazier filled with glowing charcoal. Fishy steam
drifted from this receptacle, and peering through that steam were many stalked eyes. Only on
seeing those eyes and how they were vibrating did Janer become aware of the hammering
sound.
‘What. . .’ he began.
‘Hammer whelks,’ said Erlin. ‘Not such good news to any other slow-moving mollusc.
They’ve got a kick that can crack plascrete. It can also snap human bone easily enough, if you’re
incautious around them. They have to use a cast-iron pot to cook them.’
That was it then: the molluscs were trying to batter their way out of the cooking pot - if
‘batter’ was the best term to use. Janer took another gulp of his rum to quell the sudden
queasiness he felt. Erlin moved away with a fixed smile.

‘You told me to warn you the next time,’ the Hive link reminded him.
‘Yeah, but this time I really need it,’ he replied.
Walking past carrying a stack of platters, the crewman who had earlier handed him a
drink, glanced at him questioningly.
‘Eh, what’s that?’
‘Private conversation,’ said Janer, tapping the box on his shoulder.
The man grunted and moved on. Janer brought his attention back to the hammer whelks
as the first set of stalked eyes drooped and sank out of sight. The hammering was getting louder
now. He turned away, only to see crewmen swinging the glister’s frame from its brazier and
knocking out the manacle pins. One of the men used a large pair of tongs to haul the creature
from the metal and drop it on to the deck. It was Ron who stepped forward with a large mallet
and large flat chisel.
‘I get first dibs on the tail-meat,’ said the big man.
‘All yours,’ said Drum.
Janer ate some of the white fragrant flesh of the glister after Ron finally broke it open.
When a crewman presented him with a plate piled with steaming purplish body of a whelk, he
demurred. This fleshy thing had a large pink foot, ending in a lump of bone, and its flaccid
eye-stalks hung over the side of the plate. Thereafter, Janer stuck to the cane rum and tried to
avoid seeing the Hoopers gobbling down hammer whelks liberally sprinkled with spiced vinegar,
and tossing the foot bones over the side. He was thankful when it was all over and time to return
to Ron’s ship.
‘You all right?’ Erlin asked.
‘Fine,’ said Janer, getting unsteadily to his feet.
She and Ron helped him to the rail then down the ladder to the rowing boat. Once he was
in the boat he felt queasy again and leant over the edge in readiness to be sick. The lights from
the braziers aboard the ship glinted on the oil-dark wavelets. Janer’s nausea subsided and he
trailed his hand in the cool water. When he went to take his hand out, he found that it seemed to
have stuck.
‘Janer!’ Erlin shouted.
A glistening body half a metre long came up with his hand and he could feel something
grinding through his tendons and bones. There was a horrible keening coming from somewhere
and his hand hurt very badly. Ron had hold of him and suddenly he was in the bottom of the boat,
the glistening thing writhing beside him. Ron’s boot came down on his wrist and Ron’s hands
closed like vices on the leech. It came off stripping skin and Janer saw pink flesh and abraded
bone before the blood welled up. I should faint now, he thought, but there was no relief until
they got back to the ship and Erlin slapped a drug patch on his neck.
‘You know what this means?’ she asked as he went under.

Janer didn’t know what she meant. All he knew was that the pain was going and that he
felt kind of funny.
A hornet came to his bedside as he slept and it watched him with its compound eyes.
****
The ship was dark and it stank, and it was crawling with the teardrop lice that fed on the scraps
Prador dropped when feeding. Her own cabin had extra lights, but these only made the lice hide
in her bedding and amongst the few belongings she had brought with her, and still there was the
smell and the pervading marine dampness. Knowing what to expect, Rebecca had dressed in a
full-body environment suit and, on the few occasions that she slept, she slept with her helmet
on. Shortly after the launch she had hunted down all the lice she could find and burnt them with
a small QC laser, but soon they had returned and she became bored with the chore. Now she
was just plain bored. Time to see Ebulan.
The service corridors of the ship were wide enough for second-children and blanks to
pass each other - though she noticed some of the blanks had healing wounds on their bodies
where Ebulan’s children had passed too close and sliced them with the edge of a carapace or
some other lethal piece of shell. When she came face to face with Vrell, a first-child and
consequently a larger Prador, Frisk ducked into a wall recess while he passed. The adolescent
turned slightly towards her as he clattered by, with some chunk of putrefying human meat held in
one of his claws. She stepped out behind him and followed, as no doubt the meat was for Ebulan.
Only Prador of his age and status got to sample such delicacies, as not many humans were still
bred for meat, it now becoming passé. Adolescent Prador ate only the decayed flesh of the giant
mudskippers that were farmed along the seashores of their home world.
Soon Vrell came to one of the main corridors which were wide enough to allow Ebulan
himself passage. A second-child saw Vrell coming and dodged to the wall, pulling itself down flat
so the first-child would have to extend himself to cause any real damage. Vrell clouted the top of
its shell in passing but, obviously on an errand for his father, did not linger to pull off a leg or
two. It was this society - utterly stratified and utterly devoid of beneficence - that Frisk most
admired about the Prador. The slightest sign of weakness was punished in the extreme. No
member of the society deserved any more than it could take. And there was no right to life. She
felt there was something clean and pure about it, and it was the antithesis of all those things
she detested in the Polity.
Vrell drew to a halt at a huge doorway that was a slanted oval in a weed-coated wall. The
doors themselves were a form of case-hardened ceramal; unpolished and still retaining its
rainbow bloom from the heat treatment. They cracked in an arc off-centre of the oval and slid,
turning as they went, into recesses above and below. Beyond was a chamber lit with screens and
control panels that in the Prador fashion had something of the appearance of luminous fungi,
and perhaps of rock-clinging insects. On a gust of warm air, rolled out the smell of sea-life,
decay, and the sickly musk that only issued from adults like Ebulan. Frisk quickly stepped through
the doorway after Vrell, and moved to one side, further studying the chamber as she did so.
Ebulan hovered before a collection of screens, on most of which scrolled Prador glyphs
and computer code. A couple of screens showed scenes from the Third Kingdom, and were
probably U-space transmissions from Ebulan’s agents there. The adult turned as Vrell crouched
down to one side of him, holding up the piece of meat, which Frisk now identified as a human

leg, then slid forwards, only to halt before presenting his mandibles.
‘Why are you here?’
The voice came from Frisk’s right, where three human blanks were lined up in readiness
to do Ebulan’s bidding. He had spoken through one of these. It did not matter which one.
‘I’m here because I need one of your blanks to assist me,’ said Frisk.
Ebulan slid forwards and presented his mandibles to Vrell. The adolescent dropped the
meat across them and scuttled back. It was well for adolescents to be cautious: adult Prador
were not averse to, in fact very much enjoyed, eating their own young, as this was the way they
thinned-out the weaklings. As Ebulan sliced the meat and chewed on it, Frisk noted a number of
screens fading behind him. Was there something the Prador did not want her to see? She turned
her attention to Vrell as the adolescent backed up to the side of the chamber, his carapace
scraping along the wall.
‘One of my blanks?’ said the blank to her right.
Frisk returned her attention to Ebulan. Bits of flesh were dropping to the irregular floor
and lice were scuttling in to gobble them up. There were also lice clinging around his
mouthparts.
‘I have my library console and crystals here with me and I need some help with some
cataloguing,’ she said.
‘Which of these units do you require?’ asked the blank.
Frisk studied the four mindless humans and then walked over to a heavy-set male. She
ran her hand down this one’s bare and heavily tattooed chest then into the front of the
elasticated trunks he wore. The blank farther to the right had no need of trunks like these to
prevent certain items flapping about, having been neutered some time in the past, probably
because he was not good breeding stock. After a moment, she slid her hand out and nodded in
satisfaction.
‘This one will do,’ she said.
‘He is fully functional,’ said Ebulan. ‘You may take him, but be sure he is returned to me
fully functional.’
‘Come with me,’ said Frisk to the blank, and headed for the oval door. The blank followed
her, doglike, as she went through. Ebulan watched her go then turned slightly towards Vrell and
waited. The adolescent shifted nervously, picking his legs alternately from the floor before
finding the nerve to speak.
‘Why does she require a blank for cataloguing?’ he asked in the humming Prador tongue.
‘She does not. She is bored and requires a male blank for the purposes of recreation,’
Ebulan replied.
‘Sexual recreation?’ Vrell asked hesitantly.

‘Yes.’
‘Why do you allow her such liberties?’
‘You would find, Vrell, should you attain adulthood, that one gains a certain affection for
tools one has had for some time. Also, you would understand and sympathize with the needs for .
. . recreation.’
‘Yes, Father,’ said Vrell, understanding not at all.
****

6
At her instruction, the three male glisters dropped away from their mate and
skulked around to the other side of the feeding turbul and, once they were in
position, she slammed into the turbul shoal to drive it towards them. She need not
have bothered - so far gone in gluttony were the turbul that they hardly noticed
her. Seeing their mate grabbing at turbul and tearing off heads had the males
hurtling into the melee as well - snapping also at prill and goring leeches as they
came. Soon all four glisters were in amongst it: moving from turbul to turbul with
ruthless efficiency. In no way could they eat all they killed, but their instinct was to
kill as many as possible before feeding, for there would always be uninvited guests
at the table. For their part, the turbul were still too intent on the taste of hammer
whelk, not realizing that none remained, not seeing the sudden flurries of claw
and snapping mandible, and their headless fellows now drifting by. The glisters
themselves would have been fine, had not all this occurred on the edge of an
oceanic trench.

Sometimes Sniper wondered if allowing the Warden to subsume him might be the best and most
sensible move he could make. Perhaps then he would become as machinelike in his attitude as
he was in appearance. Was it right for a drone such as itself - one of the pinnacles of Polity AI
technology - to get bored, grumpy, and sometimes downright ornery? Did SM13 ever feel that
way? He flicked a palp eye round to observe the submind, but the flying brooch was as blank and
unreadable as ever.
‘GCV 1236, for our delectation and richness of experience,’ said Thirteen.
Sniper quickly checked all his outputs and found he was emitting a low-grade mumble
from one of his memory interfaces. He quickly shut it off as they slowed to hover over an islet in
the shape of a horseshoe. This particular landmass was old enough and had room enough to
have acquired some vegetation. SM13 turned and focused its topaz eyes on him.
‘That’s better - not so noisy now,’ said the little drone.
‘How long have I been doing that?’ Sniper asked.

‘Ever since you flew out here. You know you could do with either a deep diagnostic or a
memory upgrade. You’re so backed-up you’re spilling over.’
‘I like it that way,’ said Sniper. ‘So, what have we got here?’
‘Usual whelk survey, they’re the best environmental indicators, then we check out the
molly carp here. They sit at the top of the food chain and pick up all the poisons. But first, we pay
a little visit to my sea cave.’ With that, the little drone dropped out of the sky towards the island.
Sniper immediately followed, his interest piqued.
The seahorse drone decelerated over a grove of stunted peartrunks, then eased in
through the sparse green-and-blue leaves and knots of black twigs. Sniper followed, pulling
leeches off his metal skin with his precision claw and snipping them in half, not because they
might do him any damage, but because on some level it irritated him that they confused him with
something living. Once through the branches, Thirteen accelerated to an area where a ridge of
old packet-worm coral was crumbling to white powder and glittering nacreous flakes. This mass
of coral rested on a slab of basalt tilted up out of black dirt. Underneath this slab was a dark
elongated hole. Thirteen turned at forty-five degrees to enter this place, its eyes igniting to light
up the interior.
Sniper found the hole less than accommodating and had to smash away lumps of coral
with his heavy claw before he could follow the little drone through. Once through he too sent
beams of light from the projectors on either side of his mouth. The two drones were now in a
narrow cavern. At the back of this, a cube-shaped hollow had been cut into the rock, and in it
rested three large hammer-whelk shells. Thirteen moved forward until it was hovering over one
of these. Its ribbed tail uncoiled, split at the end, and gripped the rim of the shell.
‘I thought you were only intended for observation,’ said Sniper.
‘I am,’ said Thirteen.
‘How did you excavate that?’ Sniper asked, indicating the cavity with his heavy claw.
‘With a boosted geological laser and patience.’
‘And what about your tail? Last I recollect, the Warden didn’t allow you any manipulation
of your environment. . . ever since those thrall units . . .’
Thirteen gave an aerial shrug above the whelk shell.
‘If you have the funds, you can buy the alterations. No doubt that is something you’ve
been telling Windcheater for some time,’ the little drone replied.
‘I have . . . but does the Warden know about your . . . alterations?’
‘No,’ said Thirteen, ‘nor does he know about these.’ With that, the submind tipped the
whelk shell to reveal that it was full of amberclam pearls. Sniper shifted forward in the confined
space and turned a palp eye to each of the shells in turn. The second shell was full of short rods
of translucent pink stone Sniper recognized as fossilized glister. The third shell contained lumps
of greenish rock. Only a laser chromatographic scan rendered the delightful news that this

substance was pure green sapphire.
‘Quite a collection,’ said the war drone. ‘What do you intend to do with it?’
‘To buy my laser upgrade I had to stick a pearl to my tail with amberclam glue and
transport it over four thousand kilometres. That took me the best part of a solstan year and I lost
four pearls in the process. My tail alteration took five years, by the same methods.’
Sniper gave his deadly grin and backed out of the cave. Dropping the whelk shell back
into its place, Thirteen followed him out into the emerald day.
‘You still have your account at the Norvabank, then?’ Sniper asked.
‘I do, though there’s not much in it right now.’
Thirteen rose up through the trees at high speed, in an explosion of foliage and leaves.
Sniper followed, deliberately going through the thickest branch he could see, just for the hell of
it, and smashing it to splinters. Once clear of the dingle the two drones flew out over the bay and
settled towards its calm waters.
‘So what sort of percentages are we talking here?’ asked the war drone.
‘There’s a gem dealer who comes down from Coram to buy stock from various Hoopers. I
got his eddress two years ago and have been waiting for the opportunity to get my finds to him. I
can’t move this amount without risking being caught by the Warden, and if he catches me, it’ll be
immediate subsumption and I’ll lose the lot. You’re a free drone. You’ve a better chance. It’s
doubtful that it’s even illegal for you to trade in natural gems.’
‘You didn’t answer my question.’
‘Twenty per cent net of profit,’ said Thirteen.
‘Fifty per cent,’ said Sniper.
‘You’re a robber and a thief!’
Sniper grinned his grin again as they skimmed close to the surface. He lowered his back
legs in, and set a subprogram to counting the whelks in the area.
‘Seems to me you’re all out of options,’ said Sniper, at last enjoying himself immensely.
‘Watch yourself, Sniper!’ said Thirteen, turning in midair.
‘Are you threatening me?’ Sniper asked, turning also. The little drone must have gone
mad. Only at the last moment did Sniper realize to what Thirteen had been referring. The
creature looked like a monstrous carp swimming with its top half out of the water. Underneath
the water, Sniper knew that this molly carp would have three rows of flat tentacles with which it
gripped the bottom to drag itself along. The prow of its head now cut quickly and without
deviation towards its target.
Sniper loaded a missile.

‘No! Protected! The Warden!’
Sniper knocked the missile out of the air with an EM pulse just as it left his mouth then,
too late, tried to lift out of the creature’s path. He couldn’t even use his fusion booster because
this too might kill it. The great mouth gaped and slammed shut, and with a satisfied bubbling the
molly carp sank.
SM13 flew in a tight ring then settled down so the sensors on its tail were in the water.
Immediately the little drone picked up an ultrasound signal issuing from below.
‘Bollocks,’ Sniper was saying.
****
The morning shuttle was due in an hour, and Keech sat in the Baitman nursing his fourth mug of
sea-cane rum, his hover trunk resting on the floor beside him. The other customers in the bar had
avoided him since his arrival four hours earlier - it seemed this place never closed - and the
barman watched him warily from behind his chessboard. Keech tasted each mouthful but
otherwise the potent liquor had no effect on him. There were Golem androids that could enjoy
the option of insobriety. He had no such option while he retained this body. He often considered,
as Janer had suggested, memplantation in an android chassis, and just as often he rejected the
idea. When he had been reified on the home world of the cult of Anubis Arisen, he had more
seriously considered the option then. But being a walking corpse did have advantages, especially
if there were people you wanted to fear you. He savoured that moment Corbel Frane had seen
him: the atavistic terror the old piratical Hooper had felt. That terror had been integral to Keech’s
success then. Had he just been human or Golem, Frane would not have fled at that critical
moment, and would likely have torn Keech apart. As it was, Keech had chased Frane’s AGC out
over above Mount Ember, then shot it down. Frane’s ending had been suitably apocalyptic.
Keech sipped alcohol through his glass straw and thought about Hoop. Even though the
two days with Olian Tay had yielded him little more information of value than he had learnt in
the first few hours with her, he was still satisfied with the result there. After seven hundred
years, an end was in sight. The villain would be brought to book, and Keech’s self-assumed
mission would end. What then? Keech contemplatively studied the lozenge that depended from a
chain round his neck. Whole avenues opened up before him, which was more than most dead
men could say. Almost, almost he smiled, but there was not enough movement left in his face.
Lost in his own thoughts it took him a moment to realize that an individual who had just entered
the Baitman was peering at him curiously.
The man was short and very stocky, but not in the least bit flabby. His appearance had
much that was human in it, and much that was boulder. Like most ship Hoopers, he wore loose
canvas trousers and a loose plastilink shirt with a wide leather belt around it. Tucked in a loop in
the belt, like a weapon ready to be drawn, was a large briar pipe. His face was wide and friendly
and seemed even wider because of the great bushy sideburns sticking out below the shiny bald
pate of his head. One look at this man, and at the mottled bluishness of his skin, told Keech that
one of the Old Captains now stood before him.
‘Do I know you, boy?’ the man asked.
Keech felt a hint of amusement at being called boy. It was of course perfectly reasonable

for this man to assume that anyone but another Old Captain was much younger than himself.
‘You may know me - or know of me. My name is Sable Keech and I’ve been dead for seven
hundred years.’
As a line, it was certainly an attention grabber. But that was what he needed to hook the
interest of such a man, and perhaps then be able to extract information. The Captain was
hooked. He looked to the barman, pointed at Keech’s table, then he sat down opposite the reif.
‘Sprage,’ he said, holding out his hand.
Keech watched the hand for a moment, hoping Sprage would realize what he was doing
and quickly retract it. When the hand remained offered, he tilted his head to one side and
reached out with his own grey claw. Sprage seemed unconcerned as he grasped and shook it,
then released it to lean back. He unhooked his pipe from his belt and pointed the stem at Keech.
‘Funny to see a reif after all this time,’ he said.
‘When did you last see one?’ Keech asked, curious despite his concerns.
‘Oh, way back,’ said Sprage, taking a pouch out of the top pocket of his shirt and
beginning the seemingly intricate process of filling his pipe. ‘A programmed one got sent here in
search of his killer, before the Polity put a stop to that sort of thing.’
At least five centuries ago, Keech calculated.
Sprage went on, ‘But you’re not programmed like that. You full AI?’
At this point the barman approached the table and placed a bottle and a glass before
Sprage.
‘Tab it,’ said Sprage when the man seemed inclined to linger.
‘Partial,’ said Keech, after the barman had moved away.
Sprage now had his pipe filled and he inserted the stem in his mouth. The antique lighter
he produced took at least five tries to get going. ‘Bloody thing - nothing lasts nowadays,’ he
muttered, then gazing at Keech through a cloud of tobacco smoke, ‘What you doing here, then?’
‘Looking for a killer - though not mine,’ Keech replied.
‘Anyone I might know?’
‘Almost certainly. I’m looking for Jay Hoop, perhaps more commonly known round here
now as the Skinner. I’ve been looking for him for a very long time. Any ideas?’
Sprage appeared decidedly discomfited by the question. He puffed hard on his pipe,
setting up a glow in it that reflected out of his eyes. Keech wondered what caused such an
effect, for normal human eyes were not so reflective.
‘Got to be dead, ain’t he?’ said Sprage.

‘From what I can ascertain, killing him has not been an easy option, and has been
something people have been reluctant to complete. You wouldn’t happen to have something
relevant in a box on your ship, would you?’ said Keech.
‘Not on . . .’ Sprage broke into a fit of coughing. ‘Er, not sure I’m with you there,’ he
finished, when he could. Keech thought that someone of this age ought to be better practised at
subterfuge. Sprage poured himself a glass of sea-cane rum and sipped at it to still his ticklish
throat.
‘Do you know who I am?’ Keech asked.
‘Seem to recollect a name like that,’ said the Captain. He bore a puzzled expression for a
moment, then that swiftly cleared. He stared at Keech with widening eyes.
‘You . . .’ was all Keech heard of what the Captain said next.
OUTSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: BALM PUMP 30% LOAD INCREASE.
The warning message fed in from his aug through his visual cortex and glowed across his
left visual field; also, the vision in his right eye went blurry and sounds abruptly became distant
and fuzzy. Everything external suddenly became of secondary importance. He ran an immediate
diagnostic from his aug and got conflicting reports from the probes sunk in his preserved flesh.
Something was wrong, seriously wrong. Vaguely he heard Sprage saying something with
vehemence, and then saw him stand and leave.
Keech ignored this: if now he went into true death, none of it mattered.
OUTSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: BALM PUMP 38% LOAD INCREASE.
Keech reached over and flipped up the lid on his trunk. He removed the cleansing unit
and, ignoring the curious stares of the Hoopers in the bar, he opened his overall and quickly
plugged himself in. Black balm flooded the extractor tube, and it was some minutes before
sapphire balm returned up the other tube.
DROP PUMP PRESSURE 20%, he instructed. Immediately another warning message came
up.
OUTSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: EXTREMITY PROBE B23 NIL BALM.
Keech glanced at the cleanser and saw the row of hieroglyphs as a blurred red line. The
cleanser was obviously struggling to do its job.
EXTREMITY PROBE B23: STRUCTURAL ANOMALY.
What the hell?
EXTREMITY PROBE B23: STRUCTURAL BREAKDOWN.
This was it; there had always been the chance that his body would start to break down;
that the preservatives would cease to be as effective as they had been in the beginning. He had

never expected it to happen so fast though. He looked at the lights on the cleanser and saw
there was no sign of green.
The next message displayed by his aug was one he had only seen twice before, and then
only shortly after he had been reified.
INVASIVE ORGANIZM DETECTED.
IDENTIFY, he told the aug.
A sub-program immediately connected his aug to the local server and a search engine
was loaded with genetic code segments. The answer came back very quickly, and flashed up in
his visual cortex.
SPATTERJAY VIRAL FORM AI.
The leech that had fallen on him outside Tay’s damned museum - that was it, then. The
Spatterjay virus was inside him and it was doing untold damage as it tried to assimilate a dead
man. He looked at the cleansing unit and saw that there were now two green lights lit up. If he
could breathe, he would have breathed a sigh of relief, for now the unit was handling it. He sat
back as his vision started to clear and saw that everyone in the bar was staring at him. The
barman appeared particularly annoyed, as he walked over to his table.
‘I don’t know what you said to him, but I’ve never seen him get that uptight,’ he accused.
It took a moment for Keech to realize the man was talking about Sprage. After a long
clicking gulp he managed to get out a reply. ‘I just told him who I . . . was,’ he said.
‘I don’t care who y’are. The Captains run it here, so I’d prefer it if y’left.’ The barman
glanced at the cleanser. ‘And I want you to leave now.’ A couple of Hoopers had stood and were
walking up behind the barman. Keech knew he had no chance in such a situation. He stood,
picked up the cleanser and, holding it close to his chest, walked unsteadily from the Baitman. His
trunk closed its own lid and followed faithfully behind.
Outside the Hooper bar the street seemed more crowded than when he had entered and
Keech noticed a lot of Polity citizens were wandering about. A catadapt passed close by him and,
with a loud sniff, gave him a look of disgust before moving on. Exerting greater control over his
joint motors he walked stiffly towards an aircab he saw parked at the end of the street. Another
red light had gone out on the cleanser by the time he had reached it. The Hooper inside nodded
his head in recognition. He was the one who had ferried them out from the shuttle port.
‘Can’t take y’mate. Waiting for a fare,’ he said.
‘I’ll give you ten shillings to take me very slowly to the shuttle port,’ said Keech.
‘Well, why didn’t y’say? Get in!’
Keech nodded to his trunk. ‘If you could deal with that.’
The Hooper quickly got out of his cab and, using the toggle control on the trunk soon had
it in the boot. It gave Keech some satisfaction to see the same catadapt running towards the cab

as it lifted and turned towards the shuttle port.
INSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: EXTREMITY PROBE B23 NOMINAL.
Only two lights now remained red on the cleanser. ‘How slowly y’want me to go?’ asked
the Hooper.
‘Give me twenty minutes. That should do it,’ Keech replied.
OUTSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: BALM PUMP AT 80%
He’d forgotten about that.
INCREASE PUMP PRESSURE TO NORMAL.
Another light changed on the cleanser, but the last red one seemed determined to hold
on. The twenty minutes he had asked for were needed in full: the Hooper had done at least five
wide circuits of the shuttle port before the light finally changed to green.
SYSTEM NOMINAL - DIAGNOSTIC ANALYSIS?
Keech considered that, but there seemed no point.
NO ANALYSIS.
He detached the pipes from their sockets and fed them back into the cleanser. The lights
clicked off shortly after, as he resealed his overall.
‘You can land now,’ he told the Hooper.
As the man nodded and brought the aircab down to one of the many jetties, Keech closed
one grey hand around his lozenge pendant. What he had done was a temporary measure at best.
Soon he would have to make a decision he had been putting off for close on a hundred years.
Three options remained to him: he could lose what remained of his organic brain - and body and become fully AI; he could die; or he could take one course open to him that still seemed
incredible even after decades of contemplating it.
Keech paid the delighted Hooper and watched the aircab lift and accelerate away in the
direction of the Hooper town, no doubt to try and pick up the stranded catadapt. He walked to
the edge of the shuttle-pad structure and gazed down the long slope of sea wall at the spindly
autoguns as they patrolled above the water line. He observed a mollusc, with a nacreous blue
spiral shell, heave itself from the water and begin sliding up the wall. An autogun was poised
over it before it got a metre from the water, and flickering red light between gun and mollusc
was quickly identifiable as lines of laser light amid the smoke jetting from the many holes
punched through the creature’s shell.
INFORM: BALM PUMP LOAD BELOW 20%, he instructed.
OUTSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: BALM PUMP 8% LOAD INCREASE.
INFORM: BALM PUMP LOAD ABOVE 20% ONLY.

The message faded and was replaced by a waiting light flickering off to one side.
INFORM: ALL EXTREMITY PROBES OUTSIDE NOMINAL.
The list that appeared had to scroll from the bottom of the visual field in his left eye. It
began at B1 and just kept going.
CANCEL, he instructed.
Then he queried the server as to the location of the nearest pharmacy. In his visual field
there now appeared a map giving both his present position and the location of a pharmacy only a
few hundred metres from where he stood. He looked round and identified a squat building raised
above the edge of an empty landing pad. Through its long chainglass windows he saw endless
displays of goods, and considered how, on any world he visited, no opportunity for commerce
was missed. With his trunk dogging his footsteps he headed over to the metal steps leading up
to the building. Here he tapped the ‘stay’ and ‘security’ button on his trunk and it dropped hard
against the plascrete, with the locks clicking home in its lid. At the head of the steps, sliding
glass doors admitted him to a small automart in which aisles of goods tempted the eye. Walking
to the first aisle he was immediately joined by an automated trolley. At the back of this trolley
was a screen and touch-console. On the console, he punched in the words ‘Intertox Inhibitors’.
After a moment, the trolley buzzed and clicked, and immediately led him off to one side.
Soon he was standing before shelves racked with a vast display of containers ranging from cards
of microcapsules to five-litre bottles and cans. The display glittered with brand names and
designs, like a wall of jewels. He walked along this display until he came to a range of cylinders
similar to the one that slotted into his cleansing unit. He dropped a couple of these into the
trolley and immediately the price came up on the screen. At the exit to the mart, he dropped a
couple of transparent octagonal shillings into the trolley’s collection tray, before taking up his
goods and leaving. Descending the steps he, as was his habit, wondered how such a system
dealt with theft. No doubt this mart had an AI keeping a few hundred little eyes on that situation.
He had probably been identified the moment he walked through the door. This thought was
immediately confirmed for him.
‘Message for Sable Keech,’ came a voice through the audio input from his aug.
‘Go ahead,’ he said.
‘It has been reported that you purchased Intertox Virex 24. You are advised that all
Intertox drugs have a seven-minute active life in reification balms.’
‘I am aware of that.’
‘Thank you for your attention,’ said the voice, and the audio shut off.
Staring out over the sea, with the two containers clutched against his chest, Keech
thought it so nice to know someone cared. What bitterness there was in the thought was muted hardly alive.
****

The morning breeze had died to a flat calm, and the sun had become almost distinct in the
verdigris sky. With nothing now to do, the sail - bored with hanging on the spars - had folded its
wings and was now perched on a spar munching on a rhinoworm steak. Crew were either
off-shift and sleeping, or catching up on jobs that had been left unattended while the ship was
moving. Anne had a party busy below decks, checking the caulking and all else that might affect
the integrity of the hull. It was a make-work task as the tough yanwood did not rot and was
infrequently damaged. Boris was greasing the steering cables, and taking his time about it, while
Pland was supervising a couple of juniors as they scrubbed stains out of the deck - it was
obviously an authority he relished, having been the one holding the brush only a few journeys
back. Peck cleaned his shotgun with fastidious attention: it had lasted him well this weapon,
over a hundred years, though of course, with all the parts he had replaced, it was no longer
actually the same shotgun. He deliberately didn’t get involved in anything too laborious, as he
knew what his next job would be.
‘Peck, over here,’ ordered Ambel.
Peck looked up. It was always himself the Captain called to help with this stage of the
operation - Peck really wished he would choose someone else. He handed his gun and cleaning
kit to Gollow, who was scrubbing the rails, before heading over to join the Captain.
‘All right, Peck, let’s do it,’ said Ambel, giving Peck a slap on the shoulder before reaching
down to get a hold of their second bile duct where it had rested against the wall of the forecabin
overnight. He dragged it across the deck to the rear winch, eliciting muttered complaints from
Pland’s deck-scrubbing crew, then he and Peck heaved the object into a cargo net and hoisted it
from the deck. There it hung with its tied-off neck pointing down, as Ambel pulled across the
large green-glass carboy he had brought up earlier and dropped a big funnel in its mouth. The
rest of the crew stopped what they were doing and moved in to watch as Ambel eased the tie
open and thick green bile flooded into the funnel, then into the carboy. The flow of it slowed
when the carboy was three-quarters full.
‘Water,’ demanded Ambel, pulling out his sheath knife and driving it into the top of the
duct. Pland passed a bucket of fresh water to Peck, as Ambel once again tied off the duct, then
transferred the funnel to the slit he had made. Peck handed him the bucket and he poured its
contents inside the duct, thereafter moving the funnel back to the carboy and carefully squeezing
and kneading the duct to get the rest of the bile into solution. The bucket of water passing
through the duct filled the carboy to its brim. Ambel then corked it, sealed the cork itself with
wrack resin, and pressed his captain’s seal into the resin.
‘ ‘Bout ten grams o’ sprine out of that, I reckon,’ said Peck, ‘How much does it fetch now?’
‘Eighty-two shillin’s a gram,’ said Boris.
‘What’s that in real money?’ asked Peck, swinging the winch arm out over the sea and
releasing the tie on the cargo net. The duct splashed into the waves, but because of what it was
there was no concerted rush of creatures to feed on it. Everybody laughed at Peck’s little joke,
then fell into respectful silence as Ambel picked up the loaded carboy and carried it carefully to
the rear deck hatch. Peck swung over the winch arm and wound the net down beside the hatch.
Ambel placed the carboy inside the net and secured it before opening the hatch and
climbing down into the rear hold. Peck wound the net up off the deck then swung the winch arm
across over the hatch and with a clacking of bone ratchets, lowered its precious load into the

hold. It was Ambel’s job to secure the carboy in its padded frame - indeed, his responsibility. For
this was a serious moment. Every Hooper knew the story of the baitman who had dropped a
carboy of leech bile. He had been thrown off the back of the ship with a rope round his ankle,
and towed through leech-infested waters for a day before the rest of the crew forgave him. Or
rather, this was the story senior crewmen told the juniors.
Eventually Ambel came back out on deck, rubbing his hands together. He looked around
at his crew and grinned.
‘Bugger,’ said Peck.
Boris stared at him, then at Ambel. ‘Another one?’ he asked disbelievingly.
Ambel nodded, still grinning happily. Unfortunately the sail had got the gist of this brief
exchange. The steak it was chewing landed on the deck with a sodden thump, and there was a
boom of wings opening above them as it chose that moment to launch itself from the mast. It
was smart enough to get away before anyone could try talking it out of fleeing.
‘Island north five k!’ it shouted as it went. Fortunately, sails normally had the decency to
tell a crew where the nearest landfall was before they went. It was only polite. Ambel’s grin
became slightly strained.
‘Rowing boat?’ Peck suggested helpfully.
Boris, Pland and Anne wore smirks and, noticing these, Ambel turned to give his ship a
long slow inspection.
‘Yes, the rowing boat,’ he agreed. ‘And while I’m about that, someone can reef those.’ He
pointed to the fabric sails, which were hanging slack from their spars. ‘I should think that the
mast chain and cogs need greasing by now, too. Also the harpoons could do with another
sharpen, and this deck needs a proper clean.’ When he paused, there was a concert of ‘ayes’ as
the crew scattered to their tasks before he thought of any more chores for them. Ambel grinned
to himself, then went off to find the reinforced oars.
****
The great wing of the shuttle slewed in the sky above the landing pads, as Keech yet again
unplugged his cleansing unit and packed it away in his trunk. A quick query through his aug
confirmed the information that this was the shuttle he was waiting for. He secured the trunk
down by the sea wall - its AG set in reverse so it would take a forklift to pick it up - and headed
on over to the arriving shuttle. Fenced walkways between landing pads brought him eventually to
the one where the shuttle had descended. He avoided the passenger embarkation point, and
moved round to where autoloaders were shifting the fresh cargo out into a warehouse. A Golem
android - which by his nametag was called Paul A2-18 - was standing watching the cargo being
shifted.
‘Can I help you?’ said Paul A2-18, as Keech approached.
This Golem was obviously an old one, constructed before Cybercorp discovered that
physical perfection made people nervous. Paul was Apollo descended to Earth and clad in blue
overalls.

‘I’m Keech. I’ve come to pick up a package.’
‘Ah,’ the Golem paused as he, no doubt, sent a query and received instructions. ‘Please
come this way.’
Paul led Keech to the side of the bay and pointed to a container resting on the platen
before a scanner. The container itself was hexagonal in section, and had a single carry handle.
The only visible way of opening it was by the coded touch-plate mounted upon it - a device no
doubt keyed to Janer’s DNA .
‘What’s inside?’ Keech asked.
‘I am afraid I am unable to provide that information,’ said Paul A2-18. ‘The box is
scan-proof.’
Keech thought about that. If it had come through the runcible, then there should be no
problem with it in legal terms. Why then had this android tried to scan it at all? He was about to
ask when he noted that Paul appeared slightly uncomfortable. Though what Keech was seeing
was only emulation, and probably conscious emulation at that, he understood what the Golem
was telling him and he kept his mouth shut - it was good to know that such Apollonian perfection
had its faults. He picked up the container and turned to go, stumbled, and had to support himself
against the platen for a moment.
‘Are you all right?’ asked the android.
‘I’m fine,’ said Keech, grimacing as he cancelled the warning messages flashing up in his
visual field. The Intertox, which had brought the activity of many of his probes back to nominal,
but no better, was now breaking down in his balm. He had expected this to happen, but not with
such sudden ill effect. Walking back around the shuttle it was with his vision tunnelling that he
saw the five very familiar people disembarking.
Batians: for a very long time members of this mercenary race had been trying to finish a
job started seven hundred years ago. All of the Eight had employed Batians at one time or
another, and Keech had been forced to kill more of them than he liked to think about. Upon
recognizing them, he ducked his head and speeded his pace. Unfortunately, it is difficult to
disguise the fact that you are a walking corpse. He glimpsed the five of them talking together,
then turning as one to gaze in his direction. He could see that they were hesitating, as this
particular area would be constantly and closely watched by one of the Warden’s subminds.
At that point, he removed his remote control from the pocket of his overalls and pointed it
towards his trunk. Instantly the trunk began its miraculous transformation. He reached it in time
to pick up his scattered belongings and load them in the luggage compartment, and was in the
process of fitting the hover scooter’s thrusters when he saw that the five were running towards
him. Mounting the scooter he registered them reaching the wall walkway just ten metres or so
away from him. He saw how all five had their hands poised over concealed pockets - and were
staring at him with ill-contained hatred.
‘Another . . . time,’ he managed on a clicking gulp, then saluted to them and launched his
scooter into the sky.

‘Sable Keech, you have broken the law,’ came the voice of the Warden from the com in
the scooter’s console.
‘I am aware of the flying regulations around shuttle ports,’ he replied.
‘I should hope so. You are, after all, a monitor. You realize you have been automatically
fined?’
‘Yes, I realize, but if I had stayed in the area the five Batians there might have been
tempted to try and kill me despite your watching SM - then you’d have had a more serious crime
to contend with, one way or another.’
‘I see ... I did note the arrival of those five you mention,’ said the Warden.
‘But did not see fit to warn me, even though you must have known I was here and must
have known my record with them.’
‘Even though armed, they were doing nothing illegal.’
‘Yes,’ said Keech, ‘but weren’t you hoping they would?’
There came no further comment from the AI, as Keech turned his scooter and headed for
the beach from which he had first departed. He set the scooter to land on automatic, as what
depth perception he did have - aug assisted - was fading from his eye. With a deal of
unsteadiness he dismounted, tucked the cleansing unit under his arm, then staggered across a
bank of glossy pebbles, and collapsed on his knees in the green sand beyond.
OUTSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: BALM PUMP 28% LOAD INCREASE.
It was playing out again, only this time the problem was caused by the drug he had used
to try and solve the previous problem.
INVASIVE ORGANIZM SCAN, he instructed, and received an immediate reply.
PRESENT.
He was fast running out of options. With hands that seemed flaccid, he opened his
overalls and connected the cleansing unit again. The balm coming out of him was muddy brown
this time, and it took a long time for the liquid sapphire to return. The blurred line of red lights
held his attention, while he thought about what he must do. The option of dispensing with this
reified body and going full AI would require his return to the Dome then to the moon Coram,
where the only suitable facilities were available. Full death, he decided, was not an option. The
remaining option resided in the lozenge depending from his neck chain. What had the lifecoven
woman who had sold it to him said?
‘It reads the blueprint and then it sends off its little builders.’
But even that would require his return to very high-tech medical facilities.
‘Yes, you need to be in a tank for it to work correctly,’ said the woman.

Keech nodded to her, and she stepped back into the dingle at the head of the beach. And
he could not quite grasp why this bothered him so, but he was then quickly distracted.
‘Why should you have any more life,’ said a voice beside him.
He glanced across at Corbel Frane.
‘Who are you to ask that question?’ he replied.
Frane smoothed his moustache. ‘In a fair and equitable world we can all ask questions,’
he said.
‘You can’t, because I killed you ages ago.’
Frane seemed affronted as he drifted from hallucination to memory.
OUTSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: CEREBRAL PROBE ERROR.
Cradling the cleanser against his belly, Keech heaved himself to his feet. ‘I’ve got to get
help,’ he said.
‘Not one of your favourite pastimes,’ said Francis Cojan, standing at his side.
Keech glanced at the man and saw that he was young, athletic, and smiling, not at all like
the last time he had seen him.
‘You need friends to help you. Keech doesn’t believe in friends.’
Keech turned to see Alphed Rimsc on his other side. It was only his voice that Keech
recognized, the man’s face having been mostly eaten away by the diatomic acid Keech had put in
his suit’s oxygen supply.
‘This is not real, you’re all dead.’
‘Really, where you should be,’ said Corbel Frane, waving a finger at him. ‘I mean, how
long has this been going on - seven centuries? Are you mad? How many lives has your vendetta
cost?’
Keech gestured at him with a grey claw. ‘That’s not something you would think! That’s
me!’
He was about to shout out again when he suddenly realized he was utterly alone on the
beach.
‘Shit,’ he said, and gazed down at the two green lights on the cleanser.
REPEAT ERROR MESSAGE, he instructed.
OUTSIDE PARAM FUNCTION: CEREBRAL PROBE ERROR.
In his organic brain - cross-referenced to AI emotional emulation - he got in the nearest

he could get to a cold sweat.
DETAIL.
The reply did nothing to ease that feeling.
Capillary blockage to organic cerebrum/Agglutinate balm/AI viral fibre/Ox-3 starvation.
PRESENT DETAIL.
NOMINAL.
That made him feel no better. Cradling the cleansing unit while it continued labouring to
clear his fouled balm, he returned to his scooter and slumped down with his back against it. He’d
just come as close as it was possible, for a walking corpse, to having a stroke.
****
Underneath accreted layers of time, perversion, and monstrous deed after monstrous deed, there
lay an earlier self that Frisk knew would be horrified at what she had since become. She even
found a certain perverse pleasure in that fact - more pleasure than she was extracting in this
present pursuit.
The ancient Prador to whom Ebulan himself had been first-child during the Prador/Human
war, had maintained that human flesh gained added piquancy from extended suffering. So it was
that humans force-grown for meat began to be slaughtered by slow and excruciating factory
processes. When they had fled to the Prador Third Kingdom, she and Jay had found satisfaction
of their perverse instincts in the holding pens and slaughterhouses there, but only some. For
force-grown humans did not have time to acquire the life experience to truly appreciate the
horror of their situation.
In later years, after Jay had departed, Frisk had continued to find satisfaction there, but it
had decreased as eating human meat had become less fashionable amongst Prador kind. With
fewer and fewer force-grown humans available, sometimes years might pass between each
sado-sexual release for her. She had tried human blanks before, but always been frustrated.
And thus it was now. The blank, of course, remained utterly indifferent to the things she
was doing to him. She realized this was a pointless exercise, but could not restrain herself from
carrying it through to the end. Under instruction from his thrall unit, he grew an erection and
pumped away at her while she cut and burned him. But because he was also ancient Hooper, the
burns quickly scabbed and slewed away, and his skin closed back over the wounds she made like
a layer of oil over water, his expression changing not one whit as she inflicted this abuse on him.
In the end she grew bored and frustrated at his passivity, and pushed him away. How she wished
things were still as they had once been.
‘Move back to the door,’ she instructed.
The blank pushed himself off her and stepped back as instructed. Lying back, she
remembered the games she and Jay had once played: the screams of both agony and ecstasy
ringing through the pens, the quintessential pleasure of watching some favourite plaything
coming to realize that he or she was no longer favoured, and faced only a future of agony and

death, then consumption by the Prador. She remembered how, with the correct drugs and
techniques, they could extend such an individual’s life for days - even after removing their entire
skin. Heady days, now gone for ever.
‘Leave me,’ she instructed the blank, and turned over on to her stomach as the door
closed behind him.
Of course, now she was coming back into human-habited space, there would be a surplus
of material for her delectation. Most of them would be Hoopers, true, but they would be Hoopers
with minds, and even though durable, they could still be made to suffer - it was all a matter of
technique. She understood herself well enough to know that her imminent return to the scene of
her most ghastly crimes was not really about Jay or Keech - it was about boredom and need.
Feeling movement on her leg Frisk rolled over and batted away one of the many lice that
occupied the ship. As she donned her environment suit, she tried to imagine a future where she
could continue to let loose the full extent of her malice and have it responded to. She tried to
relish the prospect, but imagination had become dull, and interest lacking. In this she found
another source of anger.
Standing up, she said, ‘I will just have to work at it.’ But the words seemed to be sucked
away by the coldness of the ship surrounding her.
‘I will work at it,’ she said, and smashed her foot down on the louse, crunching it into the
floor.
****

7
The cloud of disturbed silt, broken shell, gobbets of flesh and yellowish chyme now
covered five square kilometres of seabed, and when one edge reached the oceanic
trench it waterfalled into the cerulean depths. On a good day for glisters, this
waterfall would have descended upon certain entities down there and elicited only
the waving of siphons like hollowed trees, the contemplative thump of a fleshy
foot capable of tipping boulders to see what might be for lunch underneath, and
the blink of a slot-pupilled eye the size of a dinner plate. Today was a bad day,
however. The monstrous whelk — which had as its minuscule kin both the hammer
and frog varieties, for it was into his kind that they transformed upon surviving
long enough to finally become sexually active - had not had a particularly good
day himself, nor week either. For longer than had seemed fair, a deepwater
flesh-eating heirodont had hunted him through the boulderfields that were his
natural home below and, of necessity, he had escaped into the deep crevices
found higher up the face of this underwater cliff. Below, encountering such tastes
in the water would merely have whet his appetite for one of the huge filter-worms
that lived underneath the boulders. Those worms were now far out of reach, and
the source of this taste was very close. Rolling out masses of tentacles, with skin
so thick and fibrous even leeches could not penetrate, he hauled himself up the
face of the cliff and went to dine.

He was on the deck and prill were coming over the rail. There was no one else on board but
something shadowy and insectile steered the ship down an avenue made in the sea by the
reared trumpet mouths of giant leeches. He backed away from the prill but his fear was more of
the leeches and the way their mouths were watching him. Too late he realized he had backed up
against the mast and his fear twisted its knife in his gut. He looked up and the sail shrugged at
the inevitability of it all before it dropped on him. He tried to run but just could not move fast
enough. Sheets of pink-veined skin enfolded him and dragged him down. Only then did it occur to
him how ridiculous this whole situation was and that he was dreaming. He woke with the
twisting fear in his gut, turning to a gnawing hunger.
Janer opened his eyes and immediately sat upright. He looked at his bandaged hand and
flexed it. It was stiff and slightly sore, but not half so painful as he expected.
‘How long?’ he asked.
‘You’ve missed a day and we are now halfway through a second,’ the mind replied.
‘I’ve got the virus in me.’
‘Five per cent of visitors here end up infected. The ones uninfected are those who take
precautions. You took none, though you were advised at the runcible terminal and took the
information pack on offer. Did you scan it?’
‘No,’ said Janer.
‘You wanted to end up infected,’ the mind stated.
‘Perhaps. Not consciously anyway. Fait accompli now. What are the disadvantages?’
‘There are few. If you spend sufficient time away from reinfection during your first
century, the virus will die in your body, and as it breaks down, will cause most of your major
organs to fail. Your sensitivity to pain will be greatly reduced, though some might not consider
that a disadvantage. You’ll be more susceptible to certain fungal infections. There are three
known diseases that would kill you in a protracted and painful way, whereas before you would
have survived them . . . There is a long list and it is in the information pack you took.’
‘Advantages?’
‘Extreme resistance to injury. Gradual increase in physical strength. Higher resistance to
other viruses — some of which would kill you, had you not had this virus. And, of course, reduced
sensitivity to pain - if you consider that an advantage.’
Janer looked at the hornet squatting on the table by his bunk. Minds did not feel pain.
How could something scattered between thousands of nests feel pain? How could a mind that
once thought at the slow speed of pheromonal transfer understand physical injury?
‘Would you consider pain an advantage?’
‘I consider anything that increases my sensitivity to the world around me to be an

advantage. The unit that is with you now died some time in the night, and all I experienced was
the loss of sensory input from that world.’
Janer more closely inspected the hornet. He hadn’t realized. He prodded it with his finger
and it went over on to its back with legs in the air like a pincushion.
‘What killed it?’ he asked.
‘The same thing you have been infected with,’ said the mind.
‘I thought you said these hornets had been altered.’
‘Two different alterations, one of which I predicted to have a low chance of success.’
‘I don’t get it,’ said Janer. ‘How was it infected? It couldn’t have been bitten.’
‘Insects, unlike humans, cannot avoid infection here. The viral spores which only take hold
inside a human after a massive infusion - like through a leech bite - can enter insects through
their breathing spiracles,’ was the mind’s sarcastic response.
‘I thought the virus didn’t survive for long outside of a body.’
‘It doesn’t. The spores can enter when the insect feeds on something infected. They can
even enter when it lands on something infected, or even flies past it. In the case of insects it only
takes a few viable spores for the virus to be established.’
‘Why? Why so different from humans?’
‘Obviously we are the more primitive life form,’ said the mind.
‘Oh, you poor thing, you,’ said Janer.
‘Of course,’ said the mind. ‘I meant physically, not intellectually.’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Janer. He slid his feet from under the cover and sat on the side of
the bunk. He removed the dressing from his hand and looked at the ugly wound in which it
seemed a blue ring had been tattooed. He was a Hooper now. He had the mark.
‘What do you want to do with . . . this lost sensory input?’ he asked, pressing the dressing
back into place.
‘Return it,’ said the mind. ‘There is still much to learn about this virus and its effect on
hymenoptera physiology.’
Janer reached under his bunk and pulled out his backpack. From this he removed a
two-pack of brushed aluminium cylinders. Each cylinder was ten centimetres long and three in
diameter. One end was rounded and the other end was a spike. He took one cylinder out of the
plastic wrapping, pressed his fingernail into an indentation, and a small door flipped open. He
used the plastic wrapping to pick up the dead hornet and drop it inside the cylinder. His years of
being indentured, and the two decades thereafter, had enabled him to tolerate the presence of
these insects but had not relieved him of his fear of actually touching them. He closed the lid

and stood. Then he went out on to the deck.
****
The signal bell from the scooter comunit was chiming, but Keech ignored it as he waited for the
last lights to change to green on the cleanser. Shortly after the chiming ceased, he got a
message through the audio input from his aug.
‘Message for Sable Keech,’ it said.
‘What now?’ he asked.
‘Link requested from Hive transponder.’
Keech glanced back at the hexagonal box in the scooter’s luggage compartment. He’d
almost forgotten about that.
‘Permission for link granted,’ he said.
First came the buzzing, and then the Hive mind came online.
‘Do you have the package?’
Keech replied, ‘I have the package, but I won’t be taking it to Janer just yet.’
The buzzing took on an angry tone. ‘We had an agreement,’ said the Hive mind.
Keech watched the last red light change to green, then detached the cleanser and
carefully pushed the tubes back into place.
‘We had an agreement,’ the Hive mind repeated.
‘The agreement is off. I need to return to Coram and make use of the medical facilities
there.’
‘You have a problem?’ the mind asked, injecting ersatz concern into its voice.
‘I have a problem,’ Keech said.
‘What kind of problem?’ asked the mind.
‘At a stretch, you could call it a medical one,’ replied Keech
‘Erlin Tazer Three Indomial is with Janer. Perhaps she could help you. I believe she travels
nowhere without an extensive collection of medical and pathological research equipment.’
‘So nice of you to be thinking of me,’ said Keech, bracing his hand against the scooter and
standing up.
‘Was that sarcasm or irony?’ asked the mind.

‘Probably both,’ said Keech, dropping the cleanser into the back of the scooter.
‘I’m never sure which is which,’ said the mind.
Keech stared at the scooter, trying to decide if he should risk flying to the Dome. His
vision was still tunnelling and there were odd squares flicking up in the visual field fed from his
aug. A hissing crack interrupted his decision-making process. Automatically he ducked down,
only to stoop into a cloud of smoke that had gouted from his own kneecap.
‘You’re not going anywhere, reif!’ someone shouted.
For one long horrible moment Keech could not decide if this was reality or not. The two
Batians who came striding out of the dingle at the head of the beach were like so many others
he had seen and killed over the years. Then, to his horror he realized he had forgotten seeing
these people earlier at the shuttle port. He tried to dispel anxieties about what this failing
memory could mean, as he had more exigent concerns: two Batians here - with, no doubt, the
other three not far behind.
‘You know, you’ve made our job so very easy,’ spat the man of this pair.
Keech said nothing. He gazed at the woman as she kept her laser carbine centred on him.
The man holstered his weapon with a kind of casual contempt. It was the mistake they had
always made. They were so very confident in their ability to kill. Weren’t they such good shots?
But then it was like fire and ash: fire will not burn something that has already been burned.
‘Who sent you?’ Keech asked, as he had asked many times before.
The man smiled nastily and gave no answer – as before. Keech nodded and drew his
pulse-gun from his belt holster.
‘Drop it!’ shouted the woman with the carbine.
Keech raised his weapon and carefully aimed it. Laser shots punched smoking holes
through his chest and through his stomach, but did not spoil his aim. He fired once: a black hole
appeared in the woman’s forehead, and the back of her skull turned into a blooming cloud behind
her. As she staggered back and went over, Keech turned and mounted his scooter. The man just
watched this in stunned horror, before thinking to reach again for his own weapon.
‘You forget, I’m already dead,’ said Keech, before slamming his scooter up into the sky.
****
A wind was blasting the ship along at a good rate of knots, and spray was coming up over the
bow. Erlin watched Janer come up on to the deck and gaze about in surprise.
‘Got his sea legs, then,’ said Captain Ron.
Erlin turned and searched for a trace of irony in Ron’s expression, and found none. She
returned her attention to Janer as he walked to the rail and tossed something silvery over the
side. The silvery object fell in an arc but, before it hit the waves, it corrected and shot off under
its own power. Captain Ron grunted in surprise and, when Erlin turned to him, he seemed

embarrassed.
‘Message carrier,’ he said, nodding toward the receding object. ‘Used to send ‘em in the
war.’
‘What war?’ Erlin asked.
‘Prador,’ explained Ron tersely.
‘Oh.’
Erlin looked away from him as she absorbed that. Ron was nearly as old as Ambel, and it
was well to be reminded of this fact. It became too easy to view the likes of Ron and Ambel as
relatively normal. Their apparent simplicity was deceptive, as the Old Captains had centuries of
experience, and probably had forgotten more than she had learnt in her mere span of two
hundred and forty years. She had actually forgotten that most Old Captains fell into an age range
in the upper half of a thousand years. Senior seamen came in at the lower half. Herself? . . . she
qualified as a senior, but only that. How easy it was to forget the way things were here. Those of
the crew classified as juniors, and whom the likes of Ambel referred to as ‘lads’, were often over
a century old. She wondered then how Ambel viewed her. Was she a child to him? Had the anger
she had felt at his seeming complacency been seen by him as a childish fit of pique? What when she found him - would be his reaction to her? Stupid child, she told herself as she watched
Janer approach.
‘What message?’ asked Ron.
‘No message,’ said Janer as he climbed up on to the cabin-deck. ‘Just a dead hornet going
home.’
‘Told you the fibres clog ‘em,’ said Ron.
‘Apparently so,’ admitted Janer. ‘Where are we going?’
Erlin replied, ‘Captain Drum sighted the Treader heading out for the feeding grounds.
We’re going after it.’
‘What feeds there?’
‘Leeches - big ones.’
Janer nodded his acknowledgement and grimaced at the scar on his hand.
Erlin turned to Ron again. ‘Ambel said he came here after the war. In all the time I was
with him I never questioned that, but I do now wonder if he was telling the truth.’
‘Couldn’t say,’ he said. ‘I came here a century after it was all over, and didn’t meet him
until a century after that.’
‘You came here a century after the war?’ Janer interjected.
Ron glanced at him. ‘I was getting old and the geriatric treatments in the Polity weren’t

so good then. Seemed like a good idea at the time.’
Janer glanced at Erlin to see how she was responding to this - she with her opinion of
people searching for ‘miracles’. Her expression gave nothing away so he returned his attention
to Ron.
‘What did you do in the war?’ Janer asked, parodying himself at the gaucheness of the
question, and then wishing he’d kept his mouth shut once he saw Ron’s expression.
‘I was in a unit fighting out of the Cheyne outer systems. War drones and cyber-boosted
troopers. We ran sabotage missions into their shipyards and the barracks where they kept their
human-blank troopers. It was all a long time ago.’
Janer was fascinated, but he could see that, as far as Ron was concerned, it was not long
enough ago. He glanced at Erlin, hoping that she might have something to ask, but Erlin was
gazing out to sea with a slightly lost expression on her face.
‘Do you mind saying anything more about it?’ Janer eventually asked.
‘I do mind,’ said Ron, ending the conversation.
****
Shib stared down at Nolan, and then abruptly holstered his gun. Why hadn’t he reacted faster?
And why hadn’t Nolan’s shots brought that bastard down? Just then, Svan, Tors, and Dime came
crashing out of the dingle, searching for someone to shoot.
‘You missed him,’ Svan stated.
Shib glared at her and gestured to Nolan.
‘She hit him four times. He simply shot her through the head and climbed on his scooter.
He just wouldn’t go down,’ he said.
Svan stared at Tors. He shrugged - and, in reply to that, she shook her head slowly, then
walked over to the prostrate Nolan. She stooped and picked up the laser carbine. After inspecting
it for a moment, she threw it to Shib, who caught it with a snap of his hand. Svan then gazed
around at all of them.
‘I would have thought,’ she said slowly, ‘that the repetition of events over the last seven
centuries would have been enough to inform you about Sable Keech. Well, apparently not.’ She
studied each of them. ‘Do you know how many Batians have died trying to complete the contract
on him? No? Neither do I, but I do know that the total is more than fifty - and very probably for
much the same reasons.’ She pointed at the carbine Shib held. ‘That was set on the basic kill
level. Keech is a heavy-world reification. He may appear fragile, but you have to remember he
has heavy-world bones internally strengthened to take cybermotors.’ She walked over to Shib and
pulled a small black box from his belt and held it up.
As if she was lecturing idiots, Svan went on, ‘That’s how we followed him and that is
precisely why he’s so dangerous. He was a man once, but that’s something he hasn’t been for a
very long time. He’s biomech, he doesn’t feel pain, and you need nothing less than an explosive

shell or full-power laser hit to take him down. Now do I have to engrave these facts on your
foreheads?’
The reply was silence. Shib felt especially shamed, as the whole tirade had essentially
been directed at him and Nolan. He gazed down at the corpse of the woman he had known only
for a couple of days. It was the way of things.
‘Now,’ said Svan to Dime, ‘you and Tors inflate the dinghy, and you,’ she stabbed a finger
at Shib, ‘bury Nolan where she is. I want nothing lying about for the Warden to pick up on.’
Shib gazed again at the corpse. It was not the Batian custom to bury the dead: when you
were dead, that was it, and there was no point in giving respect to a lump of meat. However, in
this case, he could see the point. Spatterjay was not a full Polity world, but it was on the edge of
the Polity, and as such would be very closely watched by its Warden. There would be SMs out
there somewhere, and they could be any shape at all. One of them could even be watching them
now. He glanced at Svan as she went back to the edge of the dingle, to where she had dropped
her pack. He watched her remove black crabskin armour and begin to don it, and then he went in
search of something with which to dig a hole.
He had a real bad feeling about all this.
****
On the map on the screen, it was called ‘The Little Flint’ and, as is the way with such things, it
was precisely as described when Keech was hoping for understatement. There were no sails on
this sloping black surface poised less than a metre above the sea, which was fortunate, for had
even one been there, he would have been unable to land the scooter. Keech brought the vehicle
down with a crash and dismounted even as it slid and caught against a chalky rim of rock. He
staggered, fell on his face, and after pulling himself up on to his knees left a wet smear of balm
and other less salubrious substances on the glossy stone.
All out of options, and time to pay the ferryman.
Keech surveyed his little island of black stone and thought that there shouldn’t be room
here for Frane, Rimsc, and the rest. He ignored their acid observations, got himself back on his
feet and staggered to the back of his scooter. Once away from it again, now with the cleanser
clutched to him like a valued child, he went down on his knees again, on the stone. If what he did
next finished him here, then it seemed a dramatic enough place for him to exit. He pulled open
his burned and soaking overalls to expose the four supposedly killing holes through his body.
There was also a deep burn across the metal shell on his side, but luckily the two cleansing
sockets were undamaged. He plugged the unit in and was totally unsurprised at the row of red
lights that greeted him. Of course, now, they were irrelevant. He offered a half-hearted prayer to
Anubis Arisen and pulled the lozenge of metal from the chain around his neck. After detaching
the chain from the end of the lozenge, he stared for a long moment at this lump of golden metal.
‘Do I believe in miracles?’ he asked the watching crowd, his mind straying back to Erlin’s
derisory comments on such things.
The replies were as varied as he could imagine, and he knew they would only be that what he could imagine - as he still had enough faculties to distinguish hallucination from reality.
Now he had to act quickly before he lost the ability to make that distinction. Now he had to act

before he lost what remained of his organic brain. He reached down and affixed the lozenge into
the recess made for it in the top of the unit. The lozenge clamped down, then immediately grew
thin metal tubes from all round its rim, and these tubes mated with tiny sockets in the cleanser.
INITIATE CHANGER NANOFACTORY UNIT, he sent through his aug, then swayed back and
watched the tubes. Black balm flooded out of him, and what came back was completely clear. It
would not be empty though, definitely not that. He closed his eye, and waited. He could feel
nothing as the cleanser pumped millions of microscopic factories around with the embalming
fluid in his vascular system. Inside him he imagined them attaching themselves to the walls of
his veins like little volcanoes, little volcanoes that in moments would each be spewing out
millions of nanomachines, machines that might eventually enable him to live again.
The warning messages were coming up constantly, until he instructed his aug to turn
them off. The system that had been monitoring his body was a system for monitoring the stasis
of a dead thing. But now the changer factory program was taking over.
The factories were anchoring themselves and doing their work. The Spatterjay virus was
in there doing its work as well. He should be in a tank at this moment, being watched over by
one of the more sophisticated autodocs - not sitting here on a rock being watched by people he
had killed long in the past. He opened his eye and saw that the hieroglyph lights on the cleanser
were all flickering from amber to red and to blue. He’d never seen them blue before, and he
made a croaking sound that might have been laughter. When he then surveyed his surroundings
to see what his audience’s response might be to that, he saw that he was once again alone. He
now croaked at the silence, then abruptly turned his head and stared down at his burnt knee.
There was a sensation there. No, not possible - not yet. It had to be some sort of ghosting
coming across from his organic brain to his aug. The stab of agony that came next, though, was
undeniable. He tilted his head back and relished the pain. He knew there would be more of the
same as the nano-machines repaired his decayed nervous system. But Keech also knew that, if
he survived, he would remember this moment; this pain had been the first thing he had really
felt in seven centuries.
****
The molly carp did three circuits of the bay at high speed, and then squatted in a deep trench
where the bay opened to the sea. SM13 put this down to an intestinal complaint, and Sniper
suggested that the little drone might like to act as a molly carp suppository. SM13 had then
suggested it should go off to finish the whelk census and survey of the carp population. Sniper
suggested the carp population might be better reduced by at least one.
‘You can’t do that,’ said Thirteen. ‘You’ll be guilty of killing class-three intelligence and I’ll
be culpable.’
Sniper did an ultrasound scan of the inside of the carp, found the creature’s peanut-sized
brain, and wondered just who had made that classification. Also, scanning the other contents of
the stomach he rested in, he found the carp had already been guilty of the crime he wanted to
commit.
‘This one’s been eating the others here,’ he informed Thirteen.
‘That’s the natural order of things. We aren’t allowed to intervene.’

‘Yeah, but how’s the Warden going to know this one hasn’t been eaten?’ Sniper asked.
‘If you probe to the back of its skull you’ll see why.’
Sniper did this and eventually found a micro transponder direct-linked into one of the
carp’s main nerve ganglia. He swore yet again, then withdrew his scan to run a diagnostic on
himself. Unbelievably, he found that the carp had managed to put dents in his armour. He
restrained the urge to put a missile into the carp’s peanut, and wondered if by moving about he
could make the creature sick.
‘Sniper . . . Sniper . . .’
‘Yes, I hear you.’
‘I’ll have to contact the Warden. He’ll have to know about this.’
‘Don’t be silly.’
‘I have to. This carp has a transmitter because it’s a prime and part of one of the
Warden’s studies. If I don’t tell him, he might get suspicious later on. We don’t want that.’
‘Oh all right, creep, tell him.’
‘There’s no need to be like that. Is our deal still on?’
Sniper contemplated that and looked for an angle. ‘We didn’t actually sort out those
percentages. Fifty-fifty, wasn’t it?’ When there was no reply the war drone was about to continue
when he felt his antennae twitching and the invasive presence of the Warden at the periphery of
his mind so he clammed up. For a moment the presence was blurred, low signal strength, then
the Warden flicked to underspace transmission and included Thirteen in a trifold link.
‘So, you cannot even count whelks without getting into trouble,’ said the Warden.
‘Yeah, that’s right,’ said Sniper.
‘You, Thirteen, neglected to warn Sniper of how partial molly carp are to large
crustaceans. That was remiss of you.’
‘Sorry,’ said Thirteen.
‘Very well. You, submind, will now move on to the next sector to continue your survey.
You can get going right now.’
Sniper felt the link with Thirteen break. The little drone shot away to the east, and in
seconds was beyond the range of Sniper’s ultrasound scanning.
‘You, however,’ said the Warden, ‘will stay where you are until nature has taken its
course. If this carp is in any way damaged by your incompetence I will get to know about it.’
‘I hear and obey,’ said Sniper.

Finally, almost reluctantly, the Warden’s presence withdrew.
‘And molly carp might fly,’ the war drone muttered.
The molly carp, its body making swimming motions and its tentacles groping for a bottom
that was fast receding, rose to the surface of the sea. It then rose from that surface, and with
nose tilted down, accelerated to the east faster than any of its kind had ever travelled before.
Perhaps knowing how little control it had over its situation, it closed its eyes and curled its
tentacles into knots. Sniper regretted that he could not use his fusion boosters too, but AG
planing would have to do for now. After a hundred kilometres, he dunked the carp in the sea
again and scanned its body while its skin rehydrated. The creature’s peristaltic heart arteries
were fine and the micro transponder had emitted no signal. Other than this, it only seemed a
little dazed. For the next jaunt Sniper took it two hundred kilometres - and substantially faster.
Again, the carp seemed fine. When Sniper finally started to reach the limit of the creature’s
endurance he was moving it very fast, and was impressed. These carp were tough. Sniper
reckoned on them taking a solstan day or so to reach what was laughingly called civilization on
Spatterjay.
****
Another evening was drawing in and Janer wondered at the steady roll and tranquility of this
ocean life. He’d said something along those lines to Roach earlier on, and the ragged little man
had stared at him as if he was a lunatic. After an uncomfortable silence Roach had finally said,
‘One the Cap’n always comes out with: “It’s like war - long periods of boredom broken by
moments of sheer terror.” So I don’t think tranquil’s quite the word.’ And at that, Roach had gone
off to trull for more boxies. Now leaning on the rail, Janer glanced to one side as Erlin came to
stand with him. Unlike him, she did not wear a thermal suit. He wondered if he would be
dispensing with his too when the virus took a firmer hold in his system. He studied her profile for
a long moment and felt something like yearning under his breastbone. This woman was so
interesting and, perhaps because of that, very attractive to him.
‘Was this how it was before?’ he asked.
She glanced at him before returning her attention to the sea. ‘Most of the time,’ she
replied.
Janer looked thoughtful. ‘You know, from what you’ve said and from what I’ve learnt from
some of the crew, things haven’t changed much here in a long time.’ He nodded towards Ron.
‘Makes you wonder if they might be the reason for it.’
‘What do you mean?’ Erlin asked.
‘Well, they’re the rulers here in all but name, so perhaps they just don’t want things to
change. The intention might not even be conscious.’
‘You could be right,’ Erlin conceded.
‘I think I am,’ said Janer. The two of them now fell into a comfortable silence. Janer felt
calm and relaxed. He hardly noticed the ratchettings and clonks of the ship’s mechanisms.
‘You were here for quite a while, weren’t you?’ he asked after a while.

‘Eighty years, give or take. I hardly remember a lot of those years. I guess you don’t when
there’s not a lot happening.’
‘What about when you first came here and discovered the virus . . . the weird set-up
here?’ he asked.
Erlin’s expression became troubled and she shot him an assessing look.
‘Some strange things happened then, but it’s been so long that I sometimes wonder if my
memory played tricks on me.’ She shuddered as if the cold was now getting through to her.
‘Well, don’t just leave it there. Now you have to tell me,’ said Janer.
She stared at him with her expression suddenly hard. ‘Why should I tell you?’
Janer met her look. ‘Because we’re the same. We’re both coming to that time in our lives
when we wonder why we should carry on. You should tell me because you may gain some
insight, and because you lose nothing by telling me, but you do gain time.’
Erlin’s hard expression was broken by a smile. ‘You have an unbreakable arrogance, Janer
Cord Anders,’ she said.
‘Yes, which is why I’ll live. Now tell me.’
Erlin’s expression became troubled again as she turned to lean on the rail, staring out to
sea.
‘I was young when I came here - young, enthusiastic, curious, and sure I was going to do
great things with my life.’
‘And you did,’ said Janer.
‘Debatable,’ said Erlin, then after a moment continued, ‘You know how seeing that fight
between Domby and Forlam brought home to you what this world is really like?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, my moment of revelation was somewhat more . . . horrifying than that. I’d been on
board the Treader only a few days. I’d been ferried out to it by AGC from the Dome - that was
when the runcible was planet-based. At that point I hadn’t even seen one of the sails, as there
wasn’t one aboard when I arrived. Anyway, Ambel, Peck and Anne went ashore on a little island
to get some fresh meat to attract in another sail. While there, Peck got attacked by a leech and,
of course, I was fascinated to discover that Ambel had hammered the leech on the ground until it
released the plug of flesh it had taken, and that Peck just screwed the piece of flesh back into
place.’
‘That was it?’ Janer asked.
Erlin glanced at him. ‘That just piqued my curiosity, and that’s when I really started to
investigate. I took urine samples, recorded statements, and slowly began to piece together what

the ecology of this place is all about: the leeches. I tried to take samples from Ambel. . . but I’ve
told you about that.’
‘No blood in him,’ said Janer, ‘just fibres.’
‘Yes, I couldn’t even get a sample by opening his arm with a scalpel. Anyway, on we
travelled with a sail hanging on the mast and frog whelks leaping on board, trying to take a
chunk out of me, and even though I was truly beginning to understand it all, I didn’t realize what
extremes it could all go to.’ She looked at Janer again. ‘Have you heard of the Skinner?’
‘Skinner’s Islands is what I heard. I assumed it was the name of whoever discovered
them,’ he said.
‘No. It’s the name of the occupant and his occupation.’
Janer waited for her to continue, and after a long pause she did.
‘We lost the sail again because the stored meat had worms in it. Even they were extreme,
and I had to hide in my cabin until they were all removed from the ship. Ambel towed the Treader
to a nearby island and he, Peck and Anne went ashore again after meat -rhinoworms mostly live
in coastal shallows. Anne and Ambel came back to the ship without Peck, and started to collect
harpoons and other weapons . . . You know, even then most of the crew had a much bluer
coloration because they hadn’t eaten Earth food for a while. I should have taken that as a clue.’
‘Keeps the virus in abeyance,’ said Janer.
‘Oh yes,’ said Erlin. ‘But what happens to a human who doesn’t get to eat Earth food at
all? You know, ever since ECS drove Hoop and his crew away, there has always been Earth food
available here. Hoopers could only grow a few adapted varieties that Hoop himself established
here, but they were still enough. If such food had not been available there would have been no
humans here when the Polity returned.’
‘They die without it?’ Janer asked.
Erlin gave a humourless laugh and gazed out to where the sun was sinking into a mantel
of grey clouds which almost had the appearance of floating mud flats.
‘It would be better if they did. They do not: they just cease to be human - we know this
because Hoopers have been stranded and unable to obtain Dome-grown food . . . Peck, it seems,
had been taken by one of these creatures that had once been human - a creature they called the
Skinner, because of its unpleasant habits. I, of course, wanted to see it for myself, and
demanded that I go ashore with them in their attempt to rescue Peck. I think what finally
persuaded them was the surgical laser I carried. I’d managed to remove its safety limiters and
then had an effective weapon.’
‘So . . . you went ashore.’
‘Yes, we went ashore and we saw this Skinner.’ Erlin stared down at the water and
proceeded to give a clinical description of the beast. Janer might not have believed her, had he
not seen some strange and frightening things in his time. When she had finished her description
she paused for a while before going on with, ‘When it came at us it was waving something in its

right hand. Ambel put a hole in it with his blunderbuss and Anne and Pland got it with harpoons.
When I saw what the creature was holding I joined in the fight. I cut it with my laser, and I tell
you that was no easy task - then I crawled away to spew up my guts. The other three used my
laser to finish the job on the thing.’
‘What did it have in its hand?’ Janer asked, getting right to the point, even though he
thought he might already know the answer.
‘It was Peck’s entire skin.’
‘Jesu! The poor bastard.’
Erlin gazed at him now with a slightly crazy look in her eyes. ‘Yes, he was. When you
meet him you’ll have to ask him all about it,’ she said.
‘What,’ said Janer, ‘he survived?’
‘Oh yes. Ambel picked up his skin and we went to find him. When we found him, skinless,
writhing in a bowl-shaped rock, I tried to put him out of his misery. Ambel knocked the laser out
of my hand, then he, Anne, and Pland proceeded to dress Peck again in his own skin.’
‘You’re kidding.’
‘Am I? You know what sticks in my mind the most?’
‘What?’
‘How they punched holes through his skin to let the air bubbles escape ... so they could
squeeze the air out through the punctures. They carried him back to the boat and out to the ship,
but he managed to climb on board himself. There, you see, the raw extremes . . . those are what I
saw.’
Janer watched her as she stared into the descending night. Perhaps she was a bit
deranged. He did not want to openly call her a liar.
****

8
The turbid were all either dead or fled, and now the glisters fed with alacrity. As,
one after another, they gobbled down turbid bodies, their own bodies expanded
hugely to accommodate their gorging but, unlike the frog whelk which had caused
all this furore, they had sub-shells which slid into place to protect newly exposed
flesh swelling between original segments of shell. It was a rather hasty and
frenetic banquet, for a glister feeding on one end of a turbul’s body was
hard-pressed to eat half of it before coming nose to nose with the uninvited diners.
On each occasion this happened the glister might snatch a between-meals snack
of prill or leech before moving on to the next turbul - the fish’s flesh being so

much sweeter and more tender, and definitely to be preferred.

Keech shook with fever. His nerves were regenerating very quickly and when he could stand the
pain no longer, he shut down some of the connections to - and in - his organic brain. He did want
life, but he wanted sanity too. Even so, with connections closed off, he felt like a diseased wreck.
His entire body was delivering to him the message that he was full of infection and decay, and
that he was falling apart. The physical evidence of this was how he had swollen, and the plasma
leaking from his skin and a creamy fluid oozing from his nose. The cleansing unit was humming
now as it worked hard following the nanofactory programme. A pool of volatile balm had puddled
on the rock around his knees, having leaked from the holes lasered in his torso. These holes
were now filled with nubs of veined, purplish flesh, and a messages light was clamouring for his
attention. He decided to view the said messages and turned the system back on.
N-FACT MESSAGE: BALM DRAINED. WATER REQUIRED - 8 LITRES.
The nano-changer program was fully online. Keech got unsteadily to his feet, picked up
the cleansing unit and walked down to the edge of the rock. He stared out across the slow dark
roil of the sea and thought for a moment that something further was wrong with his vision, until
he realized that night was descending. He looked down and saw below the water’s surface,
whelks of one kind or another, clinging to the stone, their shells seemingly formed of coiled gold
and veined jade. He drew his pulse-gun before kneeling and dropping the unit in the water. No
reaction from the whelks. Perhaps they became somnolent in darkness - or perhaps they did not
consider him edible.
Immediately the unit began taking in water. He could feel it suffusing his flesh and
cooling him. Was his bone marrow producing red blood cells now? What would happen first? In
seeming answer, his arms began to itch intolerably. As he scratched at them, grey skin began to
slew away. His hope of seeing pink skin underneath was dashed when flesh as white as fish
meat was revealed. He stopped scratching and inspected his fingernails. Two of them were bent
right back. He shook his hand and they fell out, pus now leaking from the ends of his fingers.
N-FACT MESSAGE: DANGER - TANK AMNIOT UNSUITABLE. ELECTROLYTIC
REQUIREMENTS . . .
Keech turned the message off. He wasn’t in a tank. The nearest electrolyte he could
immerse himself in was this sea, and that seemed a suicidal idea. He’d just have to pray that
Erlin could help him. When his irrigator automatically moistened his already wet living eye, he
reached up and unplugged it. Some things seemed to be working, anyway. Once the unit stopped
drawing in water, he stood, picked it up, and headed unsteadily for his scooter. The nanites could
still work on his body while he was in the air, so there was no point in waiting here any longer.
He mounted his scooter and dropped the unit between his thighs. From the comlink came that
familiar strange buzzing the instant he turned it on.
‘Yes?’ said the Hive mind.
‘I have your package, and I will deliver it,’ said Keech, the liquid in his mouth and throat
distorting his synthesized voice. A set of slowly changing coordinates flicked up on the screen
map, and Keech lifted his scooter from the stone. Once in the air, he keyed the autopilot and sat
back. He didn’t want to fly manually while he was dripping on the controls.

****
Through thousands of eyes the Warden observed the people in the base on Coram and on the
planet below. When a situation hinted at ramifications that might impinge on its remit, the AI
observed it with greater attention, or assigned a submind to watch it develop. When an SM could
not be spared from its particular vehicle: be that an iron seahorse, floating cockleshell, or some
other more esoteric sea-shape, the Warden loaded a copy or created one for that specific
purpose. Sometimes it allowed these new minds to continue. At other times it resubsumed them.
After all, they were only a pattern of information - as was all life.
At present, through one of its eyes, the AI was observing with interest the arrival of an
amphidapt from the runcible in the core ocean of Europa, in the Sol system. The attachment that
came with this woman had her noted down as a separatist terrorist who might be attempting to
smuggle leeches to the strange dark sea that was her home. After only moments of observation,
the Warden lost interest and assigned SM24 to observe instead, as it did not understand how
she believed she might bypass the bio-filters of the runcible. Not a molecule got through that the
Warden was not prepared to allow through. Now it let its attention wander to a fight occurring
just beyond the Dome gate. Just for the hell of it, it placed a bet for an E with the submind in
charge of Dome security, and got odds that made it wonder if it was time to subsume said mind for it obviously knew something the Warden did not. Shortly after that, the AI received a signal
from a direction whence nothing had come in decades - in fact from one of its deep-space eyes.
It gave the new matter almost a quarter of its attention.
The ship emerged out of underspace, leaving a coruscating trail as antimatter particles
struck the disperse local hydrogen. Two of the Warden’s deep-space eyes flared out in an EM
shockwave, so of necessity it had to observe from a distance. Around the ship the stars distorted,
as if seen through a lens, as it fell into the system seemingly out of control. Braking on ram
scoop motors, it threw out a torus of radiation as it dumped velocity and came down to half the
speed of light.
‘Please identify yourself,’ sent the Warden, as it noted the pilot was experiencing
difficulties. A jumbled theta-block of pictographic computer language then overloaded all the
Warden’s receivers for two microseconds. It took the AI another three seconds to discover that
there was little information of value in this communication, other than its form. By now the
vessel had the Warden’s full attention.
‘Prador ship. Please identify yourself.’
The ship was tumbling, using ram scoop and ion drive intermittently, as it tried to slow.
Leaving a long trail of fire behind it, it arced around the sun. Another block of information
overloaded the Warden’s receivers. Four seconds later the AI got the gist.
‘Nature of U-space generator fault?’
The garbled reply lasted for a couple of seconds, then cut off as the ship went into
U-space.
The people in the Coram complex were baffled at the sight of all the exterior windows
immediately becoming shrouded in something like an undulating wall of sun-glinting water as
shimmer shields slammed into place across them. Internal doors closed - just slowly enough for
people to get out of the way. Deep inside the moon, energy buffers went online to take any surge

from the arm-thick superconducting cables linked to every essential system in the complex.
Through the shimmer shields, ugly weapons turrets could be seen rising out of sulphur and ice.
‘Attempting to land,’ was the gist of the next transmission.
The Warden immediately direct-linked to the runcible it controlled, ready to transmit
itself away should that action be necessary. It knew that if this was an attack, it would itself be
the main target. A few seconds later the ship resurfaced in an explosion of antimatter half a
million kilometres from Spatterjay, and on the opposite side of the planet from the moon.
Through its satellite eyes the Warden watched as the craft managed to get down to a
speed of ten thousand kilometres per second. It skipped atmosphere then tried some sort of aero
braking. There was a momentary U-space signature, then a flat antimatter explosion in the
stratosphere. After the initial flash and detector overload, the Warden detected a scattering of
debris blown into orbit around the planet. It picked up a brief whistling-bubbling sound on com
which it tentatively identified from its library as the sound of a Prador getting fried by a
high-intensity microwave burst. It considered the event for a whole six seconds before contacting
one of its subminds.
‘SM Twelve, you saw?’
‘I saw it. I didn’t know any visitors were scheduled.’
‘They weren’t. It was some sort of Prador vessel, but I couldn’t get close enough to
identify it. Check that orbital debris and report back.’
‘OK, boss,’ said SM12.
From one of its satellite eyes the Warden observed a meagre dot accelerate away from
the planet at hypersonic speed, before flicking its attention elsewhere.
‘SM13, I want you moving into your last sector immediately. You are now on full crisis
alert.’
With a degree of peevishness the Warden then opened up its next communication
channel.
‘Sniper, I do know that a molly carp is not capable of travelling at seven hundred
kilometres per hour. If it dies, you understand you’ll be charged with killing a grade-three
intelligence?’
‘I understand. The carp’s fine. What’s happening up there?’
The Warden transmitted a condensed information package to the war drone. Sniper might
be a pain sometimes, but did have his uses, especially in any situation that might involve
explosions and sudden death. The Warden then flicked away from the drone to another focus of
attention. Now linking through the local server, it accessed a very particular aug on the planet
below. The actions it was pursuing were initiated from a program within itself which it labelled
‘nasty/suspicious’. The blueprint for that program had, in fact, initially come from Sniper.
****

Sniper scanned around inside the molly carp for breakages. Dropping it five metres into the sea
the moment the Warden had contacted him had not been a clever idea. Surprisingly the carp was
undamaged, just a bit twitchy. He relinquished all control of it as he scanned the information
package.
Prador. . .
Some very old and unused programs initiated in Sniper, and as a result he came as close
to excitement as it was possible for him to get. He immediately began running systems
diagnostics and checking his inventory: 121 smart missiles with coiled planar loads, an
assortment of mines, plenty of carbide fingers for his rail gun, and of course his APW. He was
well armed, but his big problem was his power supply. Hauling a molly carp all that distance on
AG had depleted his batteries, so his allotropic uranium generator was struggling to bring them
up to charge, and his microtok was struggling to keep the generator running. In drone parlance,
he was knackered. He decided the best thing for him to do now was sit tight until everything was
up to charge.
He did a quick ultrasound scan beyond the fleshy vessel he was in and saw that a sailing
ship had just come into range. No matter to him unless they decided to hunt down this carp and
cut it open, so he settled down to wait. He was now in what he supposed might be called the
carp’s small intestine, and had quite a way to go to reach the final exit.
****
Using two ceramal-composite oars with blades as wide as a man, Ambel towed the Treader with
a rowing boat. Each time he dipped those oars in and heaved, the hawser connecting the boat to
the ship creaked and stretched, and the ship slowly slid on through the water. The boat itself
was heavily reinforced, especially about the rowlocks. The first time Ambel had used these oars
in an unreinforced boat, his exertions had torn the sides out of it, and the crew had to quickly
haul him back before the leeches got him. Just in case of that eventuality, Pland and Anne kept
an eye on their Captain while they supervised work on the deck, and Peck was in the nest
keeping an eye elsewhere.
‘What’s he doing?’ asked Pland.
Ambel had shipped his oars and was staring off to one side. Both Pland and Anne
followed the direction of Ambel’s gaze, towards the horizon. A spreading disk of red fire grew
behind cloud like a skin cancer. It broke and dispersed as they watched, but it took a long time
for the colour to leave the sky.
“What’s that?’ Pland asked.
‘Big meteor?’ Anne suggested doubtfully.
They both stared contemplatively at the coloration in the sky and only returned their
attention to Ambel as he started rowing again.
‘Molly carp to starboard!’ yelled Peck from the nest.
‘Where the hell did that come from?’ said Pland.

He and Anne both stared at the creature as it rose out of the water and came down with a
huge splash, seemingly trying to bite the waves. After pausing for a moment it swam round in a
couple of tight circles, then rocked backwards, apparently examining the boat, before setting off
at a frantic pace to do one circuit of the ship. Those who had been scrubbing the deck stopped to
watch the show, glad of an interruption to their tedium. Once back where it had begun from, it
settled down now to blow bubbles and make strange grunting sounds.
‘That’s one confused beasty,’ said Anne.
‘Bit of a mad moment, maybe? We all get those,’ said Pland.
Anne snorted and gave him a look.
‘They used to follow the boxy boats . . . never cause no harm,’ said Sild, leaning on his
mop.
Immediately on his words, the carp reared up and suddenly sped towards Ambel’s
reinforced rowing boat.
‘Now that’s normally what Peck does,’ said Anne.
Gollow and Sild eyed each other in confusion, turned to watch as she and Pland sped
away along the deck, then abruptly dropped their cleaning utensils and followed.
They all ran around the forecabin to the foredeck and began winding in the cable that
joined ship to rowing boat. Boris joined them, from the helm, but even with his help, they knew
they would not be quick enough. Ambel shipped his oars and, holding one like a club, he stood
and waited for the carp. The carp reached the rowing boat when the boat was only four metres
from the ship. The creature hesitated in its approach, then, as if coming to a decision, it lunged.
Ambel chopped down on its head with all the force he could muster. There came a sound as of a
sledgehammer hitting a block of wood. The carp itself immediately stopped, but its bow wave
continued on to hit the boat, almost tipping it over. Ambel kept his feet and used all his weight to
bring the boat back on an even keel. When the carp nosed in again, hesitantly, as if not sure
what had happened to it, he hit it again, this time high on the hump of flesh located behind its
head. Again that solid bang. Ambel inspected the bend in his oar, then swivelled it in readiness
for another blow, perhaps hoping to batter it straight again. The carp shook itself once, then
lifted its head out of the water and turned an accusing eye on Ambel.
‘That’s it! You show the bastard!’ yelled Peck from his perch. Anne, Pland, and Boris
stared up at him, trying to decide which of the two contestants Peck was addressing.
Ambel rested the butt of his oar in the bottom of the boat as he stared eye to eye with
the creature. After a moment, the carp opened its mouth and issued a deep whooshing hoot,
then it turned and moved slowly away.
‘Captain got its attention, then,’ said Boris.
‘I thought it was going to try for him,’ said Anne.
‘Nah,’ said Boris, eyeing the junior crew gathered round. ‘It knew it couldn’t get the

Captain down in one gulp, and what’d happen to it if it tried. Molly carp are smart. Remember
Captain Gurt’s carp? He fed it on leeches, and trained it to catch even bigger leeches for him.’
‘He made a lot of skind,’ agreed Pland.
‘Then there was Alber’s carp - used it to tow his ship around,’ Boris went on.
Anne said, ‘Could be it just didn’t want to eat the Captain. That was only a lick on its
head it got, no more than an itch.’
‘Remember what happened to Captain Gurt?’
‘Oh, yeah, they only found his leg, didn’t they?’ said Anne, then, ‘Why they called molly
carp? I’ve always wondered.’
Boris appeared thoughtful for a moment. ‘They look a bit like a fish from Earth called a
carp. Then there was this Hooper who had a wife called Molly who kept on carping at him.’ Boris
ignored Anne’s wince at this and soldiered on. ‘He went out one day and saw this big fat carp
and thought it looked like his wife. And that’s how they got their name.’
The junior crewmen attended Boris’s explanation with dubious expressions, before being
shepherded back to their tasks by Pland, now the excitement was over. Anne leaned close to
Boris and muttered, ‘You don’t really know, do you?’
Boris scratched at his moustache. ‘Nah, haven’t a clue.’
Peck chose that moment for another yell. ‘That’s it, y’bugger!’
He was waving his fist, but it was still unclear at whom or what he was gesturing.
‘Never been the same since,’ said Boris, shaking his head.
‘Oh, he only goes a bit funny sometimes,’ said Anne. She pointed at the island to which
Ambel was again towing them. ‘It’s islands - they remind him of the Skinner’s Island. He never
feels safe near them.’
‘He knows he can’t be got again,’ said Boris, looking meaningfully towards the Captain’s
cabin.
‘Not the point. It ain’t logical, but he’s convinced it’s going to happen again.’
‘Well it can’t,’ said Boris, looking towards Ambel as the Captain continued to tow the ship
on in.
In Ambel’s cabin the Skinner’s head lay still in its box; still and silent, and attentive.
****
The remaining hornet had been gone for two days now, and the mind had not spoken to him
much since his voicing of his concerns about Erlin. Quite dryly, it had asked him just what he
found so unbelievable about her story and, when he had tried, it had pointed out all the clues

that pointed to the ‘extremity’ Erlin had described. Since then Janer had been contemplative and
had nothing to ask it. Since then the mind had very little to say to him either. It was almost as if
an embarrassed silence had fallen between them. When it was broken, Janer jerked as if he had
been slapped.
‘Now, there’s an interesting sight,’ said the mind.
‘Mind, where are your eyes now?’ Janer asked, confused as to why he should have been
surprised at the voice. After a pause came a flat reply, without the usual complementary buzzing.
He realized this was the reason he had jumped: the buzzing had always served to forewarn of a
communication.
‘I’m on a rock in the sea. Sails live on it,’ the mind said.
‘Why are you there?’
There was no reply for a long time and, standing at the rail, Janer started to fidget
uncomfortably. He glanced up at Ron, who had a telescope to his eye, then at Erlin, whom the
sail had lifted to the nest. Other members of the crew were slowly moving about their business
on the deck: Roach, Forlam, a thickset blonde called Goss, who kept giving him the eye, and
others he had no name for. Janer studied Goss speculatively. This journey was starting to get a
little boring. Perhaps it was time to spice things up a little. Just then, the Hive mind came back to
him, but this time the buzzing had returned.
‘Look to the north,’ it said.
Janer did so, and observed a red glow sheeting up behind cloud, wavering like an aurora.
‘What is it?’
‘An antimatter explosion. The Warden is most reticent about its source,’ said the mind.
‘Antimatter?’
The mind was silent for a while before continuing.
‘I will be with you soon. Keech is coming. Tell Erlin to prepare her equipment.’
‘What do you mean, Keech?’ Janer looked in confusion from the light in the sky back to
the activity on the deck.
Others were gazing out at the redness and talking to each other in muted tones. But
already the light was beginning to disperse, to fade. The buzzing that had accompanied the
mind’s message faded also, and it gave no reply. Janer looked at Goss again, then he looked up
at Erlin. He called to her.
‘What did it mean “Keech is coming”?’ Erlin asked him, once Janer had related the mind’s
message.
‘I can only think he’s in trouble, if it means you’ll need your medical equipment,’ said
Janer.

‘What the hell am I supposed to be able to do for him?’
‘He is a little past your services, I have to admit.’ Janer shrugged and grinned at her.
‘Perhaps we should prepare anyhow. The mind doesn’t normally get things wrong.’
‘OK. I suppose you’re right.’
Erlin headed for the deck hatch and Janer watched her for a moment.
‘Let me help you. I’m a bit of a spare wheel here anyhow.’
Erlin gestured for him to follow.
Once below decks, Erlin pulled one of her cases from a storage locker, then put it on the
floor and opened it. Janer looked at the mass of gleaming apparatus neatly packed inside. He
recognized a nanoscope, portable autodoc, and one or two other items.
Erlin pointed at the autodoc. ‘You know how to assemble that?’ she asked.
Janer pulled the doc out of the case and proceeded to clip together the hooded cowling
and the insectile surgical arms. Erlin allowed a little surprise to enter her expression, nodded an
acknowledgement to him, then turned to something else. She took out a flat box with a
gun-shaped object fixed in its upper surface. Janer immediately identified the ‘gun’ as a
hand-diagnosticer, and the box it was plugged into as a portable drug-manufactory.
‘Oh hell,’ said Erlin. ‘I haven’t got a clue.’
‘Let’s just be as ready as we can,’ said Janer.
They got ready.
****
Windcheater flew in a world constructed of information. Eyes crossed and toes clenched he
gazed with wonder on a virtual galaxy dwarfing the incontestably vast Human Polity. There was
so much to know, so much to see - great minds moved past the sail like sun-bright leviathans,
and the financial systems of worlds were complex hives he could lose himself in for centuries. It
was wonderful: there was so much to do, so much to have. But Windcheater, with a
self-discipline and intelligence beyond that of his brothers and sisters, gradually shut all that out
and concentrated on the specific. He curled his lip and growled when he located the minuscule
antiquities site based on Coram and surveyed the price list. Perhaps Sniper believed the sail
would be too dazzled to pick up on things like that.
‘Windcheater.’
The voice came from close by and Windcheater uncrossed his eyes and looked around.
His fellow sails were all gathered at the other side of The Flint, watching him warily. It had not
been one of those that had spoken.
‘Sail, I’m speaking to you through your aug. Do you understand me?’ asked the voice.

‘I hear you,’ said the sail. ‘But I don’t know who you are.’
‘Of course . . . you’ve never heard my voice. I am the Warden.’
‘Ah,’ Windcheater managed. He noticed then that his fellows were edging even further
away from him and were observing him all the more warily. There was nothing he could do about
that just now.
‘Well, what do you think of the human virtual world?’ the Warden resumed.
‘It is . . . useful,’ replied the sail. ‘What do you want?’ it then asked, thinking it might be
less disconcerting for his fellows if he quickly terminated this conversation. He did not want
them thinking him any crazier than they did already.
‘Like yourself I want many things - and like yourself I understand that there is little to be
had without paying a price,’ said the Warden.
Windcheater showed his teeth and waited. The Warden continued.
‘I see that your business arrangements with Sniper have provided you with some income.
I see no reason to prevent that arrangement continuing. It could easily be argued that any
artefacts accessible to you are legitimately the property of your people . . .’
‘Our property?’ Windcheater asked.
‘You are, after all, the autochthons of this world,’ the Warden observed.
‘Does that mean we own it?’ the sail asked, a couple of strange ideas occurring to him all
at once.
‘That is something we can discuss at a later time,’ said the Warden. ‘For now I just want
to know if you would like to augment that minor income.’
Windcheater considered the offer for all of a couple of seconds, quickly forgetting his
concerns about how his fellow sails might view him. That ‘minor income’ was the only income he
had, and there was so much to have.
‘Tell me about it,’ the sail said.
‘I need a pair of eyes, but a pair of eyes in a natural form of this world. Not so much
undetectable as unnoticed.’
‘What for?’
‘You saw the light in the sky to the north?’
Windcheater nodded, then realizing the Warden would have no way of seeing this,
replied in the affirmative.
The Warden continued, ‘I want you to go and take a look in that area and report to me

anything unusual.’
‘Like what?’
‘Just anything unusual.’
Windcheater considered again: Why not? He could do with the extra credit.
‘How much?’ the sail asked.
‘One thousand shillings for each day.’
By the time the Warden had reached the word ‘day’, Windcheater was already airborne.
His fellows, after watching him depart, turned to each other in great puzzlement and there was
much confused shrugging.
****
As Ambel rested, the Treader drifted up behind and nudged the back of the rowing boat. As it did
this, he dipped the oars and rowed again for a few minutes. Slowly the ship drifted into a
sheltered cove whose visible bottom was smeared with leeches and pinioned by the stalks of
sea-cane, which at the surface opened into tangles of reddish tendrils that were kept afloat by
chequered gourd-like fruits. An islet, no bigger than the ship itself, slid past to the right of them,
and from this the stalked eyes of frog whelks tracked their progress, their grey and yellow shells
clattering together in their agitation. Boris turned the helm so that the ship drifted away from
these, and Ambel allowed the rowing boat to come back against the side of the ship.
‘All right, Pland!’ he shouted.
At the bows, Pland, Sild and Gollow heaved the anchor over the side and dropped it into
the shallows, where it thumped down, still visible, raising a cloud of black silt. Taking the usual
precautions for mooring in island waters, Pland had greased the anchor chain some hours before.
The grease wouldn’t stop prill as they - should they have the inclination - could scale the wooden
sides of the ship using the tips of their sharp legs like pitons, but it would deter frog and hammer
whelks, and other of the more common annoyances. Anne lowered a ladder to Ambel while he
hitched the boat to the side of the ship and secured his oars inside. As he climbed back aboard,
Peck looked down at him disconsolately from the nest.
‘Still time to get a worm or two to tempt a sail. Fresh meat’s always best,’ said Ambel,
nodding towards stony beaches and the island with its narrow crown of blue-green dingle.
‘I ain’t goin’,’ said Peck.
‘You stay and trull for boxies, Peck,’ Ambel replied cheerfully.
‘I don’t wanna stay,’ said Peck.
‘You could hook us some sea-cane and a few gourds as well. We’ve a barrel or two to
spare, and some bags of dried salt-yeast,’ said Ambel, ignoring this.
Peck snorted and returned his gaze to the island. After a moment, he turned away,

stepped out of the nest and scrambled down the mast to the deck, from where he again returned
his attention to the island. Ambel watched him for a moment, then shrugged and walked over to
the wall of the forecabin, from where he unhooked his blunderbuss. He also shouldered a case
containing powder and shot. He turned to Anne and Boris, who had just come down from the
cabin-deck.
‘You two fetch your stuff and get down to the boat,’ he said - then, turning to Sild and
Gollow, ‘You two as well.’ To Pland he said, ‘Keep an eye on things here,’ flicking his eyes in the
direction of Peck. Pland nodded, and Ambel ducked into his cabin. Once inside, he closed the
door and laid his blunderbuss and bag on the table. After a pause, he went over to his sea-chest
and took out the Skinner’s box. He opened it and looked at the head inside. Insane black eyes
glared back at him from the grotesque object. Ears that looked like spined fins wiggled. There
seemed a lot more of them than there had been before. Ambel looked closer and noted lumps
growing down the side of the long-snouted end of the thing. They were similar in shape to the
lumps from which its tusks sprouted. Ambel stared at it some more, then abruptly came to a
decision.
‘It’s sprine for you,’ he said to the head.
The head rose up on its bottom jaw and tried to shake itself free of the box. Ambel
slammed shut the lid and locked it. The head was still banging about inside its box as he closed
it in his sea-chest. He took up his ‘buss and his bag and quickly left his cabin.
****
With a fear gnawing his gut, Peck watched them rowing ashore. Horrible things happened to you
if you went ashore. Memory was a feeling. He could feel a long bony finger under his skin,
working round between dermis and muscle, tugging and ripping. Why can’t a Hooper faint? he
wondered. Why did the pain have to last for so long? Somewhere deep inside himself Peck knew
he was being foolish. The Skinner was finished. Ambel kept the head in a box and the Skinner
could no longer do what it had been named for.
The boat grounded on the beach of the cove and the five of them hopped out, secured it,
then made their way into the dingle. Rhinoworms would be in the deeper water surrounding the
island elsewhere, so they would have to make their way round there, and out of the shallow
cove.
Peck looked at Pland, who was standing at the bows with two juniors. The three of them
had dropped lines over the side and were milling for boxies. Nothing to worry about. Everything
was fine. But then the whispering started again: a kind of hungry pleading.
‘Wants some buggering sea-cane does he?’ Peck said loudly.
Pland glanced at him. ‘Get it from the stern. I don’t want you stirring it too much here.’
Peck nodded, then moved to one of the rail lockers, where he pulled out a coil of rope and
a grappling hook. He walked then to one side of the stern end of the ship, hurled the grappling
hook out, and began hauling away. Soon the hook snagged one of the sea-cane plants, and he
pulled carefully until it slid up to lodge in the tangle at the plant’s head, then he increased the
pressure. With a puff of black silt the plant came up out of the sea bottom. He drew it in to the
edge of the ship then hauled it up hand-over-hand as far as the rail. With it draped half over the

rail, he grasped the stalk, which was as thick as a man’s leg, pulled out his panga, and with one
blow cut off the hand-like root and anchor stone to which it was clinging. Root and stone
splashed back into the sea, while the rest of the plant flopped on to the deck, its gourds thudding
down like severed heads, scattering small leeches, trumpet shells, and coin-sized prill across the
planks. Peck then spent a happy five minutes stamping on the prill and leeches, and dropping
trumpet shells into a cast-iron bait box. During that time he forgot the whispering, but when he
had finished it returned stronger than ever.
Come . . .
With a sweat breaking out, Peck clung to the rail - then he swore and headed for the rear
hold. Down below decks, he muttered to himself and crashed barrels about with more vigour
than was entirely necessary. Two barrels he hoisted out on to the deck before climbing out of the
hold and rolling them over towards the sea-cane. After opening the barrels, he stamped on the
few leeches he had missed, then began plucking gourds and tossing them into the first barrel.
Need. . .
‘Shaddup! Buggering shaddup!’
The stalk of the sea-cane Peck sliced up with single panga blows so each fragrant section
fell into the second barrel. The ribbed red-and-green skin of the cane stalk was only a thin
sheath covering a gooey yellow honeycomb that smelt strongly of aniseed. Peck scooped up the
tangled top and tossed it back over the side, before quickly snatching up the grappling hook and
casting it out into the water again. It’s a coward, he thought, as he yanked in another cane. It’s
only this bad when the Captain ain’t aboard. But today the whispering was particularly strong.
He’d never known it as persistent as this before. But this time he would resist. It was only when
he had dealt with the second sea-cane, which had nicely filled both barrels, that he remembered
that Ambel kept the salt-yeast in his cabin. Then the whisper became even more intense, even
more eager. With elaborate care, Peck returned the rope and grappling hook to the locker before
clinging tight to the rail again. He clung there for as long as he could, but a horrible fascination
eventually turned him round to stare towards the Captain’s cabin. After a moment he walked to
the door and - out of Pland’s view - he ducked inside.
The pain. The pain had been transcendent. It had taken Peck somewhere he had never
before been. There had been a terrible understanding in it, too. It had been given to him so he
might understand, yet he had failed. Peck stood over the sea-chest with his sweat dripping on to
the ornately carved wood. Here, concealed in this box, was something that all Hoopers - with
their ambivalent relationship with pain - could not but fear and worship at the same time.
I mustn’t. . .
It was so hungry, and if he fed it, the whispering would stop. Peck abruptly turned from
the cabin and ran out on to the deck. For a moment he stood there gasping, hoping it would just
cease. That subtle voice suggested untold pleasure and pain so intermingled they were
indistinguishable. He had to silence it, so if food would do the trick, then food it must be. He
reached into the barrel where they kept the sail’s feed and pulled out the last, rather putrid
rhinoworm steak. He headed back into the Captain’s cabin and opened the chest.
It was there in the box; moving about in the box. Peck studied the secured lock and felt a
strange relief.

I tried . . .
Then the lock clicked.
Oh bugger.
****
Gliding on thermals rising from banks of sun-heated coral, Windcheater observed the motorized
dinghy as it hurtled for the shore, the wake of a chasing rhino-worm close behind it. Steam and
explosions of water blew from around that wake as the figure crouched in the back of the dinghy
tried to hit the pursuing worm with a high-intensity laser. Windcheater recognized this because
only recently he had been scanning, with wonder and no little dismay, a weapon-dealer’s site.
‘They’re bounty hunters. Batian killers. I already know about them,’ said the Warden, as
the sail tried to describe what he was seeing - he hadn’t yet quite mastered transferring images
across from his visual cortex.
Windcheater banked, riding out of the thermal and away from the island. Hadn’t there
been something about Batians on that weapons site? The sail resisted the impulse to go back to
the place as he had more than enough to chew on concerning humankind. As he flew on, he
auged through to any easily accessible information about his own kind, and was surprised to find
how much and how little was known.
Polity experts knew that sails fed from the surface of the sea, taking rhinoworms, glisters,
prill from the back of leeches - and sometimes leeches themselves. The speculation that they
took to the ships for an easier food supply and a less hazardous existence was, of course,
entirely wrong. Strange how the humans tried to classify the behaviour of any other species as
relating only to ‘animal’ traits. Windcheater was completely certain that he and his kin had taken
to the ships out of curiosity. It was much more difficult working as a ship sail for just a few
steaks than snatching a whole worm from the sea and devouring it on the wing. Silly, arrogant
humans.
The information section concerning sail mating was of huge interest to Windcheater. He
had known for a long time that humans were divided into two sexes, and how all that operated he had often been aboard a ship during one of the frequent Hooper meets, though why it was
necessary to consume prodigious quantities of sea-cane rum and boiled hammer whelks before
the sexual act, he had never been able to fathom. What he had not been aware of was that his
own kind had four sexes. Anyway, during the mating season, he had never really had much
chance to think about the mechanisms that drove him to such exhausting madness. Three males
required to fertilize one female egg, and that egg then encysted and stuck, in its cocoon, on the
side of the Big Flint. Hence, what a human far in the past had described as ‘that rock-top orgy’.
Windcheater flew on, heading for the horizon of Spatterjay, and all the new horizons he
was now discovering. He was but a speck by the time the Batians beached their dinghy in a spray
of sand and opened fire en masse on the rhinoworm that reared out of the sea behind them.
****
The worm dropped, flaming, back into the sea, writhed there for a moment as if still intent on

coming on to the beach after them, and then grew still. Shib let out a shuddering breath, then
quickly wiped at the sweat that was stinging his eyes.
‘Great idea using an inflatable dinghy to get out here. Real classic, that one,’ he snarled.
‘Shut up, Shib,’ said Svan, as she watched the leeches surfacing to take apart the
laser-cooked rhinoworm. ‘You know what would happen if we used AG here. The Warden would
be up our asses with a thermite grenade about two seconds later.’
‘Yeah, but—’
Svan made a chopping motion with her hand. ‘Enough. You either handle it or you don’t.’
Shib shut up. He knew Svan wasn’t suggesting he could pay back the deposit and go
home. Employment contracts with first-rankers like her either ended with a large payout or in a
rather terminal manner. He nodded when she gestured towards the boat, then slung his carbine
from his shoulder and headed over to the vessel. Upon reaching it, he immediately clicked on the
little rotary pump. Joining him, Dime hauled out their packs and tossed them on to the pebbled
beach. Shib detached and collapsed the telescopic outboard, and then he and Dime stood back
as the dinghy quickly collapsed and shrivelled. The rolled-up dinghy was no wider than a man’s
wrist, and with its motor locked beside it, formed a pack that could be tucked under an arm.
Dime carried this to the head of the beach and slid it under a spread of sheetlike leaves growing
there. Soon all four of them had loaded up their packs and were heading along the beach.
‘Why here?’ Tors asked after a moment.
‘A location easy to find - and our client has business here,’ Svan replied.
Half listening to the conversation, Shib kept his eyes on the dingle. A hideous bird-thing
observed him from the branches of a tree with a hugely globular trunk. He had thought the
creature dead and decaying until it had moved to follow their progress with its glistening
eye-pits. He suppressed his immediate inclination to burn it from its branch. No doubt Svan
would take that as one push too many.
‘Do you have any further information on this client?’ Tors asked.
‘Same one as has had the bounty up on Sable Keech for the last three centuries. No way
of tracing the transaction without collecting, and no one has managed that yet.’
‘I don’t get how he’s lasted so long,’ said Dime, with an apologetic glance to Shib.
‘Organization, speed, luck and, thus far, seven centuries of experience. Anyway, Keech
doesn’t often put himself in a position where he can be hit. Normally he operates on Polity
worlds well within AI surveillance, and spends most of his time searching through Polity
databases. Not easy to get him there. When he does come somewhere like this, he’s normally
well covered. It’s surprising that he’s here alone. Maybe he’s getting careless,’ said Svan.
‘Or maybe he’s just had enough,’ said Tors.
Svan shrugged and gestured to a path cutting into the dingle opposite a jetty. ‘This looks
like it,’ she said.

As they turned into the path, Shib could feel the hairs prickling on the back of his neck. He
had been in some hostile places before, some where he’d had to go suited and armoured, and
some where nothing less than a fully motorized exoskeleton would do, but here he felt things
were wrong right from the start. This was a casually brutal place. In the Hooper town, he’d
caught the tail-end of some sort of fight, and even he had been surprised at how easily Hoopers
bore hideous injury. Then there had been the rush to head for where Keech had headed, then of
course Nolan . . . He peered round at the surrounding dingle and gripped his carbine tighter. From
the dingle floor, spined frog-things regarded him with glinting blue eyes, and the foliage above
bore oozing fruit of a long and slimy variety. Was there anywhere here where you could let your
guard down?
‘This is the place. We secure it and wait for her here,’ Svan said.
‘Her?’ asked Shib, nicking his gaze forward. Ahead of them a tower sprouted from the
ground, and around it the churned earth was clear of vegetation, as if the tower itself had sucked
all goodness from it. Shib wondered where the resident ogre was.
Svan did not elaborate. Instead she turned to them.
‘Dime, take out the autogun, and any dishes on the roof. Tors, I want you to blow the
door. You cover him, Shib, and hit any autos around the door.’
‘How many people here?’ Shib asked.
‘Just one old woman. We’re to hold her and wait. Our client should be along soon. Right,
we go now.’
Dime dropped a targeting visor down over his eyes, raised his carbine, and fired four
short pulses in rapid succession. As he fired, Shib and Tors ran for the door. On the roof of Olian
Tay’s residence, the satellite dishes on the pylon flared and sagged. The autogun, which had
swung their way at the last moment, disappeared with a flat crack and flare, out of which black
fragments dropped to the denuded ground. Tors hit the door and slapped a small disk against the
locking mechanism, while Shib covered him. They both swung themselves either side of the
entrance as the small mine blew and sent the buckled door crashing inside the building. Then
they were in.
Svan walked across the clearing, carefully scanning her surroundings. She watched as
Dime ran around behind the structure, and she listened as sharp cracking sounds and low
detonations issued from inside. The only noise she sensed came from Shib and Tors. This place
was deserted. Either Olian Tay had struck lucky, or someone had warned her. As Svan entered
the building, Dime moved in behind her. Tors stood in the central living room, doors broken open
all around, while Shib was coming down a spiral staircase to one side. She glanced at them and
they both shook their heads.
Svan peered up at the ceiling. ‘House computer, where is Olian Tay?’
‘Olian Tay, Olian Tay, is over the hills and far away!’ The voice was that of a woman, and
Svan had no doubt to whom it belonged. She made a sharp hand signal to Dime, who quickly
pulled an instrument from his belt and held it up.

‘Where are you?’ she asked.
‘Oh, I see,’ said Tay. ‘You want me to tell you that just so’s you can deliver the flowers my
lover has sent.’
‘You could say that, but don’t you really want to know why we are here?’
‘That’s the way, keep me talking so’s your friend can trace a signal. Not too bright that,
considering you destroyed the radio dish.’
‘You’re somewhere close, then,’ said Svan, making another sharp gesture. Shib and Tors
made to duck out of the room and search, but Tay’s next reply stopped them in their tracks.
‘Wrong, this signal is coming through a landline to a pylon on the east of the island. Right
now I’m sitting in the Mackay lounge on Coram. Oh, by the way, there’s enough explosives
underneath my house to launch you four out this way as well, so I suggest you listen very
carefully to me.’
‘I’m listening,’ said Svan.
‘Now, I know that somehow you’ve traced our mutual friend, Monitor Keech. He is not
here anymore. The last I heard he was heading off to find some Old Captain to chat to. What I
am most interested in is how you managed to trace him here.’
Svan gave the other three a warning look. ‘If I tell you that you’ll let us walk out of here?’
‘I will allow that,’ said Tay. ‘Now perhaps you can explain yourself?’
Leaning her elbows on the rim of the granite outcrop, Tay stared down at her tower. She
then studied the screen of her transponder and smiled at the way the mercenaries were
frantically gesturing to each other.
Their leader spoke up then. ‘We followed Keech with a purpose-built tracer that picks up
on emissions from certain old designs of cybermotors,’ the Batian woman said, holding up some
sort of device she had pulled from her belt. Tay peered at her screen. The explanation seemed
plausible but she didn’t believe it for a moment.
‘I don’t believe that for a moment,’ she said, enjoying herself immensely. Only a small
seed of doubt marred her enjoyment: if they hadn’t traced Keech by the method they claimed,
how had they traced him? As she turned from the granite, with the transponder held up before
her face, it occurred to her that maybe they were not here searching for Keech at all. No matter.
She walked over to her AGC and climbed into it. When these mercenaries finally went away, as
their kind always did, she would return to her home. She dumped the transponder on the seat
beside her and reached for the control column.
‘Why, Olian,’ said the woman who climbed into the AGC beside her, ‘you’ve got it all
wrong. They came here to meet me, and I came here to meet you.’
Tay did not recognize the face that smiled at her, but the gas-system pulse-gun pointed
at her face had her fullest attention.

‘Who the hell are you?’ she asked.
‘Can’t you guess?’ the woman asked and, so saying, picked up Tay’s transponder and
spoke into it.
‘Svan, this is your client here. I have Olian Tay and will be with you shortly. I must
congratulate you on performing precisely as I expected.’
She clicked the transponder off, tossed it out of the AGC, and then looked at Tay
expectantly. Before reaching out to take hold of the column Tay wiped sweat from under her chin
and swallowed dryly. Batian mercenaries . . . now there were many people prepared to hire these
mercenaries, hence the entire culture of one continent, on an Out-Polity planet, revolving around
that frowned-upon profession, but factor in the recent presence of Sable Keech here on
Spatterjay, and Tay’s own interests . . . Tay did not like where her thoughts were leading her.
There had always been something odd about one particular story concerning the demise of one
of the Eight.
‘What do you want?’ she asked.
The woman gave a deprecatory smile and waved the gun at her. Tay could not keep her
eyes off the wide silvered snout of the weapon. She knew that, even at its lowest setting, it could
probably take her face off.
‘Oh, Olian, we can chat about all this back in your wonderful tower. Then you can show
me your wonderful museum. I’ve read quite a bit about it, and have always wanted to see it.’
Tay engaged the old grav motor and lifted the AGC into the air. She considered making a
grab for the stranger’s gun, as up here might be her only chance. Perhaps this woman did not
realize how long Tay had been a Hooper, and just how strong she was.
‘You know, Olian, you wouldn’t know how old this body is, just by looking at it, and how
long it has been Hooper,’ said the woman.
Tay said nothing for a moment. This body. Not my body, not me. That one phrase was all
the confirmation Tay needed. She felt suddenly very small and vulnerable, even though her
captor seemed smaller and more fragile than she. She knew now who this person was, and that
there wouldn’t be a lot she could do if she did get hold of the weapon. The woman sitting next to
her could break her like a ship Captain could.
‘You’re Rebecca Frisk,’ she said.
‘Of course I am,’ said the woman.
As she brought the AGC in to land on the roof of her tower, Tay became absolutely certain
that she would die if she was not very careful. And even then . . .
‘Out,’ said Frisk, once the grav motor wound down.
Tay climbed out of the AGC, calculating all the way how she might survive this. That Frisk
had come to see her out of curiosity, she had no doubt; that she left death and destruction
behind her wherever she went was a matter of historical fact.

‘What do you want here?’ she asked, as Frisk followed her to the stairwell.
‘I want to see your museum,’ said Frisk.
****

9
Prill and leeches had gathered in huge numbers, snapping up stray pieces of flesh
while adding to the chaos by attacking each other - or the glisters, even though
that gained them nought - and tearing the fragments into smaller fragments as
they squabbled over them. Visibility in the water was now atrocious, what with all
that activity disturbing the seabed and all the spurting spillage from tender organs.
This detritus of broken bodies and stirred-up silt was also so thick in the water that
little else could be tasted. And, what with the rattling and clattering of prill and
the bubbling and hissing sussuration of leeches obliterating most other sounds,
what happened next was predictably unfortunate.

‘Something coming,’ said Ron, his eye to his telescope.
Janer looked out over the sea but for a moment could see nothing. He then discerned a
distant dot coming towards them and growing larger. He unhooked his intensifier and quickly
focused on the object.
‘I’ll be damned,’ he said.
‘What?’ asked Erlin.
‘He’s got an AG scooter,’ Janer replied. ‘Must have been all those investments he made
before he shuffled off. Compound interest.’
Erlin laughed, and Janer chalked up a mental point as he hooked the intensifier back on
his belt. It was good to know that he could touch her in some way.
The scooter came to a halt above the ship, and hovered there for a long while. Before
anyone could wonder if it was just going to stay up there, it descended and came in to land on
the clearest part of the deck.
Janer gagged when he drew close to it. The crusted stinking thing sitting on the saddle
was Keech all right, but a Keech somewhat changed since the last time Janer had seen him.
‘Too late, I think,’ he said.
Erlin approached the reif with her diagnosticer. She pressed it against his arm and the
thick scab there cracked and oozed red plasma. She stared at the reading on the diagnosticer,
then abruptly took a step back. Keech’s head turned towards her, shell-like crust breaking away

from his neck to reveal wet and bloody muscle underneath.
‘You’re alive,’ was all Erlin could manage.
Keech just looked at her with his single, weeping blue eye.
With the rest of the crew, Janer just stared. It was Ron who suddenly moved into action.
‘All right lads, get him below. Gently, mind,’ he said.
‘I ain’t touching that,’ said Goss.
Ron looked at her and raised an eyebrow - and Goss was the first one to reach for the
reif. As they lifted Keech off his scooter, stinking crusts fell away from him to expose flayed
muscle. Something bulked in the front of his overall, and Janer had a horrible feeling that organs
were floating about free in there. He was so involved with what was happening that he didn’t
notice the hornet had returned to his shoulder until Keech was taken below decks.
‘He brought a package for us,’ said the mind, ‘It is in the luggage compartment of the
scooter. Get it now.’
‘You don’t order me any more,’ said Janer out loud, and Ron glanced round at him. Janer
pointed at the hornet and Ron nodded, before following the others below decks.
‘Please,’ said the mind.
‘OK.’
Janer went over to the scooter and looked in the back. He instantly knew which package it
was. He lifted it out and inspected it.
‘Put it somewhere safe . . . please.’
Janer headed for the hatch to his cabin. ‘What is it?’ he asked.
‘Do you need to ask that?’
‘No, I guess not,’ said Janer, since he had received deliveries like this before.
He took the package below, walking past the crammed cabin, where Keech was stretched
out on a table. Reaching his own cabin, he was about to place the box under his bunk when the
mind stopped him.
‘Wait one moment,’ it said, as if something had only just occurred to it. In Janer’s
experience things never ‘only just occurred’ to a Hive mind. He waited anyway.
The hornet launched itself from his shoulder and landed on the box. It crawled round to
the middle plane of its hexagonal front. Immediately a hexagonal hole opened and the hornet
crawled inside.
‘You may put it somewhere safe now,’ said the mind. Janer crammed the box under his
bunk, and went to see what was happening with Keech. As he arrived, Erlin was clearing the

cabin.
‘Everyone out. Out, now,’ she said.
The disgruntled crew shuffled away. The medical technology of off-worlders always
intrigued Hoopers simply because of its utter irrelevance to them. Their attitude was something
like the attitude of a hospital consultant to the trappings of shamanism. This was yet another
strange Hooper reversal.
‘You can stay,’ said Erlin, and it took Janer a moment to realize that she meant him. He
walked into the cabin, past Ron as the Captain went out. He stared down at the thing that was
Keech.
‘What can I do?’ he asked.
Erlin pointed at the autodoc. ‘That’s an idiot savant quite capable of dealing with injuries
to a normal human. Right now Keech is making the transition from corpse to living man with the
aid of a nano-changer. He’s also infected with the Spatterjay virus, which is digesting dead
tissue, just as it does in a living creature. The problem is that it started on Keech when he was
all dead tissue. We’ve also got a few hundred cybernetic devices to deal with.’
Keech made a clicking gurgling sound.
‘He keeps trying to speak,’ said Erlin. She seemed at a loss.
Janer did not know what to say. If she could not handle this, then there was no way he
could. He looked at Keech and felt pity. The only option, it seemed to him, would be to load him
back on his scooter and head full-tilt for the Dome. He’d probably be dead by then, but even so . .
. Janer focused his attention on Keech’s aug. There was an interface plug on it.
‘Back in a moment,’ said Janer, and ran from the cabin. In the crew cabin he searched his
backpack until he had hold of what he wanted, and rushed back. He brandished the small screen
and optic cable, then walked over to Keech.
‘This should work,’ he said. ‘It has a voice synthesizer.’
‘It does work,’ said Keech, the instant Janer plugged him into the personal computer.
‘Erlin, do not concern yourself with the cybernetics. I will take them offline the moment they
interfere with physical function.’
Erlin came up and stood by Janer. She seemed calmer now, and the look she gave Janer
made something flip over in his stomach.
‘Right,’ she said, ‘we’ve got a lot of work to do. We need to rig up some kind of tank. The
nanites cannot function outside of a liquid medium, and that’s why they’re failing to build his
outer tissues. The virus needs to be inhibited by Intertox. Keech, I take it you’re blocking the
pain?’
‘I am.’
‘Right, we need to make a tank.’

Erlin looked at her box of tricks for a moment, then looked at Janer.
Janer said, ‘There’s a monofilament mainsail stored in the rear hold. Goss told me it was
a gift from some out-worlder who wanted to establish a business here by displacing the living
sails. Ron didn’t have the heart to warn the man that such replacement sail would require extra
rigging as well as extra crewmen. They now apparently only use it to stretch around the hull after
an attack by borers. I don’t know what borers are, but I can imagine the effect. I should be able
to rig something in about an hour.’
‘Do it then,’ said Erlin.
Janer turned to go, running through his mind the stored materials he had seen for the
repair of any damage to the ship. He needed to construct a frame strong enough to support the
weight of a few hundred litres of water. Perhaps some sort of hammock arrangement? He did not
need to worry about the strength of the monofilament fabric. He’d yet to see it ripped, and knew
that little short of a hit from a pulse-gun could puncture it.
‘Janer,’ said Erlin.
Janer turned at the door.
‘I don’t know how to say this . . .’ she began.
‘Then don’t,’ said Janer, and went on his way.
****
The four mercenaries were definitely unhappy. It had soon become evident that Frisk had been
watching for some time before their arrival, and had allowed them to act as a crude decoy.
‘The warning message - was that you?’ Tay asked.
Frisk continued to study the looming sculpture of the Skinner and replied contemplatively.
‘Oh no, that was the Warden. We monitored the signal and made sure there were no subminds in
the area. Now, tell me, how did you ascertain the details for this?’
Tay stared at the sculpture and wondered just who Frisk was referring to when she had
said ‘We’. She also frantically tried to think of some story to turn to her advantage - something to
eke out the possibility of escape from this impossible situation. Then she remembered one
aspect of the history of Frisk and Hoop: they had once been art thieves and both had an interest
in paintings.
‘A crewman going off-planet presented me with his collection of paintings. I never
believed they were accurate until I went out to the Skinner’s Island and saw the reality.’
‘Ah, you saw . . . the Skinner, in the flesh?’ said Frisk.
Tay looked at her.
‘Yes, I saw what Jay Hoop had become,’ she said.

Frisk smiled humourlessly and moved on into the museum. At each exhibit she stopped
and stared for an uncomfortably long time. Occasionally she laughed, and occasionally she
shook her head in annoyance. All of this performance was precisely that: a performance.
‘It is an impressive collection,’ she said finally, coming to stand before the model of
herself as she had once been. ‘You’ve got so much of it right, but there are a few inaccuracies.’
‘Such as?’ Tay asked.
Frisk made an airy gesture with her hand. ‘Eon Talsca was the one who always carried an
old projectile weapon. Duon used a fast-feed minigun or one of those bulky old pulse-guns. They
often argued over the effectiveness of the weapons they used. I remember them having a
competition to see who performed best with their particular choice of weapon. Duon won, of
course. He killed fifteen of the twenty ECS monitors we let run loose - though they disputed after
about the artistry of their weapons’ play. Eon brought down his five monitors with clean head
shots.’
Tay reached down to her belt for the device clipped there. A hand closed on her wrist and
she found herself staring at the flat snout of a small stun gun, belonging to the Batian she now
knew to be called Svan. She knew this choice of weapon was meant for her, if she ran. Obviously
Frisk wanted her alive - for a while.
‘It’s only a recorder. I was making sure it was running,’ Tay said.
Svan looked askance at Frisk.
Frisk nodded. ‘Let her record. She’s an historian to the end.’
It was then that Tay knew for sure that she wasn’t going to survive this unless she was
sharp. Obviously Keech’s presence had brought Frisk to Spatterjay and curiosity had brought her
to this particular location. Self-preservation, though, would not allow Frisk to leave behind any
witnesses to the fact that she was still alive. As Tay watched Svan step back and lower the
weapon, she wondered if these mercenaries realized that.
‘Well, he did get Jay right, but then I suppose his memories of the Skinner’s isle were
more recent than those of the Talsca twins,’ she said.
Frisk stared at her with the confidence of someone utterly in control of a situation,
waiting for her to explain. Tay was aware that the old pirate was expecting some sort of survival
ploy. Instead Tay pretended ignorance, or indifference, as she made a circling motion with her
hand to encompass all the exhibits.
‘The artist,’ she duly explained. ‘Every exhibit here is based on the sketches and paintings
he made. Of course it could be my error giving Duon the projectile gun - the twins are very easy
to confuse.’
‘Who is this artist?’ Frisk asked.
‘Name of Sprage, one of the Old Captains,’ Tay replied.

Frisk was thoughtful for a moment. ‘The name escapes me,’ she said, ‘though I would
perhaps recognize the face.’
‘Not that memorable,’ said Tay. ‘His self-portrait won’t win any prizes.’
Frisk glanced around the museum. ‘Where are they?’ she asked.
‘What?’ asked Tay, her attention deliberately directed towards the mercenaries, as if
searching for a way past them. If Frisk clicked to her ploy, that was it - all over.
‘Where are these paintings?’
Tay glanced at her as if surprised at her interest, then quickly cleared her face of
expression. ‘I don’t have them. Sprage has them still,’ she said quickly.
Frisk smiled at such transparency, and Tay dared to hope.
‘Where do you keep them?’ Frisk then asked. ‘Don’t lie to me. You know your life might
depend on it.’
Tay hesitated before saying, ‘I keep them in a vacuum safe. They were done on kelp
paper, and some of them are very old. I didn’t want to risk putting them on display in here.’
‘You could have vacuum-sealed them in here,’ said Frisk.
‘Yes, but they’re also susceptible to light damage,’ said Tay - then, quickly changing the
subject, ‘What . . . what else have I got wrong in here?’
Frisk was not to be distracted. ‘I want to see these paintings. Show them to me.’
Hooked, thought Tay, though she was uncomfortable with just how easy it had been.
None of the Eight had been quite this stupid, and these Batian mercenaries certainly weren’t.
Perhaps they were all simply confident that any ploy she tried would be ineffectual in the face of
their combined abilities. Tay scanned about herself as if seeking, yet again, for some way out.
Finally she stared directly at Frisk.
‘I’ll let you have them if you let me live,’ she said.
‘What makes you think I want to kill you?’ Frisk asked.
‘I know your history, remember?’
Frisk affected an expression of boredom.
‘Take me to these paintings now or I will have Svan here cut your fingers off one at a time
until you do,’ she said.
Tay stared at the Batian who was tapping a small curved knife strapped to her side.
Giving a sharp nod, the historian moved to the door. Two of the other Batians closed in on either
side of her as she stepped out into emerald sunlight. Perhaps they thought she might try to run
now. She did not, and instead stumbled on the bare soil, obviously demonstrating how fear was

making her weak, then walked as slowly as she could - delaying the inevitable. The mercenary
Svan shoved her in the back, and she stumbled again. As she righted herself and continued, she
felt the skin on her back crawl. This was her only chance, and it had to be done just right. Soon
they reached the ruined front door of her residence, and Frisk went in ahead, with one of the
mercenaries following behind her. Svan shoved again, and Tay followed them. Soon they were all
gathered in the main living room.
Frisk turned and regarded Tay. ‘Well?’ she said, utterly in control of the situation.
‘I need to address the house computer,’ said Tay in a hollow voice.
Frisk nodded to Svan, who stepped up beside Tay and pressed the snout of her stun gun
against the back of the historian’s head.
Tay swallowed dryly before speaking. ‘House computer, open false wall.’
Immediately a wall that seemingly held two windows, began to slide sideways. The
windows blinked out, at the last revealing themselves as screens. Behind was revealed an oval
door completely free of any apparent locking mechanisms.
‘House computer,’ Tay began again, pausing when the stun gun was pressed harder
against the back of her head.
Frisk nodded for her to continue.
‘House computer, cancel lock-down and open atmosphere safe,’ Tay finished.
There came a deep clonk, then, with a low clicking and a hiss, the oval door swung aside.
As it opened it was revealed to be almost like a barrel bung, such was its thickness. Inside lay a
polished spherical chamber. At the centre of this chamber rested two long coffin-like cases.
Tay very carefully gestured towards one of them. ‘There they are. We can take a look if
you wish,’ she said.
Frisk was immediately suspicious. ‘You - Shib, isn’t it? Go in there and bring that case
out,’ she said, pointing.
With his laser carbine held one-handed, its butt propped against his hip, Shib cautiously
stepped inside the chamber. He squatted and pulled at a handle fixed to one end of the case,
then glanced back questioningly.
‘It’s palm-locked to the floor,’ explained Tay.
To Svan, Frisk said, ‘Take her in there to unlock it, and then bring it out.’
Svan pressed the gun again into the back of Tay’s head and the historian advanced while
Shib stepped out of the safe and moved to one side. Tay ducked slightly as she stepped over the
safe’s threshold – then drove her elbow back as hard as she possibly could. The Batian woman
grunted and stepped back a pace. Tay kicked out, catching Svan hard in the groin, and then
turned and slammed her hand against the touch control beside the door. The door began to
swing closed, but not fast enough. There was a flash and searing pain in her thigh - one of them

had hit her with a laser. She staggered against the case and glanced back in time to see Svan
raise her stun gun. Only half the blast hit her as the door relentlessly drew closed. As something
like a hammer of light flung her to the back of the safe, Tay could hear Frisk screaming
imprecations. The sound of the door locking down told her she knew she might live, then she lost
consciousness.
****
Ambel boarded first, and leant over the side to catch the rope cast up to him. Hand over hand, he
hauled up a huge cluster of hide sacks sodden with fresh purple blood. As these squelched on
the deck, Anne followed him up. Pland looked askance at the bloody slashes in her clothing.
‘Fucking prill,’ she muttered.
The others soon following her had similar slashes on their clothing. Gollow and Sild wore
the same somewhat bewildered expressions at they disappeared below to tend their wounds.
Boris remained on deck, pressing his hand to a deep, seeping wound across his stomach. He was
chewing one end of his moustache; a sure sign of irritation. Ambel, Pland now realized, had
slashes in his clothing too. There was no blood of course, since Ambel healed too quickly to
bleed. Erlin, that Earther woman Ambel had taken a shine to some years back, had even
wondered if he contained any blood at all. Pland chuckled at the thought and went over to help
them lower some of the bags of meat below decks, and then to fill the sail’s food barrel from the
remainder. He glanced around for Peck, then spotted him at the stern rail, stooping over another
barrel to empty a sack of salt-yeast into it, and yelled to him. Peck tied off the yeast sack,
dropped it to the deck and wandered across. He began to silently assist Pland and the others,
while Ambel single-handedly hauled the heavy rowing boat up the side of the ship and tied it in
position.
‘Leave a few lumps out on deck, lads. We might get us a sail tonight, then we can go
after that other big’un,’ said Ambel.
There were groans from all of the crew - except for Peck, who was strangely silent.
‘You all right there, Peck?’ asked Ambel.
‘Buggered well shoulda gone with you,’ grumbled Peck.
‘Next time,’ said Ambel, giving the crewman an estimating look. ‘How’d you manage with
the sea-cane?’
‘Barrel of cane and one of gourds,’ said Peck grudgingly.
‘Good,’ said Ambel, reaching out to give him a slap on the shoulder. ‘We’ll have some
mash to sell at the Baitman when we get back, and later I’ll have you boil us up a batch of resin.
Now get ‘em sealed and down below.’
‘He been all right?’ Ambel asked Pland, as Peck went to do as bid.
‘Bit noisy,’ replied Pland. ‘Shouting and muttering - but that’s nothing new.’
‘Mmm,’ Ambel nodded.

****
In the night, the boom of wings woke Boris from the light snooze he was enjoying while on
watch. He observed the long neck and crocodilian head of a sail questing about below the mast,
gobbling up the rhinoworm steaks deposited there. He then observed the curious sight of the sail
dropping a half-chewed steak and staring intently out to the sea.
‘Who’s that?’ growled the sail.
Following its gaze, Boris saw that the molly carp had surfaced a short distance away and
was now returning the sail’s stare. The sail clamped its mouth shut with a snap, and remained
utterly motionless. It was almost as if the two creatures were engaged in a staring competition.
Boris shook his head, dismissing the scene, and rested his head back against the rail. On the
following morning, spread across the spars with meat digesting in its transparent gut, the sail one of the largest Boris had ever seen - was ready for work.
It watched with interest as one by one the crew roused and came out on to the deck.
Peck came first up from the crew quarters, to empty a bucket of slops over the side,
watch the commotion this caused in the sea below, and then urinate after it.
‘Mornin’, Peck,’ said Boris.
Peck merely grunted at him before heading to the water barrel for a drink, then moving on
to his tasks about the deck. By the time Anne, Pland and some of the juniors came out, Peck had
a brazier set up and was blowing on the charcoal in it. Every so often, he would stop to cough, or
wipe at his watery eyes and mumble imprecations. Anne stood staring at him for a moment, arms
akimbo and with obvious annoyance in her expression. When he finally noticed her she glared,
took up the slop bucket he had left on the deck, and retreated below.
‘What?’ Peck asked Pland.
‘If you don’t know by now, you never will,’ said the crewman, coming over with a small
jug and a hide bag. Peck shrugged and continued at his blowing while Pland poured oil into a pan
and set it on the brazier. When Peck was satisfied with the glowing charcoal, and rocking back
on his heels, Pland dropped square slices of boxy meat into the pan. The sudden sizzling and
waft of savoury smoke across the deck was Ambel’s signal to come out of his cabin.
‘Ah, boxy,’ he said, then with a glance at Pland, ‘We got any of that Dome bacon left?’
Pland nodded and wandered off to investigate. Ambel watched him go, reflecting how it
was strange that the stuff was still called ‘bacon’, it never having been within a light-year of a
pig, or any other animal for that matter. He turned his attention now to the sail, who was audibly
sniffing at the smoke from the pan and looking dubious.
‘How are you called?’ Ambel asked it, as was proper courtesy.
The sail turned its head towards him, and Ambel took an involuntary step backwards
when he realized just how big the creature was. It exposed its teeth in what might have been a
grin.

‘Windcheater,’ it replied, and all the crew on deck stood still with their mouths open.
They’d never before encountered a sail without the name ‘Windcatcher’. True, they’d heard
rumour of a sail that had actually grasped how a name could be an individual thing, but like so
many other Hoopers, had dismissed the rumour as nonsense.
‘Only kidding,’ said the sail. ‘It’s Windcatcher really.’
They closed their mouths and got on with their work, quickly trying to forget this upset to
the natural order of things.
‘Pleased to make your acquaintance, sail,’ said Ambel, giving the creature a look. He had
already noticed the bean-shaped device attached to the side of its head, and he knew precisely
what it was.
The sail snickered and shook its wings.
****
Windcheater surveyed the ship with intense interest and recalled when, long ago, he had been
here last. The Earther human woman had been aboard then, and he remembered how he had
tried to bite her when she sneaked up on him to remove a sample of his skin. Memory of that
brought back to him the memory of what had happened afterwards. The Captain, with some crew
and the woman, had gone ashore, and after traumatic events he had only learnt about later,
returned aboard carrying a certain box that was still here now.
Windcheater could even hear the whispering. The man he once threw from the top of the
Big Flint was here now ... in part.
The sail tested the movement of the spars and found that they were well greased in their
sockets, and that there was little scope for slack movement between the three masts. Pulling on
the reefing cables, he released the fore and aft sails and checked the movement there. Again,
everything seemed fine. He lowered his head so as to inform the Captain, then abruptly pulled
away from the smell of charring meat. He had never quite understood this human preference for
incinerating perfectly good fresh meat prior to consuming it. It was like so many other things the
humans did that he could not quite get a handle on. As he watched them eating their food, he
thought back again to a time long ago.
Windcatcher had been the cleverest of all the sails and the most curious about these
strange creatures that had descended from the sky, but the autoguns and intruder defences they
had installed around the island they occupied had been enough to deter the most inquisitive, and
thus the situation had remained for a very long time. Then had come internal strife, after the
arrival of more of the same creatures, and the defences were gone and these creatures, these
humans, came out into the world. Windcatcher’s curiosity became almost a painful thing when
these humans built movable shells out of peartrunk and yanwood timber in which to float about
on the seas.
At first he had flown at a safe distance, but sometimes close - especially in the night and listened to the sounds they made to each other. He’d realized from the start that these
sounds were a language much like that of the sails, and had quickly memorized it all. Learning
what the words actually meant had taken somewhat longer, nearly one human century, and even

then it had been difficult to grasp that they only had so few words to describe the wind. And as
for names ...
When Windcatcher had seen a ship drifting in the sea, without its sail of normal fabric,
he had quickly grasped the opportunity this presented. Settling on the spars of the ship, he had
gazed down upon the bemused crew and told them, ‘I am wind catcher.’ And so it had all begun.
The other sails had soon joined him in this diversion - it was substantially more interesting than
sitting on a rock discussing the weather. They, like the then original Windcatcher, had not
grasped the concept that individuals could possess individual names and by the time they did,
the tradition of them being called ‘Windcatcher’ had been established. The first sail to break
with this tradition had been the original Windcatcher himself, when he had changed his name to
‘Windcheater’. But then he had always been one to break new ground.
After reminiscing, he accessed, through his aug, a communication channel that had been
opened in the night. The first communication then being, ‘You still into dodgy artefacts, sail?’
‘Are you still there?’ he asked over the ether, still finding it difficult to talk without
actually opening his mouth.
‘I ain’t going nowhere until this fucking fish has a bowel movement,’ replied Sniper’s
irritated voice.
‘Aren’t you controlling that crazy carp, then?’
‘Nah, I’m recharging in readiness for that bowel movement. Molly here’s just got a bit
confused, and seems to want to hang around the ship. Understandable, as it’s a long way from
home. Tell me, how much you say the Warden’s paying you for this?’
‘A thousand a day.’
‘Yeah, thought so. But what the hell is there to see on that ship?’
‘Nothing much. I was hungry and needed a rest so I thought I’d stop by. The way I see it,
the longer I’m out here, the more money I’ll get. If the Warden tells me to move on, then I will.
Don’t see the point in putting in too much effort,’ said Windcheater.
‘You like the idea of wages, don’t you?’ said Sniper. ‘It ever occur to you that a few steaks
is pretty cheap payment for the work you do as a sail? Without you, they’d need a fabric
mainsail, extra rigging and extra crew.’
Windcheater blinked and surveyed the Treader. Boris was at the helm, steering the ship,
but the others were scattered about the deck at minor tasks. That had not really occurred to him.
Yes, over the ages he had seen the design of the Hoopers’ ships changing and, until this
moment, had only viewed those changes as ones intended to more easily accommodate his kind.
It seemed almost a reversal now to realize that the benefits were really a bit one-sided. Through
his aug, he accessed a text on Hooper ships and sailing practices.
‘The crew-members all take a percentage of the ship’s profits,’ he said.
‘A sail could demand that, too’ said Sniper. ‘But, he’d probably have to agree to stay with
the ship for the entire duration of the voyage.’ Sniper then transmitted the address of a particular

site, and Windcheater studied with interest the sample work contracts there displayed. He
decided then that, when the Warden was done with him, things were going to change.
****
The wound on her hip was now hurting less than the after-effects of the stun blast. Parting the
burnt fabric of her trousers she saw that already the hole had filled with pink scar tissue, which
was slowly welling to the surface of the wound. The Batians and Frisk, in their overconfidence in
their abilities, had forgotten that she too was a Hooper with quite a few years behind her. Had
she been a normal human, her surprise blows would have had no effect on the one called Svan Batians were tough. Anyway, she had survived. The distant sound of a couple of explosions had
long since faded, as had the wail of her house computer when it was blown. No doubt they had
tried to either cut or blast their way through this door, but once it had closed she knew she was
safe. The amount of energy required to penetrate a metre of what had so far only ever been
described simply as ‘Prador armour’ - the superconductive and highly impact-resistant exotic
metal that had been one of the reasons that ancient war had dragged on for so long - would have
been sure to draw the attention of the Warden, and Tay was certain Frisk was not prepared to
risk that. She wondered just what Frisk had thought about her having such an incredibly
impervious safe installed here, but then Frisk did not know how valuable was the item Tay kept
here. The historian grasped the edge of one of the coffin-cases to haul herself to her feet, then
pressed her palm to the lock in the case’s surface.
‘Open viewing panel,’ she instructed.
In the surface of the case a rectangular section faded from shiny chrome to transparency,
revealing that the case indeed served a purpose similar to a coffin. There had been no paintings
here.
‘Well, I did get all of your features right,’ said Tay, gazing down at David Grenant. She
then, with a stab of her fingers, initiated a touch-console beside the window and began studying
the readouts. The feeding system was still being utilized and Intertox levels were being
maintained - like this he could last almost indefinitely. She touched in a sequence she had not
used in a little while, then waited. After a minute, Grenant’s face twitched - then, he opened his
eyes. For a second he appeared utterly confused, then he started to jerk and shake and whip his
head from side to side. She’d previously noticed how it always took him a little while to
remember precisely what his fate was. Now she stared at him calmly as his silent screams
frosted the underside of the viewing window. Grenant’s entombment had been one of the more
imaginatively horrifying of Francis Cojan’s punishments, and Tay saw no reason to change that: it
was history after all. She then reversed the touch sequence and he slowed to immobility and
finally closed his eyes.
Glancing across at the other, empty, coffin-case, she contemplated the fortuitous
workings of fate. When, if her plan evolved over many years came to fruition and she got to open
her museum on Earth, this one exhibit would be the making of her fortune. Perhaps an additional
exhibit would ensure this success. She smiled to herself, then sniffed at the air. First she had to
get out of here, before the air - no longer renewed by the house computer - turned bad.
Tay pushed herself upright and limped over to the control panel she had used to close the
door. There she paused. She had no way of knowing what might lie on the other side of the door.
Frisk could be waiting for her, even though a few hours had already passed. Tay hesitated, and in
that moment the opening light on the panel flickered, and she listened to the clicking as the lock

mechanism disengaged. No, surely she hadn’t touched it. Frisk! Tay turned and stared in horror
at the door, as it swung open. She would not now be able to close it again until it had reached its
fully open position.
Grenant! She limped over to his coffin-case and slapped her hand down on the palm lock.
‘Open!’
Black lines quartered the lid of the coffin-case and those quarters began slowly to spin
aside. Inside the case, Grenant was fully dressed, his fingers clawed above his chest, where he
had been scraping at the lid. At his hip was an empty holster. Damn! She’d forgotten that she’d
previously moved his weapon to the model she had constructed of him in the museum, mainly to
prevent him trying to draw it and use it on himself here - the little projectile weapon would not
have been sufficient to drill a hole in his coffin. She hardly dared look up now as the door clunked
into its fully open position.
‘I thought you were advised to get away from here,’ spoke an irritated voice.
Tay stared out into the ruin Frisk and her Batians had made of her home, then focused on
the object visible in the doorway. Here hovered an iron-coloured cockle, half a metre across.
It opened its bivalve shells to expose glimmers of greenish light as it spoke again. ‘You’re
lucky to be alive,’ it said. Then, ‘Who’s your friend?’
‘Who are you?’ Tay asked, slapping her hand on the coffin’s locking mechanism.
‘I’m SM Twelve, the one they usually send to clear up other people’s messes,’ it informed
her. ‘Now, I can see there’s quite a mess here. Perhaps, through me, you’d like to tell the Warden
all about it?’
‘Close,’ Tay instructed the coffin-case, then watched it do so before moving away. As she
walked to the door of the safe, the drone retreated into the room beyond and hovered in midair.
With a touch, Tay had the safe door closing behind her, and then she stood surveying the
wreckage. It was vandalism, plain and simple, like someone had gone berserk with a gas-system
pulse-gun. The furniture was burnt, even the floor, ceiling and walls were distinctively scored,
cabinets smashed. Books, some burnt and some still burning, were strewn all about, and the
computer console was a hollowed-by-fire ruin.
‘It seems they had some sort of grudge against you.’
The voice that now issued from the mollusc drone was no longer its own, Tay realized
instantly, but that is what it wanted her to know. Picking her way through the debris, she moved
to the entrance hall - the drone trailing along behind her.
‘A grudge?’ she asked.
‘The Batian mercenaries that came here - presumably in search of Sable Keech,’ replied
the Warden.
‘Oh, I don’t think they had a grudge,’ Tay replied, stepping out into soft green light.

‘There does seem an excessive amount of damage here.’
‘Not done by them, I should think. It’s not part of their remit. That lot,’ Tay gestured over
her shoulder with her thumb, ‘was probably done by their employer, once she realized she
couldn’t get at me. She has a long history of throwing spectacular tantrums. And now, of course,
she’s quite mad.’
There was a long silence from the drone as Tay headed for her museum. Shortly before
she reached the structure, the drone hummed ahead of her and zipped inside. Following it in she
was pleasantly surprised to see no damage here at all. The drone was now hovering above the
head of the Skinner, and together they presented a sinister apparition.
Tay stared up at it. ‘No explosives? No booby-traps?’ she asked.
‘None,’ now replied the voice of SM12 again.
‘I thought not. Her arrogance and self-regard would not allow her to destroy this, though
her love of inflicting pain and terror would have let her destroy me - though she would have
labelled it an act of self-preservation.’
‘Who is this employer you refer to?’ asked the voice of the Warden, quickly returning.
‘You haven’t worked that out?’
‘I have some idea, but I would like to hear the answer from you.’
‘Rebecca Frisk,’ said Tay, swinging her gaze down to the model of that very person. ‘She
must have cored herself and swapped into another human body. It must have taken some deep
re-programming to have whoever she put into her own previous body play the part of Frisk
herself, but then she would have had access to Prador thrall technology, and without any
compunction or moral restraint. She would have dearly relished breaking another’s mind and
turning it to her own ends.’
‘The woman we thought was Frisk, and who was mind-wiped on Earth, was innocent,
then’ said the Warden.
Tay wondered if the Warden was deliberately appearing to be slow for her benefit.
Perhaps AIs sometimes found it difficult to assess the intelligence of the human minds they were
addressing.
‘Well, now you’ve stated the obvious, what are you going to do about it?’
‘Nothing at present. I have no real jurisdiction here.’
Tay grimaced and turned to glare up at the drone. ‘Do me a favour. Your average Polity
citizen might believe that crap, but I do not.’ The iron cockle tilted itself towards her and its shell
opened slightly wider. It was an action that could only be interpreted as a grin. As it closed again
the Warden’s voice became significantly abrupt.
‘SM Twelve,’ demanded the Warden, ‘analysis.’

Tay could only assume that the AI wanted her to hear this conversation. There was no
other reason for it to remain audible, since Warden and drone could communicate many
thousands of times faster than human speech - or even become one entity.
‘The debris I analysed was that of a post-armistice Prador in-system cargo hauler. She
probably used a small tactical to blow it, then under cover of the explosion jettisoned herself in
an escape pod,’ explained the SM.
‘Olian Tay, why do you think she is here?’ the Warden asked.
Tay took a moment to catch up. Perhaps she was a bit slow.
‘To get to Keech, is my first thought,’ she said. ‘Then, again, she might be here to find her
husband, or simply on a whim. Someone like her is not easily predictable. Why do you think she’s
here?’
‘I cannot really say. It is difficult to assess such an ancient personality. But I do know that
someone wanted it to be known she is here. Before confirmation of her presence by you, I have
observed agents of untraceable employ disseminating rumours and stories of her arrival here.
Curious, don’t you think?’
‘Must be some enemy of hers, then,’ said Tay.
‘Maybe.’
‘What else? You know what the reaction here will be?’
‘Oh, I know, and I observe it now,’ said the Warden. ‘Already the Old Captains have called
a Convocation - no doubt to make arrangements to hunt her down and throw her to a leech
swarm.’
Tay turned and walked out of her museum, and men stood glaring up at her tower.
‘I suppose the bitch destroyed my AGC,’ she said.
‘Do not despair, Olian Tay. Sprage is coming here for you even now, knowing you would
not want to miss out on this.’
‘You told him,’ said Tay. ‘How did you know about this ... to come here, I mean?’
‘Your house computer called me just before it died. It also gave me the locking code to
your safe. Be well, Olian Tay.’
Tay glanced round at the drone as it came level with her shoulder. ‘Wait, you didn’t say
why you thought Frisk might be here,’ she said quickly.
Just then the SM jerked, shaking itself like a wet dog. ‘Well, there he was, gone,’ said
SM12.
‘Did he answer my last question?’ Tay asked.

‘The boss don’t know why she’s here, but says it could be any of three clear reasons or
combinations of them: to kill Keech, to find her husband, or to the here. He says the last is a
certainty - through her choice or otherwise.’ And with that, the drone gave her its green-light grin
again and shot up into the air.
****

10
The first male glister noted a vibration and a shifting of currents but recognized
these as being no threat to itself. It continued to tear and feed, comforted by the
knowledge that there were few creatures in the sea that could penetrate its
adamantine shell. The presence of a large boulder to one side of it — revealed as
one of these shifting currents dispersed the organic cloud for a moment - was
something it puzzled over for only a moment before getting its nose down to its
meal again. Its puzzlement increased when it soon noted how this boulder seemed
to have got much closer. When the boulder suddenly heaved up and huge eyes
observed it through the murk, the glister had time only for a few seconds of
confusion, before it too became a crunchy mouthful.

Keech was a blurred shape behind silver monofilament. He had coiled himself into a foetal
position, and the autodoc clung to his side like a chromed crab. Umbilici and cables snaked from
the surrounding fluid to Erlin’s drug manufactory, Keech’s cleansing unit, Janer’s computer, and
other jury-rigged hardware.
‘That’s the best we can do for him,’ said Erlin.
Janer noted that her hands were shaking. He himself had slept for a couple of hours, but
she hadn’t stopped working all night. She slumped into a chair and sat staring at the floor. Janer
walked over to her and took hold of her upper arm. She stood without him having to say anything,
turned and rested her head against his shoulder.
‘Best you get to your bunk,’ he urged.
She nodded her head, still resting against him, and allowed him to lead her to the cabin
she shared with Goss and seat her on the bed. She showed no inclination to do anything more.
‘You’ll keep an eye on the read-outs?’ she said.
‘I will.’
‘You’re a good man.’
‘Debatable.’
He reached down to her and tried to turn her over so she could lie down. Her arms came
up round his neck and, before he knew what was happening, she was kissing him. After a time,

they parted.
‘Is this a good idea?’ he asked.
She unzipped the front of her coverall and gazed up at him.
‘It’s what I want,’ she said. ‘What about you?’
He looked at the light blue circles visible on her dark skin. There were only a few of them.
He put his hand on her neck and ran it down to cover one small breast. Her nipple was hard
against his palm, as she lay back.
‘Help me off with this stuff. I’m too knackered to do it myself.’
Janer pulled her coverall down from her shoulders, and over her hips when she raised
them. He tugged off her shoes then slid the overalls off completely. She now lay naked, staring
up at him, stroking a hand over her belly.
‘Stress always makes me horny,’ she confessed.
‘Me too,’ said Janer, nearly breaking his neck in his hurry to get undressed. The fit of
giggles that followed unmanned him for a while. But Erlin was warm and, although with the body
of an eighteen-year-old, brought to their love-making the experience of over two centuries. This
experience for Janer, himself only just into his second century, was enlightening. He soon
discovered that there was nothing Erlin did not know about the human body, and how best to use
it.
****
Alternately rubbing his eyes and his belly, Captain Drum left his cabin. He felt he’d maybe
overdone it on the hammer whelks and sea-cane rum - just a tad, but not enough to cause any
real damage. What had finished him off had been those glister brains on toast. The ensuing
hallucinations had been of the flying kind and had continued throughout the night. He felt
sluggish and slightly ill, as if the virus inside him was punishing him for his excesses. It was a
moment, therefore, before he realized that what he was now seeing - mostly submerged next to
the island of sargassum - was no Spatterjay leviathan he recognized. ‘Orlis, get that anchor up,
nice and easy, lad.’ Drum moved to the rail to get a closer look at the initially unfamiliar shape.
His vision was still a bit blurry, and some part of himself was trying to deny what he was seeing.
Finally, he could deny no longer that he was observing Prador pictographs impressed in golden
metal armour.
Jack, the first mate, walked up and stood beside him. ‘What’s up, Cap’n? . . . Oh!’
‘That,’ said Drum, ‘is a Prador light destroyer, armoured with that damned exotic metal
that always made ‘em so hard to blow.’ He looked round to check that Orlis had the anchor in,
then hurried to take the helm. ‘Wake up, Windcatcher!’ he shouted, and tried to turn the wheel.
When it did not move, he pushed harder, then felt wood beginning to break in his hands, so he
eased off.
‘Boarders!’ Jack yelled, suddenly.

Before Drum could react, a shape in black crabskin armour was on deck, levelling some
kind of weapon. There was a flash and a thud and, trailing smoke, Jack went flying over the
opposite rail. Before he hit the water, he blew apart and Drum saw one of his legs go
cartwheeling across the surface of the sea. Another black-clad killer came over the rail - then
another.
‘Get ‘em, lads!’
Orlis threw the anchor at the last one to come on deck. With a sickening crunch, the
anchor folded that one, and he just lay down to die. With a roar, Orlis charged the next one, but
something suddenly lifted him from his feet and flung him four metres back. He lay on the deck
staring at the smoking wound in his stomach.
‘Hey! It’s only—’
A flat detonation curtailed his observation, and spread bits of him all over ship.
Drum picked up a harpoon head that Banner had been working on, up on the cabin-deck,
and moved to join the fray.
‘One step further and you’re dead.’
Drum stopped exactly where he was, and looked around. The woman standing there held
a heavy pulse-gun trained on him, and he knew she wasn’t kidding - it might take her two or
three shots, but he’d certainly go down. Whoever these people were, they had come prepared for
the durability of Hoopers.
The woman seemed surprised for a moment. ‘You . . .’ she said, then, ‘I suppose you don’t
recognize me, Little Skin.’
Drum had not been called that in more years than he cared to remember. And even then
there had only been a certain group of people who ever used the nickname. A sick feeling grew
in his stomach as he guessed who this woman must be. Immediately he put her appearance
down to cosmetic surgery, but quickly realized that had to be wrong. Whoever had given herself
up to ECS needed to have the right genetic code for ECS to be fooled. That meant the woman
before him had either cloned herself, or actually sent her own body. Drum knew which she had
done, and why she looked so different now.
‘The sail, secure the sail!’ the woman yelled as she moved up behind him.
Three loud thumps followed, and he glanced down to see one of the armoured figures
beside the mast, with some sort of bolt gun. The sail screeched and struggled in the spars ratchets and chains clanking below and the foremast slamming back and forth. Another
detonation followed and Banner’s head went bouncing along the deck.
Drum swore and threw the harpoon head at the woman. The gun stuttered in her
double-handed grip, and Drum staggered under the impact of ionized gas pulses hitting his torso.
It hurt like hell and there was a smell of burning flesh in his nostrils. She fired again and it felt to
Drum like he’d been hit in the chest with a shovel. Losing his balance fell back towards the
ladder, where a third hit sent him over towards the deck. His head struck the hard timbers and
the world went dark - so thankfully he did not see the rest of his crew being slaughtered.

****
Rebecca Frisk gazed down at the three Batians as they removed their breather helmets and went
to check on their comrade. Svan, Tors and Shib were all heavy-worlders, and all quite capable of
tearing an Earth-normal human to pieces. Dime also, and the anchor thrown at him had nearly
cut him in half. Svan, the woman whom Frisk had initially hired, soon saw that there was nothing
to be done for her comrade, and turned to climb the ladder on to the deck which formed the roof
of the forecabin.
‘They are dangerous and strong. It’s a shame we weren’t sufficiently acquainted with that
fact before meeting Olian Tay,’ said Svan, once she was face to face with Frisk.
‘You were warned this time,’ said Frisk, a glassy smile on her face. ‘You have now also
been provided with weapons suitable to the task, rather than those silly carbines you had
before.’ She pointed to where Dime lay. ‘It seems that even such a warning and such weapons
are not enough.’
Svan turned from her and stared out over the sea to where the Prador ship was surfacing,
its chameleon skin of exotic armour now taking on the colour and texture of the nearby island of
sargassum, so that it now appeared to be an extension of that island.
‘We will be more careful in future.’
Frisk congratulated herself on choosing these stone killers. Ebulan had offered her some
of his human blanks, but she doubted he could control them as well as these Batians controlled
themselves. Very fast reactions were needed to deal with Hoopers. She glanced at her hand and
noted it was shaking. She put it on the rail to still it, and ignored the closing slit in her cheek
where the harpoon had just missed slicing her head in half.
‘As for when you take the Captain aboard,’ said Frisk, nodding to a small wedge-shaped
transport that was on its way over from the Prador ship, ‘full-restraint harness. Remember: a
Hooper his age is about twice as strong as you are, and a lot more durable. Be prepared to hit
him with a level-six stun if he so much as quivers.’
Svan went down to the lower deck and supervised the fixing of the ceramal restraint
harness on Drum. With a feeling of melancholy, Frisk watched the proceedings. How ironic that
so long ago she had saved this same man from coring in order to make him her personal body
slave - and now to do this? She stared for a moment then took a cloth from her pocket to wipe
away the small spill of blood on her cheek. As the cloth touched blood, she convulsed violently,
dropping her pulse-gun on to the deck. Svan glanced up at her, but Frisk stepped quickly out of
sight, pulled an injector from her belt and pressed it to her neck. The shaking stopped shortly
after, but the feeling of dislocation, of not quite knowing whom she was or why she was,
persisted. Bad nerve conflict. Partially under control, Frisk moved back to the rail.
Speaker and two guard blanks came aboard to collect Drum.
‘We have experienced previous difficulties with the coring of long-term Hooper humans,’
said Speaker, staring up at her.
‘You just need to be as quick as you can, and not worry about extraneous damage,’ Frisk

informed the Prador in its ship. ‘Don’t bother removing the cerebrum either, just cut in and use a
spider thrall unit.’
‘Yes,’ said Speaker.
They never nod or use any hand gestures, Frisk observed for perhaps the thousandth
time.
‘Oh, and don’t worry about his injuries. Hoopers heal very quickly,’ she added as they
hauled the Captain over the side. Then she pressed a hand against her mouth to suppress a
giggle.
****
A wind from the east began blowing with greater and greater intensity, rolling the cloud into grey
threads across the sky’s jade face. With the occasional imprecation and much skill, Windcheater
and Boris tacked the Treader out of the cove, then rounded the island and ran before what
seemed the start of a squall. The morning was gone before the island was out of sight, and a
persistent drizzle sheened Windcheater and soaked the crew. Boris stood at the helm in a long
waxed-cotton coat and sou’wester, and grumbled when the rest of the crew went below for
shelter. Windcheater held his head up and was enjoying the moisture and cold.
Ambel came and stood beside Boris for a little while before turning to him. ‘I’ll take over
in a couple of hours, but I’ll send Peck up with some rum tea before then,’ he said.
‘Aye, Captain,’ said Boris, quite used to long lonely watches at the helm.
Ambel stood there uncomfortably for another moment, then asked, ‘You got any sprine,
Boris?’
Boris gave him an odd look before replying. ‘Don’t carry it, Captain. Anything happens
where I might need it, and I’d likely get no chance to use it,’ he said.
Ambel nodded, moving to the ladder.
‘Try Peck,’ Boris advised. ‘He’d be the one.’
Ambel nodded again, climbed down, and swung at the bottom to drop himself before the
door of his cabin. Once inside he immediately opened his sea-chest. He didn’t attempt to open
the box containing the Skinner’s head - just stared at it for a while before closing the chest and
leaving his cabin. Clumping across the deck, he opened the hatch leading down into the crew
quarters, and went through. As he descended, he could smell rum tea being made.
‘You got any sprine, Peck?’ he asked.
Peck looked up from the little stove, shook his head, and returned his attention to the
kettle. Ambel reckoned he was lying. Any Hooper who had been through the kind of experience
Peck had endured would carry sprine just in case such a situation should recur.
Ambel didn’t push it. ‘Any of you others got some?’ he asked generally.

‘Got any what?’ asked Pland, who lay on his bunk with a book propped on his knees.
‘Sprine, you idiot,’ Anne replied, from the bunk above him.
‘I ain’t that rich,’ complained Pland.
Ambel looked next at Anne and she shook her head. He leaned back and glanced over to
the junior’s quarters, then decided not to bother. No chance young ‘uns like that had any sprine.
You didn’t really get to think much about dying until you were reaching the end of your second
century.
‘We’ll have to refine some then,’ he said.
Nobody asked what for. They all knew what Ambel kept in his cabin.
‘We’d need a steady mooring for that,’ observed Pland.
Ambel said, ‘We’ll cross Deep-sea, pick up one or two more on the way across, then moor
at the west atolls. We can do it there.’ He gave them an estimating look. ‘Take an hour or so off,
then I’ll want you up on deck and ready.’ And, with that, he climbed back above.
An hour later, he was up on the cabin-deck, scanning the sea with his ancient set of
binoculars, when a humped shape slid into view.
‘We got one!’ Ambel yelled. ‘Hard to port!’
Boris drained the last of his rum tea, and hung his tin cup on his belt, before steering the
ship towards the distant shape.
Windcatcher adjusted himself accordingly. The rest of the crew clambered up on deck,
but as the Treader drew closer to the shape, they all realized something was wrong. There were
no prill visible there, and the hump was too steep, too immobile.
‘Yer molly carp again,’ said Peck.
They were silent for a while as they watched the great fish parallelling their course, then,
because they were now on deck anyway, they slowly began to set about their normal duties.
Anne sharpened harpoons and knives. Peck had a couple of juniors helping him repair ropes, and
making new ones from a bag of fibre beaten from sargassum stalks. Pland worked in the hold,
salting rhinoworm steak, and Boris had the helm, of course. Other crew continued with that
constant round of tasks which kept their ship seaworthy: the constant repairs to the
superstructure; the greasing of chains and sprockets; the tightening of chains, cables, and
bearing shells, besides the endless scrubbing and polishing.
As they worked, the crew-members considered what they already knew. They had all
heard stories about molly carp - about their tenacity and the odd things they did. They were
aware that to have one hanging around while they were hunting giant leeches could be
dangerous. Through his ancient binoculars Ambel watched the molly carp for a while longer, then
turned his attention elsewhere. The drizzle had ceased and the sun was burning the sky a lighter
green, when he was able to yell out another warning. A group of three leeches had come into
sight and they immediately headed for the Treader.

‘Twenty degrees to starboard!’ Ambel yelled. ‘Hold it there.’
As the ship hove over, Pland came up on to the cabin-deck and quickly went to replace
Boris at the helm. Boris meanwhile went to load the deck cannon with its powder charge and
stones. The others brought out their own weapons and readied them. Ambel slid down the
ladder, dived into his cabin, and came out with his blunderbuss tucked under one arm.
He looked around. ‘All juniors below!’ he yelled, eyeing Gollow and Sild. The two men
looked set to argue with him, before nodding acquiescence. It was fair enough: none of the
juniors was as strong as any senior, or anywhere near as strong as Ambel, so they could easily
get killed during a leech hunt. Gollow and Sild, who had done well enough during a previous
hunt, were still suffering from the injuries they had received when going ashore with Ambel after
the last rhinoworm - for juniors also did not heal as quickly as older crew.
Once they were gone, Ambel scanned those who remained. ‘We’ll take the last one, lads.’
He glanced up at Boris. ‘You hear that?’
‘I ain’t deaf, Captain.’
Boris sighted down the deck cannon at the last of the three shapes rapidly approaching.
Ambel watched them for a moment, then turned his gaze to the right. Further out in the sea, the
molly carp held station and watched.
The incursion of prill from the first leech to arrive was short-lived and quickly repelled.
The leech itself, after grinding at the wooden hull for a moment, lost interest and swam away
with most of its prill remaining on its back. The same happened with the second leech, but the
third one arrived only moments after the second had turned away from the ship, so the attack of
prill from both was unrelenting. Boris managed to fire three times on the back of the final leech.
Ambel managed to get off two shots before taking up the first of the harpoons and planting it in
the huge creature. He continued methodically planting four harpoons deep into its body, hauling
tight the ropes to each, and bringing the leech hard against the side of the ship.
Prill were mashed and smashed and blown apart. Bits of prill still managed to crawl to
the scuppers and drop through into the sea, but what remained on board no longer had any
mobility. Anne and Peck washed this mess out through the scuppers after the rest, where no
doubt some of the larger pieces would grow into more prill again.
‘This is a good one, lads,’ said Ambel, rubbing his hands together.
He scrambled down the rope with his crampons fixed to his feet and hooks hanging from
his belt. Pland followed with the knife and bar and they were soon out standing on the slippery
mound of the leech and making the first incision. At one point the leech convulsed momentarily,
and Pland fell and began to slide down its side, before Ambel caught hold of his collar and
hauled him back up. Soon they had the incision braced open and Pland was inside groping about
in the bloody morass of its intestines. The leech convulsed once again, sinking down at its tail
end. Ambel looked back and saw a large swirling in the water there. The humped crown of the
molly carp suddenly surfaced. The creature regarded Ambel for a moment, then it sank out of
sight again.
‘Crafty bastard,’ he muttered.

Meanwhile, the juniors, hearing that the shooting had ceased, came back out on to the
deck to help in any way they could. But really, at this stage there was little they could do. They
would just get in the way, so they stayed back and watched.
Peck next threw out the rope and Ambel caught it and lowered the end of it to Pland.
When the leech shook again, Pland let go a stream of curses. He was on his way out of the
incision when the molly carp got a firmer hold on the leech’s tail and gave a hard tug. As the
bracing bar slipped, the incision closed on Pland like a wet mouth. Ambel slipped and fell and
caught himself only a metre from the sea’s surface by driving one of his hooks into the side of
the leech. One harpoon came free with a sucking crackle, and the leech now had enough of its
mouth end free to investigate the damage being done to it. Luckily, that end oozed back past the
creature’s main body, in the sea underneath Ambel, to where the molly carp was attacking it.
‘Pull on it! Pull on it!’ yelled Peck.
He and Anne took up the slack in the rope Pland had tied to the severed bile duct inside
the beast. The tension on the rope reopened the incision enough for Pland to get one leg out, but
suddenly the leech rolled, snapping the remaining harpoons that secured it, and both Pland and
Ambel went underwater. Boris grabbed hold of the rope as well, and the three crewmen pulled
with all their might. Sild and Gollow joined in as they heaved. The rope went slack for a moment,
but they were soon hauling in their gruesome catch. The bile duct was a large one, and clinging
to its outer surface was Pland, with a carpet of small leeches clinging to him. They hauled him
quickly up on deck.
‘Get ‘em off! Get ‘em off!’ yelled Pland.
The crew gathered round him and wrenched the leeches off, one after another. The larger
ones they beat on the deck until they released the plugs of flesh they had taken. Pland began
screwing these pieces back into place, swearing angrily all the while.
Peck meanwhile leant over the rail with a rope in one hand, to which he had hastily tied a
grapple. As he searched for his Captain, he muttered under his breath. The leech drew away from
the ship; its back end a ragged mess now where the molly carp still tore at it. Searching
elsewhere, Peck turned his attention to the ship’s wake, where pieces of prill floated and
writhed. Abruptly he cast the grapple there, hauled it quickly in, cast again. On his fourth cast, he
hooked something large.
‘Give us a hand, yer buggers!’ he yelled.
Anne and Boris were quickly at his side, hauling on the rope as well, while Pland leant
back against the cabin wall, whimpering as the remaining leeches were removed from him. In a
pool of sticky blood round his feet, lay more plugs of flesh, and kneeling in that blood Sild
collected them and passed them up to Gollow, who screwed them carefully back into place Pland himself no longer having the strength to do it.
Hauling on the rope, the three seniors saw an indefinite shape reach the surface, and
pulled it in.
‘It’s the Captain,’ croaked Peck.

They hauled it towards the side of the ship. Abruptly there was a swirl in the water
behind the shape, and it was rapidly shoved right up next to the hull. The crew quickly pulled in
the remaining slack and, as they did so, they saw the swirl circle back round towards the leech.
Anne glanced questioningly at Boris.
‘Molly carp,’ he said, and shrugged.
It was indeed Ambel under a thick layer of writhing leeches. Once he was on the deck,
the crew proceeded to do the same for him as they had done for Pland, except for screwing back
plugs of flesh. Ambel’s wounds closed too quickly for that, and there was no blood loss. When
they had finished, Ambel lay still on the deck. The grapple was still hooked through his thigh, and
it took two of them pulling hard on it to get it out. His clothing was in tatters, there were new
scars layered across the many he already possessed, and with the recent loss of flesh, he looked
smaller.
‘Captain?’ said Peck, tentatively.
No reaction for a moment, then Ambel abruptly opened his eyes and sat bolt upright.
‘You all right, Captain?’ asked Boris.
Ambel stood up and started for the rail. Peck tackled him before he could get there, and
brought him down.
‘Bloody Hoop! Bloody Hoop!’ Ambel yelled, hammering Peck with his fists.
The others heard bones break in Peck’s body, and they quickly leapt on Ambel to hold him
down - but to no avail. He threw them off as easily as bed covers, and was at the rail in a
moment. There he stopped, gasping heavily, his hands gripping and crushing the wood. As the
others watched and waited, Pland came away from the cabin wall where he left a smear of
blood, and stood with them.
Ambel turned from the rail and stared at them. Then he walked straight past them and
went into his cabin. He locked the door behind him.
****
‘That could have gone better,’ said Windcheater, as he turned himself into the wind and
observed the crewman called Pland being helped below.
‘Well, it was your idea to move this damn molly up behind the leech,’ replied Sniper.
‘You wanted a bowel movement? You’ll soon get a bowel movement,’ said Windcheater,
remembering the last time he had himself eaten a load of leech meat, and the unfortunate effect
of that meal. He also remembered the unfortunate consequences for the crew of the ship he was
over-flying shortly after.
‘I think you’re right. There’s about a tonne of chewed-up leech sitting in this molly’s
stomach, and some very strange sounds coming from there. Surprising it attacked. Surely it
knows the effect?’

‘Molly carp will attack anything that’s moving right in front of them, but they prefer
glisters and prill,’ said Windcheater.
‘I’m aware of their love of crustaceans,’ growled Sniper.
‘Why the hurry to get out anyway? The Warden’ll only have you counting whelks again.’
There was a long pause before Sniper replied. ‘Something going down,’ said the war
drone. ‘We just had a Prador ship blow in orbit. That’s probably why the Warden sent you out
here for a look. He’s always too cautious - should have this area covered by a network of war
drones by now.’
‘Ah,’ said Windcheater, turning his attention back to the deck of the Treader. Peck and
Anne were now draining the latest bile duct. The Captain was still in his cabin, and it seemed
unlikely he would be coming out for a while. The sail wondered if he had made the right choice in
coming to join this ship.
‘What do you think’s happening?’ he asked.
‘Dunno, but sure as fuck that explosion was no accident.’
Windcheater thought about it. Maybe there might be an angle here. Maybe there would
be some chance to add to his Norverbank account. He’d have to keep an eye on the situation.
****
Keech floated in a warm comfortable place, and considered what he must do next. In the morning
he’d go and check that lead in Klader. He was sure he was close to Rimsc now. The old pirate
had been clever in leaving a number of false leads, but Keech felt he was getting to the end of
them now, after using the new search program Francis Cojan had sent him. As he contemplated
what he would do to Rimsc when he found him, a coldly analytical part of himself was saying
that Rimsc was dead, that he, Monitor Keech, was dead. There was also the feeling that a long
time had elapsed. His thoughts, such as they were, seemed to have been broken in two; as if
separated over that time.
N-FACT MESSAGE: EPIDERMAL GROWTH 65% COMPLETE.
What was that? It seemed to come from that cold part of himself. He tried to move and
encountered resistance. His body moved, but it was not moving how he wanted it to move. What
this all meant was too painful to contemplate, so he concentrated on the task in hand.
The man in Klader claimed he had seen Rimsc and knew where he now was. The man’s
information would cost, but that did not matter to Keech: he would have readily paid for it
himself if he had not had ECS funding. Rimsc had to die for the things he had done - just as all of
them had to die.
N-FACT MESSAGE: HEART RESTART.
A sudden thumping drowned out all coherent thought. It was his heart, of course, yet
something was telling him that he hadn’t heard it in a long while. He felt sick now, and there was

a huge pressure growing in his head. A sudden swirling all about him made him aware that he
was submerged in some kind of fluid. I’m in a tank, I’m injured, he told himself. But surely that
was wrong? He was dead. He knew he was dead.
Suddenly the fluid was draining away from all around him. As it went, he found himself
lying at the bottom of a slimy hollow in a tangle of tubes. He stared up at the two faces hovering
above him and he could feel the machinery attached to his body. This wasn’t right. Who were
these people?
ERROR MESSAGE: PHYSICAL RESISTANCE TO CYBPLANT.
DISCONNECT.
Keech tried to ask them who they were, and what was going on. A colder part of himself
already knew, and it tried to tell him as fluid jetted from his lungs and from his mouth. He felt he
was drowning, and started to struggle
You are the reification Sable Keech. You have been dead for seven hundred years.
Keech gave a liquid gasp, and the sound he next made was more of a croak than a
scream. The cold part of himself acknowledged that there was only one thing to do.
MEMPLANT MESSAGE: FULL DOWNLOAD TO ORGANIC BRAIN.
The memories began to return. As they returned, Keech could no longer fight: he was
paralysed. A door opened before him and he walked into the apartment, drawing his EC-issue
thin-gun. The stink he recognized from Spatterjay: the almost savoury smell of charred flesh. He
only recognized his contact because the man was still wearing the bright green shirt he was
wearing when he’d left the com message. The face itself wasn’t recognizable, as there was no
face. Whoever had done this had obviously taken pleasure in it: they’d tied the man to the chair
and done it slowly. This much was evident by the way the man had torn off his own nails by
clawing at the chair arms.
Keech moved on into the room, then checked all the doors leading off from it. Nothing he
could do here now; he’d come back with the forensic team and go through this room at
microscopic level. But he didn’t need the evidence they’d find to know who had been here
earlier. He stepped out of the apartment and closed the door behind him, as well as he could, the
lock being broken. Holstering his thin-gun he moved to the elevator, stepped inside, and
descended the twenty floors to street level. Outside the building, one of those heavy rains that
seemed to fall only in Klader was shining the hydrocar streets and running streams past the
pavements. Keech folded up his collar and headed for his battered police hydrocar. Would this be
another dead end, in more ways than one?
His answer stepped out of the alley next to his car.
‘Sable Keech,’ the man sneered.
He was short, thin-faced, and bald-headed, the heavy coat he wore not concealing the
fact that he possessed a physique that appeared boosted. But it wasn’t boosted, not in the usual
sense. Keech didn’t bother to respond with words. He pulled his gun and fired, and Alphed Rimsc
went over backwards, with a smoking hole through his middle. Keech walked over, his thin-gun

down at his side. Just like that: got him.
Rimsc sat up and smiled, and casually lifted the gun he had been holding all the time.
There was a flash, but Keech heard no sound. Something smashed into his side and spun him
around. Next thing he knew, he was sitting on the pavement in the rain, broken, and unable to
move his hand to retrieve his gun that had fallen next to him. The virus: the damned virus. Keech
managed to find the strength to tilt his head and glare upwards at Rimsc. The man was still
smiling as he narrowed the aperture on his heavy pulse-gun. Last thing: the snout of the weapon
cold against Keech’s head, a blow, blackness. That was all for a while.
Out of blackness, Keech woke to the grey. He was not alive and he knew precisely what
had happened. He had prepared for this: he was now a reif. I am dead. The years of searching
came back to him: the killings and the questionings, the terrible purpose that was empty of
feeling. He had hunted down Hoop’s crew with the tenacity of a mining machine digging into a
cliff. Rimsc first - it had been a simple thing to rig his suit once he had located him. There had
been no restraining morality then as Keech had not considered himself a monitor any more.
Killing Corbel Frane had been a high point. In between there had been lesser kills; many of those
who had worked for the Eight, and those sent by Frane and perhaps by Hoop himself. So many of
them, and so many years. Keech wanted to cry and felt the circuit that activated his eye irrigator
becoming live, then going off again. The years of it all continued to download into his newly
repaired and activated brain.
****
In the darkness, Windcheater observed Ambel unsteadily leaving his cabin. All but the
helmsman, Boris, were back below decks. When Ambel walked over to Windcheater’s food barrel
and methodically pulled out steak after steak and munched them down, the sail considered, then
rejected, the idea of complaining. He just watched as Boris spotted the Captain then, with a
lantern hung from his belt, climbed down from the forecabin and walked across.
‘You better now, Captain?’ Boris asked.
Ambel wiped purple blood from round his mouth before replying. ‘Bad memories,’ he said.
‘Happens like that sometimes. Got shot with a vis gun ‘bout twenty years back. The
wound healed in a day but I was real nasty for months after.’
Ambel just looked at him and waited for him to continue - as he did.
‘It was on account of me first wife shooting me with one, ye see.’
Ambel nodded. ‘You remember it all?’ he asked.
‘Mostly,’ said Boris.
‘I don’t. I’ve got a piece missing as long as you’re old, and I don’t want it back. I know
what it is, but I don’t want it.’ Ambel looked very closely at Boris. ‘There’s bits, though. Bits keep
coming back.’
‘How’d you lose it?’ Boris asked.

‘Lost it in the sea, Boris. In the sea.’
Windcheater blinked and remained utterly still. Unlike most human conversations, this
one he did not understand at all. He recognized the expression of disbelieving horror on the
helmsman’s face, and understood that the man had not shuddered because of being cold. But
beyond that. . .
After a long silence Ambel said, ‘In the morning we’ll be at the atolls, and there we’ll
refine us some sprine. With that, I’ll free meself of one of those bits. Time the Skinner went to
his locker for good.’ He took another steak out of the barrel and began eating it.
‘You shoulda done that long ago. Don’t know why you didn’t. You know it whispers in the
night?’ said Boris.
‘I know. Does it to Peck, mainly. Makes him all skittery.’
‘That don’t take much.’
‘Yeah.’
They both eyed each other knowingly, then Boris nodded and turned to walk away,
swinging his lantern in the night. Its light glinted on the open eyes of Windcheater as the sail
watched Ambel move to the rail.
‘What was that all about?’ the sail queried through his aug.
‘Memory loss through intense pain,’ replied the Warden.
‘Oh, so glad I asked,’ said Windcheater.
‘It’s interesting that you chose this ship,’ the Warden told the sail. ‘Why did you choose
this ship?’
‘It happened to be in the area,’ said Windcheater. ‘And you wanted me to look out for
anything unusual in this area.’
‘And what have you found?’ the Warden asked.
Windcheater, with his long understanding of human language, was not immune to
sarcasm. ‘Well, I’ve found the ship with Jay Hoop on board, and I’ve found a molly carp with a big
lump of scrap metal inside.’
‘I heard that!’ interjected Sniper.
‘Yes, I know you’re here,’ said the Warden. ‘Is that molly carp well?’
‘Think it might have a bit of a stomach upset. Reckon it ate something that disagreed
with it, and I don’t mean me,’ replied the war drone.
The Warden was silent for a moment, then, ‘You, Sniper, will stay with this ship and keep
watch. When you’re free, I may have further instructions for you. You, Windcheater, will leave

this ship in the morning and fly to Olian Tay’s island. By then Captain Sprage’s ship will have
arrived. You’ll join it and keep watch. I’ll want constant reports.’
‘What’s happening?’ asked Sniper, unable to keep the frustration out of his
communication.
‘The exploding Prador vessel was a cover for the arrival of Rebecca Frisk. Where she is
now I have only a rough idea. The Old Captains, who are aware of her presence, are gathering
for a Convocation.’
Sniper hissed excitedly, ‘Frisk here?’
‘Yes, she is here.’
‘She won’t be alone,’ said the war drone.
‘She is not,’ said the Warden, and withdrew contact.
‘Come on, you damned haddock! I want out of here!’
Windcheater turned his attention to where Captain Ambel had focused his. There was a
disturbance in the sea, and white water glinting in the dark, as the molly carp swirled and rolled
and thrashed its tail against the waves.
****

11
The second male glister flicked clumps of hairlike organs on its head, registering
the tail-end of a low-pitched squeal in what served it as ears, but so stupefied was
it by its current pleasure in gustation that it could not identify the sound. Perhaps
this was understandable, since it had never heard a brother’s death-squeal before.
Waving its antennae, it detected only an overwhelming taste of whelk, but that
was perfectly understandable - so many of them having recently been torn apart in
the vicinity. It gave a lobsterish shrug, and went to take another bite of the
wonderful bounty of flesh strewn before it. The wall of flesh that rolled over it and
its meal, as well as uninvited leeches and prill, was as yielding as old oak - the
great mouth behind just hoovered them all up.

The pinioned sail kept mouthing obscenities, until Shib cut its tongue out. That made it thrash
about so much that he had to put a couple of more staples through its neck and into the mast to
keep it secured. He was the right one to do it: he had been very vocal in his dislike of this place
and its fauna. Without ceremony, the three Batians then dropped the body of their deceased
comrade over the side. Dead, he was as much rubbish as the rest of the human debris scattered
over the deck. Frisk watched the corpse dragged down as countless leeches attached themselves
to it - and then she went to see how Svan was getting on.

‘How much longer!’ she shouted down into the aft hatch. There was no reply so she
climbed down to have a look. Svan was crouching in the rear of the ship, over the open casing of
the motor she had just bolted to the keel. There were twists of wood shavings all over the floor
where she had bored the bolt holes, together with those holes required for the intake pipe and
outlet jets. Two pipes went straight through a bulkhead to the bow of the ship; Frisk assumed
they were for braking.
‘Fucking Prador diagnostics,’ Svan snarled.
‘What is it?’ Frisk asked.
‘This whole motor is just a pain,’ Svan said.
‘Will that be a problem?’
Svan closed the casing and locked it into place. ‘Shouldn’t be unless it goes wrong. But I
don’t see why it has to be so complicated. This ship isn’t exactly high-tech.’
Frisk stepped out of Svan’s way as she began to unreel a length of optic cable from the
motor. She followed the Batian as she climbed the ladder on to the deck, across this, then up the
next ladder to the cabin-deck. Here, Svan plugged the cable into a throttle-lever attached to the
helm.
‘Is all this really necessary?’ Svan asked.
‘Not completely,’ Frisk replied. ‘It’s just the way I want to do things.’ She took a device
from her belt and peered at its small screen. She nodded at the coordinates displayed there, then
quickly put the device back on her belt when her hand began to shake. She forced a grin.
‘Why not just take your Prador’s ship straight there and blow them out of the water?’ Shib
asked Frisk, coming up on to the deck. She stared at him and her grin collapsed. Was he really
that stupid?
‘Because if the Warden detects a Prador war-craft moving about down here, we just
might never be able to get away,’ she said. ‘So, Ebulan will have taken his ship down deep and
out of sight.’
Svan glared at Shib, then turned back to Frisk. ‘I see your point there,’ said the mercenary,
‘but why not use one of the little transports?’ Frisk appeared confused for a moment. Svan went
on, ‘Why all this?’ she asked, gesturing at the helm.
Frisk glanced down to where the transport bumped against the side of the ship.
‘It was Ebulan’s idea ... to get us close to Keech. He’ll be naturally suspicious of
strangers. All the Old Captains are familiar figures to each other. This way we’ll be able to get
close without rousing too much suspicion.’
This reasoning sounded specious even to herself. Frisk had indeed considered using one
of the transports - until she had been dissuaded - but now, now she liked things this way. She
glanced over as Speaker came aboard leading Captain Drum. It gave Frisk a buzz of pleasure to
see the Captain, standing here on his own ship, reduced to a human blank: his spinal column

disconnected and his body run by a spider thrall. This was power. This was everything Jay Hoop
had taught her. Her grin came back: a rictus that stretched her split cheek. She didn’t mind the
pain; it told her she was real.
****
He felt everything. The breeze against his skin almost hurt, and each step he took on the wooden
boards of the deck sent a jolt through his entire body. His breathing sounded like waves hissing
on a shingle beach. The air tasted of metal and vinegar and carried a thousand scents, some
putrid, some sweet. The thumping of his heart was controlled thunder in his breast, and the
images coming in through his eye seemed to imprint themselves on the back of his skull.
Keech stopped where he was, and thought for a moment. One eye. He reached up and
pressed his fingers into the cartouche on his aug unit. With a sucking click it came away and
rested warm and heavy in his hand. Doubled images slowly pulled together as his new eye
focused. Erlin had repositioned the connections while he had been in the tank - as it seemed the
nanites had been intent on growing him another eye, whether there were connections into what
remained of his optic nerve or not. Vision was now painful. Taste, sound, the texture of the rail
on his hands: it was a beautiful pain called life. And now he had it, Keech wanted to keep it.
‘How are you . . . feeling?’
Keech glanced round at Janer, who was standing just behind him.
‘Alive,’ said Keech.
‘A novel experience,’ said Janer.
Keech turned to Erlin as she came up on to the deck. ‘Thank you,’ he said.
Erlin smiled, glanced at Janer, and abruptly appeared uncomfortable. She turned back to
Keech. ‘Thank you,’ she said. ‘This is the most involved I’ve been in anything for decades. I. . .’
she paused, and again glanced at Janer, ‘I enjoyed it.’
Keech nodded and gazed down at the sea. These two were like teenagers who had
discovered sex for the first time - or was that just his perspective? Was this how the Old
Captains felt? Did most people seem naive and silly to them? He studied his pink hands, then his
body with the monofilament overall clinging to it. He felt a vague twinge of embarrassment when
thoughts of sex and the feel of the material against his skin conspired to give him an erection.
He stayed where he was by the rail.
‘What’s that?’ he asked after a moment, and pointed to a humped shape in the sea.
Erlin stepped up beside him and peered at where he was pointing. ‘It’s either a
transitional leech that tried to take a large prill, or Hoopers have been hunting here,’ she said.
Keech waited for an explanation.
To try and cover her earlier embarrassment, Erlin took on a didactic tone. ‘Small leeches
feed by taking a plug of flesh from their prey, and whatever fluids they can suck out.’

Keech noted Janer rubbing the distinctive scar on his hand.
‘As a leech gets bigger it takes to the sea after bigger prey, also because the water there
can support its larger body. In time, it begins to outgrow its prey, so it makes the transition from
plug feeder to a feeder upon whole animals. The problem with eating animals whole here is that
they tend not to die very quickly, so can cause a great deal of damage to a predator’s insides.
Therefore big leeches produce a poison in their bile which can kill virus and prey at once.’
Before Erlin could continue, Keech said, ‘And a transitional leech is one that isn’t yet
producing the poison, but still needs to feed on whole prey.’ He nodded at the leech floating
past. ‘Hence, that could be one that has fed on something that tore its way out of it again.’
‘Exactly,’ said Erlin, studying him carefully.
‘Why do Hoopers hunt leeches?’ he asked.
‘Sprine,’ said Janer.
‘That’s the poison,’ said Erlin. She said no more, and gestured Janer to silence when he
seemed about to explain.
‘Difficult to obtain, also rare, and it kills Hoopers,’ said Keech. He turned away. ‘No
wonder they hunt these leeches. They’d probably do much more just to get hold of it.’
‘Why are you here, Keech?’ Erlin asked, suddenly.
Keech considered lying to her for only a moment. ‘I’m here to find and kill Jay Hoop,’ he
said.
‘Why?’
‘Because he is a criminal. Because I must. Because it was . . . is my job.’
Erlin stared at the back of his head. She thought about where they were going, then about
Ambel and about what he kept in his cabin. She’d hated that low morbid whispering. It was part
of what had driven her away.
‘In a day or so we may well reach the ship that has . . . Hoop aboard,’ she said.
Suddenly Keech was facing her again, one hand gripping her collar, his other hand rigid
for a killing strike. He had moved fast, faster than she could move. Alive, Keech must have been
a very dangerous man. And now ... he was alive again.
‘Explain,’ he said.
‘What remains of Hoop is kept on that ship,’ said Erlin.
Keech released her and suddenly stepped back. He seemed confused, and his hands were
shaking. Spittle ran from the corner of his mouth.
‘No ... I don’t believe that. I don’t believe that story.’ He shook his head once, shook it

again. Abruptly his body began to spasm, and he fell over on the deck like a falling door. His aug
unit bounced on the deck beside him, and a green light on its surface turned red as the
reattachment delay finally ran out and it began to power down.
‘Quickly! Get him below!’ Erlin yelled.
‘What is it?’ Janer asked as he helped her carry the spasming man below.
‘His organic brain’s taken over control of his cyber implants and now his muscles are
fighting them. We’ll have to restrain him till he gets control.’
‘What about his aug?’ Janer asked.
Erlin shook her head. ‘Wouldn’t work. He’d end up fighting it like he is his implants.’
Janer gazed down at the convulsing face. But for the metal interfaces inset in Keech’s
cheekbone and above his eye, he looked utterly human and vulnerable. Janer wanted him to live,
not to suffer - found that he cared for the man.
‘Well that’s a first,’ said his Hive link.
When Janer angrily questioned it, it retreated to its distant buzzing, and he wondered
just how much it was picking up from him through their link.
****
Darkness and pain, and the smell of the sea and of things decaying. He fought the harness and,
though stronger than most men, he was weakened by his wounds and could only flex ceramal
that in other circumstances he could have broken like chalk. The blanks dragging him back were
as iron as he had been, and his struggles were all but ignored. He was just a difficult parcel that
they dragged to the table and threw down upon it. Then began the bubbling speech of the Prador
and, in flickering nightmarish luminescence, a huge first-child entered and poised itself over him,
its mandibles flicking as if it might like to taste this particular morsel. A claw closed on the
harness, gouging into his back as it lifted and suspended him.
‘Why? Why did you kill my crew?’ Drum asked.
The Prador’s translator box groaned and crackled as it replied. ‘Kill your crew ... I did not
kill your crew,’ it stated.
‘Why—?’ he began, but before he could question further it threw him face-down, looming
over him. Something clicked and detached from the harness, and now he was able to move his
head. He turned to see the underside of the creature’s body: the ridged carapace and swiftly
moving manipulatory arms. In one of those hands he saw something like a grey metal spider,
wriggling its legs as the first-child brought it down behind Drum. He started to bellow as small
legs like pitons burrowed into the back of his neck. Then his whole body went entirely slack, but
not, unfortunately, without feeling. The cutting sensation continued, and the pain rolled out in
waves which soon grew dull and distant. Blackness welled up inside him and took him away:
stood him aside from the world.
Then, in time, he came back.

Drum would have normally looked around, but no longer had that choice. He continued to
steer his ship and check the compass, but these actions were not at his own instigation. Hunger
and thirst were constant, but he could do nothing to slake them. He could feel the horrible ache
of healing injuries, and he could see, and he could taste the salt in the air, but beyond sensing
the world around him he could not influence it. Straining to look round where he was not directed
to look availed him nothing more than a little hope: for there was still something physical to
strain against - and something at the back of his neck repositioned itself each time he tried.
****
Frisk screamed and flung the biomech detector to the deck. Before anyone could think of trying
to stop her, she stamped on it until it broke. As she stepped back, its power pack discharged into
the planking, and set the pitch caulking on fire.
She stood there with her hands shaking. ‘How did he fucking know! How did he know!’
Svan and Tors stood back, kept their faces without expression. When Frisk pulled her
pulse-gun, Tors slipped a hand down to his own weapon - before Svan gave him a cautioning
look. He didn’t take his hand away from it though.
Frisk crashed out of the cabin, swearing repeatedly. She glared up to where Drum stood
impassively at the helm, and fired off three shots at him. The first shot seared the side of his
face. The second punched a smoking hole through his chest, and the third shot set the helm
burning. He showed no reaction but just continued to steer, his hands sizzling where they
touched the burning wood. Frisk screamed with rage and went storming down the deck. She burnt
holes through the planking as well as the rail. Eventually she came to the mast and glared down
at the head of the sail. It tried to move out of the way as she directed her weapon at it, but with
three staples through its neck it could not move far. Frisk altered the setting on her weapon and
let off a volley of shots into its face. It made a gargling hissing sound as it struggled, and its
wings boomed against the spars. It grew still, eventually.
‘You waste useful tools.’
Frisk turned and rammed the barrel of the gun up under Speaker’s chin.
‘This is not your tool to waste,’ said Speaker.
Frisk pulled her arm down in a jerky motion, holstered the weapon, pulled her injector
from her belt and placed it against her own neck. Her right leg was quivering and her cheek had
started to ache again. These nerve conflicts were becoming more and more frequent. Was it
being here? The stress? The excitement? The priozine soon flooded her system and stilled the
rebellion of this body she had stolen.
‘Stupid,’ she said to herself, then glared down along the deck to Shib.
‘Get that thing secured,’ she ordered him, with a nod at the sail’s body hanging in folds
where it had released its holds during its convulsions. Shib looked with distaste at the sail, then
went to obey. From where they stood, outside the cabin, Svan and Tors gave each other a look.
Once Frisk was out of hearing, Tors said, ‘If the detector is not picking up Keech’s aug

that means it’s off, and he’s probably dead. Doesn’t she realize that?’
‘Maybe . . . whatever. She pays the money and we do what she says. Mad as a pan-fried
AI she may be, but she’s got the shillings,’ replied Svan, and went off to assist Shib. Tors stared
up at the Hooper Captain, and after a moment fetched a bucket of seawater to throw over the
smouldering helm.
Drum continued, mindlessly, to steer his ship.
****
Using the deck winch, Ambel brought the first carboy up from the hold. Using muscle and great
care, he detached the cargo net it was contained in and took it over to below the forecabin
ladder. After attaching a rope, he climbed up on to the cabin, then hauled the carboy up there,
where he tied it to the rail before breaking the seal and extracting the bung with a large
corkscrew. Anne and Pland grimly watched the proceedings, while Boris finished setting up the
spinner and lubricating the cogwheels with turbul grease.
Peck came up on deck with a coil of tube looped over his shoulder. He threw one end up
to Ambel, who caught it and inserted it in the carboy. On the lower deck, below the rail, the three
armour-glass vessels Ambel had purchased at great cost twenty years before stood wedged in a
rack. Peck sucked on the tube and watched carefully as the green bile came up out of the carboy
and started to descend towards him, then quickly took the tube out of his mouth and put his
finger over the end. Leech bile in the mouth wouldn’t kill a Hooper, but it would make him sick
for months. Actually swallowing the mouthful would kill, though. Taking his finger off the end, he
inserted the tube into one of the vessels. The bile flowed on down and it began to fill. Peck took
this opportunity to put on his gloves. Once one vessel was full, he pinched the tube and
transferred it to the next, careful not to get any of the bile on himself. The contents of the carboy
filled all three.
‘You ready there, Boris?’ Ambel asked.
‘I am, Captain,’ said Boris, pulling on his own gloves and going over to help Peck transfer
the vessels to the horizontal wheel of the spinner, and clamp them in place.
‘Let’s get winding, lads,’ continued Ambel.
Gollow and three of the other juniors were the first to come to the double winding
handles, as Ambel came down from the forecabin. They put their weight against the handles and
heaved. Greased cogs began to turn and the chain leading in underneath the spinner began to
move. Slowly at first, the wheel began to turn. Peck and Boris removed their gloves and waited
their turn at the handles, as did Anne and Pland. Ambel waited as well. He always went last, and
he turned the handles by himself. It was an adequate demonstration of the difference in strength
between juniors, seniors, and the Old Captain. They had a long day ahead of them.
Morning dragged into afternoon, and it was the next turn for Pland and Boris at the
handles. The wheel was whirring around nicely, and the bile was just beginning to separate in
the vessels. In the bottom half of each it lay thick and green, with a layer of cloudy fluid above it.
When it came to Ambel’s turn, there was a thin layer of clear fluid at the surface. As he worked
the handles some of the crew fished for boxies, and others went below to rest their aching limbs.

By mid-afternoon a centimetre of clear fluid rested at the top of each vessel. At this point
Ambel released the handles and let the spinner wind to a stop. He called Peck over and together
they siphoned this clear fluid into a smaller, open-topped vessel. This container they took into
Ambel’s cabin to place in a secure framework he had earlier clamped to his desk. It wouldn’t do
to lose all that work to the first squall that came along. The stuff remaining in the larger vessels,
they tipped over the side.
‘Should be ready by tomorrow morning,’ Ambel stated.
‘Aye, the bugger,’ said Peck in the same grim tone that all of them had taken on this day.
It was a serious business planning to kill something a thousand years old, no matter how evil it
might be.
****
SM12 scanned the three ships and found nothing to make it suspicious. It recognized the crews
of each vessel, having come across them many times before in its travels. Completing its circuit
of Tay’s island, it experienced dronish frustration. Where was she? The Batian’s deflated dinghy
still lay under the sheet-leaves where they had beached and there had been no signs of any
other landings on the other beaches. Nothing in the air either, so that left one choice. The iron
cockle dropped out of the sky with the aerodynamics of a brick, entered the sea with a huge
splash, and switched on its sonar. Immediately it picked up signs of movement all around it, but
nothing with a metallic signature. It accelerated, kicking up a cloud of silt behind, and ran
electrostatic scans for as far as it could. It really needed some help. Taking an instant decision, it
shot out of the water and broadcast.
‘Where’s SM Thirteen?’ it asked.
‘SM Thirteen is hypersonic and will be with you directly,’ said the Warden. ‘You are
having trouble locating Rebecca Frisk?’
‘Has to have gone into the sea. She’s not on the island,’ Twelve replied. It then dropped,
and started scanning once again. It was soon tracing something it thought might be promising
when there was a splash above it, and soon an iron seahorse was cruising along beside it.
‘Want a hand?’ asked Thirteen.
‘Yes, I’m on to something now,’ said Twelve.
‘You realize that hammer-whelk shells have a slight piezoelectric property?’ said Thirteen.
In chagrin Twelve said, ‘Well, aren’t you the whelk expert. Take the north side. If she’s
using an escape pod as a submersible, there should be ionic traces. She’s probably heading away
fast. We need to get on to this.’
SM13 tilted and shot for the surface. Shortly after it was gone, SM12’s underspace
transceiver opened.
‘Anything?’ asked the Warden.
‘Nothing yet, but I’m sure we’ll find her,’ replied Twelve.

‘I’m glad you’re so confident,’ said the Warden. ‘I have to wonder if there’s not something
we’re missing. No matter - she will never leave.’
****
‘They’ve gone to the atolls,’ said Captain Ron, thumping a finger down on the chart.
‘How can you be sure?’ asked Erlin.
Janer stood back and didn’t question. His concerns were all with Keech, strapped in his
bunk below, fighting to regain control of his body. His convulsions had not let up for twenty hours
and it seemed his return to life might only be temporary.
‘Ambel’s got his own refining gear. If he’s having a good hunt this early, he’ll want to
refine what he’s got, then see if he can get some more before the season ends. For refining he
needs a stable mooring. Anyway, we’d have found him by now if n he’d been here.’
Erlin shrugged. ‘I bow to your superior knowledge,’ she said.
‘And so you ought,’ said Ron, tipping Janer a wink.
As they left the cabin, Janer asked, ‘What now, when you find your sea captain?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Erlin. She looked Janer up and down. ‘It could be nothing has changed,
and it could be everything has. I won’t know till I find him.’
Janer nodded. He wasn’t about to argue with her. So they’d had sex a few times: it had
been fun, but nothing to get all emotional about. He liked Erlin and he found sex with her
intensely stimulating, but there would be other Erlins and there would be other sex. Just a little
more thought along those lines, and he felt sure he would convince himself.
Janer followed Erlin below decks, to the cabin where Keech lay strapped to his bunk. The
monitor’s convulsions were less severe now. But perhaps he just didn’t have the energy to fight
any more. Erlin stood over him and started to lift one of his eyelids. Both Keech’s eyes abruptly
flicked open and he looked from one to the other of them.
‘Getting it,’ he managed, before the next convulsion hit.
Erlin checked the reading on her diagnosticer then plugged it into her drug manufactory.
In a couple of seconds it provided her with a drug patch, which she slapped on Keech’s chest. He
relaxed; his arched back settling to the bunk and his jaw unclenching.
‘How’s he doing?’ Janer asked.
‘Getting it, as he said. He seems to have control of his limbs now. I should think in
another ten hours or so he’ll be able to get up and move about. If he lives that long,’ she replied.
‘Why the doubt?’
‘He took a hell of a risk using that nano-changer. They shouldn’t be used without AI

supervision with full and constant scan. All it would take is one rogue factory in his bloodstream,
and he could end up with nanites floating about doing untold damage. That could happen at any
time in the next week or so, until the changer programme has run its course.’
‘He’s been dead before,’ Janer observed.
Erlin went on without acknowledging his comment, ‘The nanites could do anything. Rogue
bone-repair nanites could ossify his entire body. Nanites building blood cells could turn him into
a pool on the floor.’
‘You don’t have much confidence in them, I take it.’
‘I do not. The more miraculous a technology is, the more prone it is to catastrophic
breakdown.’
Janer studied her very carefully. Sinking back into her didacticism, she had abruptly
become distant from him. He considered taking her in his arms there and then, and rejected the
idea. He didn’t really need the complications. Without a word, he left her alone to tend to Keech,
and returned to his bunk in the crew quarters.
Once there, Janer pulled the box that Keech had delivered earlier from under his bunk. He
studied it for a while, then pressed his fingertips against the touch-plate on its side. When
nothing happened, he lay back on his bunk, holding the box up before his face.
‘Why here?’ he said.
There was no reply.
‘I could easily take this box and throw it over the side of this ship. I wouldn’t be killing
anything, as no doubt the contents are in stasis. In fact, I think I’ll do that now,’ he said, and
began to sit up.
‘Why not here?’ the mind asked him.
‘I can think of a number of reasons. This is a primitive world. Hornets have to be adapted
to survive here . . . The main reason, of course, is that it’s not a Polity world and that you’d piss
off an awful lot of people,’ said Janer.
‘Not half so many as on a Polity world,’ the mind replied.
‘OK, let me reiterate: why anywhere?’
‘Humans establish their colonies where they will. Why should I not?’
‘No answer to that, but it’s not often you establish a nest without a reason, beyond that
of colonization. . . . Tell me, the remaining hornet was successful here, wasn’t it?’
‘It was.’
‘So you had it transfer its genetic imprint to our friend here in this box.’

‘I did.’
‘How long will this queen live?’
‘As long as any other. The adaptation completely prevents any invasion by the fibres. For
that I took a snip from a glister - a creature that also exists here without the viral fibres in its
body.’
‘So what’s the point?’ Janer asked, weighing the box in his hands.
The mind warned, ‘If you throw the box over the side I’ll have another brought in by
another agent.’
‘You’re not going to tell me,’ said Janer.
‘Not yet.’
‘Now, why do I get the distinct feeling that you’re up to something you shouldn’t be up
to?’
The mind did not reply, and Janer snorted, then reached over and placed the box on the
floor beside his bed - before closing his eyes and settling down, intending to sleep. Before sleep
could claim him though, he opened his eyes again.
‘The hornet with me possessed the pattern for survival here. OK, it’s imprinting the queen
- but that’s not enough, is it? You have some other edge?’ he said.
‘You will be told eventually,’ 1 said the mind.
For a while, Janer stared at the bunk above him. It occurred to him that he might live to
regret not throwing the box over the side, then reporting things to the Warden. It also occurred to
him that the AI probably knew a lot more about what was going on here than he did. Soon, he
slept.
****
From the promontory, Olian Tay watched the three ships slide over the horizon and come in to
moorage beyond the reefs. She continued to watch for a while, expecting that once a rowing boat
put out from one of them she would have plenty of time to wander down to meet it. That Sprage
had come here for her was unsurprising to her, as they had been friends for many years and he
was one of the few Captains ever to visit her and acquaint her with the doings of the rest of the
Old Captains. That those same Captains had done nothing in which she felt interested for many
years had never really interfered with their relationship. Now, of course, the Captains were
involved in something very interesting. To capture coming events, Tay had all her portable
recording equipment with her, hooked on her belt.
Still no rowing boats left the ships, and Tay was getting fidgety when she observed the
sail circling above her. Soon it came lower and, with a booming of wings and a stirring of dust
clouds, it landed further along the promontory. She knew that sails had landed here in the past.
This fact was evinced by the scattering of broken glister shells, and the black spinal columns and
articulated skulls of rhinoworms. She had only ever seen them from a distance, though, and they

had always departed immediately at her approach.
This sail did no such thing. After folding its wings, it waddled over to her and gazed down
upon her with its demonic eyes.
‘Sail, you have an augmentation,’ Tay said, trying not to sound as nervous as she felt.
‘The name’s Windcheater,’ said the sail, and Tay immediately clicked a switch on her
belt. From the top of a flat rectangular box attached there, a device the shape and size of a
candy bar launched into the air and began slowly to circle the two of them. The sail tracked the
course of this device for a moment.
‘Remote holocorder,’ he declared. ‘X-ten-fifty, full spectrum plus anosmic, with a
transmission range of five hundred kilometres. Why do you want to record me?’
‘Because you’re a legend, and obviously part of the whole story,’ Tay replied.
Windcheater shook his head. ‘If you like,’ he said. ‘Right, you ready?’
‘What?’
The sail made a low growling sound, then abruptly launched itself. Tay yelled in shock
and closed her eyes against the dust. The next thing she knew, long bony claws had closed
around her waist and her feet had left the ground.
‘What the hell do you think you’re doing?’
Windcheater gave no reply.
‘Put me down, dammit!’
Windcheater snickered. ‘You sure about that?’ he asked.
Tay looked over her shoulder and down, to see her island rapidly receding.
‘OK, don’t put me down,’ she said. Even though angry and not a little frightened, she felt
some satisfaction in seeing her holocorder speeding along beside them, recording every
moment.
****
Sprage drew deep on his pipe and chuffed out a cloud of smoke that drifted down the length of
the Vengeance like a confused djinn. He rocked back in his chair, clumped his boots up on the
rail of the foredeck, and gazed across the white water marking the reefs around Olian Tay’s
island. Though now certain that Rebecca Frisk was back on Spatterjay, he was in no screaming
hurry to find her. A brief conversation with the Warden had confirmed that she would never be
leaving the planet. He and the rest of the Captains could take their time, in deciding how to deal
with her - not that there would be a lot of debate on that, as she would most certainly end up in
a fire - then slowly and inexorably they would hunt her down. Sprage gave a grim smile at this
thought.

‘That sail’s got something,’ said Lember from the cabin-deck.
Sprage glanced at the creature winging out from the island. It had probably caught a
rhinoworm, though why it was heading out from a landward direction he couldn’t say, unless it
had flown with its prey from the sea on the other side of the island. Watching its continued
approach as he pondered what must happen in the coming days. The Jester and the Orlando were
moored up, and by now, through the slow message-carrying of the sails and, in some cases,
through Polity-issued radios, nearly all the Old Captains should know - barring those still out in
Deep-sea. Soon the rest of them would be arriving, and it would be time for the Convocation.
Before then, Sprage would send for Olian Tay, as she would be a pain for years if he let her miss
this. Then would come a slow but sure search, island by island, atoll by atoll. Sprage felt sure it
would be the Warden who would detect Frisk first, but that would not stop the Captains from
searching, even though the Warden had assured him that they could have her eventually. All of
those who had once been slaves of Hoop carried just too much emotional baggage to keep out of
it all.
‘Hey, it’s carrying someone!’ shouted Lember, now gazing through Sprage’s
tripod-mounted binoculars. Sprage dropped his feet from the rail, stood, and walked to the front
ladder of the forecabin, puffing on his pipe. Soon he was up standing beside Lember.
‘Spot who it is?’ he asked.
Lember jumped back from the binoculars, and glared at his Captain. Sprage might be
ancient, but he certainly moved soft.
‘Can’t really see,’ said the crewman.
Sprage gently pushed past him and, moving his pipe so it jutted sideways from his mouth,
he put his eyes to his binoculars.
‘Olian Tay,’ he said, and stepped back to watch the sail come in to land.
This sail was a big one, and the boom of its wings had its smaller kin on the spars
flinching back. It deposited Olian on the main deck then, hovering above her, it stretched out its
neck towards the other sail.
‘Bugger off,’ it said succinctly.
The smaller sail hurriedly released its grip on the spars, furled its wings, hauled itself
higher up the mast and launched away from Windcheater. The bigger sail now descended and
quickly settled himself into position.
‘Interesting,’ said Sprage.
Lember watched as Olian climbed to her feet then came stomping towards the forecabin.
‘Yeah,’ he agreed. ‘You don’t often see them doing that.’
Sprage faced him, pointed a finger to one side of his own neck, then pointed down at the
sail’s head.

‘Ah,’ said Lember, squinting at the aug Windcheater had acquired.
Sprage moved away to the ladder and climbed down to the main deck. As Tay approached
him, her face was flushed and there was a touch of exhilaration in her expression.
‘I was just about to send for you,’ he said. ‘Interesting times.’ He turned to regard the
new sail, that had swung its head round the mast to watch the two of them.
‘They are that,’ agreed Tay.
Just then, Sprage spotted the holocorder sliding around them in a wide arc.
‘I would guess you know about Frisk?’ he said with a raised eyebrow.
‘I know about her - and I want to be in at the kill.’
‘Like you were with Grenant?’ Sprage asked, fixing his attention back on the sail.
‘If possible,’ said Tay, trying to keep an impassive face.
Sprage nodded as he once again puffed at his pipe. After a moment he said, ‘Welcome
aboard, sail, how are you called?’
‘The name’s Windcheater,’ said the sail. ‘And I’ll want paying for this.’
****
The sun edged over the horizon, and turned umber clouds to turquoise silk. About their business
over the sea, three sails glided across the face of this orb as its light revealed a ship far out on
the water, and decked it blue with gleams of emerald. Ambel stared at the vessel for some time,
then turned to Peck, crouching by the rail and staring down into the water. Peck looked distinctly
unwell in this morning light. The scars on his face were livid and his eyes were dark with blood.
‘What is it, Peck,’ Ambel asked him at last.
‘Bugger,’ muttered Peck.
Ambel waited for him to continue. It took him a while.
‘It calls me, Captain,’ Peck said.
‘It calls to us all. It’ll call to any who listen.’
‘It called and I went,’ Peck confessed.
‘What have you done, Peck?’ Ambel asked calmly.
Peck rested his forehead against the rail. ‘Wouldn’t stop. It had its hunger. I fed it to shut
it up,’ he said.
Ambel glanced back at his cabin and considered, having spent the night in there, how the

head had been strangely silent.
‘Did you release it?’ Ambel asked.
‘No, Captain.’
‘What did you give it, then?’
‘Remains of the baiting steak.’
Ambel was about to make a reply to that when Boris yelled down from the nest, ‘It’s the
Ahab!’
Ambel shaded his eyes to gaze out at the distant ship.
‘Now what’s Ron doing out here? Last I heard he was off after a load of turbul,’ he
observed.
‘Maybe it calls him, too,’ said Peck.
Ambel stared down at his crewman and wondered if that might be true - for the Skinner
called in different ways. Perhaps Ron was coming to deliver some long-avoided Convocation
decision on the matter. But he would soon know, as the Ahab was heading straight towards
them. Ambel walked back to the door of his cabin and locked it. The next time he went in there,
he would take with him a harpoon wet with sprine. He didn’t like to think about what might be
going on inside his sea-chest.
‘Get a cask up, lads,’ he yelled generally. ‘You know how thirsty Ron can be.’
And general laughter greeted this comment, though it was subdued.
****
The rowing boat approaching from the Ahab had six people in it. Ambel immediately discerned
the large, bald-headed shape of Captain Ron at the tiller, and he guessed the two at the oars to
be Forlam and Goss. The other three were dressed like off-worlders, and for a moment he didn’t
recognize any of them.
So he felt a momentary flush of pique when Boris recognized her first.
‘It’s Erlin!’ the crewman yelled from the nest.
Ambel squinted his eyes at the Earther woman. The last time he had seen her, she’d told
him he was dead inside, and she seriously doubted if he was human any more. He wondered
what she wanted of him now. Was she starting to comprehend things beyond her own small
compass? Was time now doing to her what it had done to him so long ago? Ambel doubted it. He
shook his head and concentrated his attention on the other two off-worlders. The blond-haired
man wore the utile clothing of a seasoned traveller, and he wore it with the casual air of one
who had not just donned it. That one might be an interesting person to meet. The other man
looked ill - or as if recovering from a long illness. He was bald and scrawny, though his bone
structure was that of a heavy-worlder. He was wearing monofilament overalls - utile garb again,

but the kind worn by Golem androids and the like: individuals that did not worry too much about
either the temperature or their appearance. Was there something familiar about this man?
Ambel felt the nag of memory and a surge of both apprehension and excitement. Perhaps he was
from before? No, unlikely: there were few off-worlders of that age. Ambel tried to dismiss these
thoughts, but he still felt a nagging doubt.
The boat clunked against the side of the ship and greetings were shouted back and forth
as a rope was thrown up for them to secure it, then a ladder lowered. Ron was first over the rail
and Boris thrust a jug into his hand. Ron downed it in one and handed it back for a refill.
‘How are y’, Peck m’boy!’ he bellowed at Peck, after he had bellowed greetings at each
other member of Ambel’s crew.
Peck just stared at him, and Ron turned to Ambel.
‘Still a bit. . . y’know?’ he asked, making a wiggling motion with his hand.
Ambel nodded.
Erlin was next over the rail and, while each member of the crew greeted her, she kept her
eyes fixed on Ambel. When he winked at her, a slow smile spread across her face. Goss
immediately started to come on to Boris, and Boris suggested showing her around the ship. Anne
stared speculatively at Forlam, then filled a jug and took it over to him.
Ambel watched the blond man as he came over the rail assisting the bald one up behind
him. The look blondy gave Erlin told Ambel all he wanted to know. He allowed himself a little
smile, as it wasn’t important. He stepped forward to greet the two new off-worlders.
‘Welcome to the Treader,’ he said.
With deep-blue eyes the bald man stared at Ambel, and an immediate shock of
recognition ran between them.
‘This is Janer Cord Anders and this is Sable Keech,’ said Erlin, still smiling.
Ambel had only time to raise one hand before the first energy pulse slammed into his
stomach. The next burnt a hole in his chest and the next blew away part of his shoulder.
Collapsing, he turned and ducked to protect his head. Another pulse hit him in the back and he
lost it for a moment. As he came to, he groaned and rolled over, agony blurring his vision and
sapping his strength.
He looked up to see Keech glaring at him with flat hatred, while he tried to bring his
weapon to bear again. Ron, Forlam, and Boris were all three having trouble restraining him,
which was very surprising. His struggles against them lasted only so long as it took Ron to get a
hand free to slap him on the side of the head. As Keech went down, Ambel tried to rise, but that
was not a good idea. He felt the blood draining from his face and just had time to see Erlin
crouching over him, peeling open a drug patch, before he lost consciousness for the second time.
****
Keech regained consciousness to find himself roped in a chair, with his head throbbing and an

ache in his torso that evidenced the fact that someone had put the boot in as he went down. He
sat for a moment with his teeth firmly clenched against the vomit that threatened to rise into his
mouth. As the nausea slowly started to recede, he tested the rope and found it strong enough to
restrain his human muscles. Next, he found that direct brain-to-cybermotor link that had nearly
killed him, and tried again. This time the ropes stretched and the chair creaked. But still he did
not have the strength, augmented or otherwise, to free himself, so he scanned the cabin for
some other means of escape.
No knife was lying handy on the desk and there were no useful sharp edges anywhere
else, as was to be expected in a ship’s cabin. There were cupboards that might contain
something he could use, but what chance did he have, without being heard, of manoeuvring his
chair to one of them and opening it? So he waited and, as he waited, he became aware of a
sound ... or something like a sound. The sea-chest by the wall drew his attention. Before he
could wonder what it was about this chest that increasingly riveted his attention, the door
slammed open and Ron stomped in.
‘Give me a reason why I shouldn’t let the boys chuck you to the leeches,’ growled the
Captain.
Keech tested his bonds again then let out a sigh. ‘My name is Sable Keech,’ he said.
‘I know that, but it don’t sound like reason enough for me.’
The Captain was angry, and Keech knew what damage an angry Hooper of his age could
do. He suspected that if he didn’t explain himself soon, he wouldn’t even reach the sea in one
piece.
‘I first came here seven hundred years ago, with the ECS mission that released Hoop’s
slaves. I was part of the attack force that raided Hoop’s stronghold -and I was the one who
subverted the program running the slave collars Hoop was using.’
In shock, Ron stared at Keech, then stepped back and sat down on the sea-chest. He
shook his head, appearing confused for a moment, then realized where he was sitting and
abruptly stood again.
‘Keech?’ he said. ‘I came here after the war, but I know about you.’
‘I’m the same Keech who killed Frane and Rimsc, and I can recognize one of the Eight no
matter how scarred and changed they may be. Ambel - a ridiculous anagram. So you don’t
recognize him, even though you were present when the ex-slaves threw him into the leech
swarm,’ said Keech. He spoke with the calm of utter certainty.
‘Gosk Balem,’ whispered Ron.
Keech awaited some explosive reaction, but there came none. Ron looked thoughtful for a
moment, then he shuddered. He rubbed a hand down across his bare chest, where the leech
scars were thickest.
‘Are you going to release me now and let me finish what I started?’ asked Keech.
After a moment Ron said, ‘No.’

Keech felt a momentary sick anger. Had he misjudged? Could it be that Ambel was not
the one he thought him to be? Or was Ron not who he thought either? So many memories
crowding in his mind - so many to sort, to know.
‘Why not?’
‘Because he’s not Gosk Balem,’ said Ron.
‘What makes you so sure of that?’ Keech sneered.
Ron advanced to stand over him, placed his hands on the arms of the chair.
‘It’s the sea, Sable Keech. It takes.’
With that, he turned from Keech and left the cabin. Keech stared at the door for a
moment then slowly began to work his arms and legs against the rope. Motor and muscle. He
broke skin and ignored the pain. The chair began to creak. From the sea-chest there came sounds
of movement - and that other sound, that whispering.
Keech worked harder at loosening his bonds, a sudden ludicrous idea occurring to him as
to what was inside that chest.
****

12
The third male glister - the last one of this particular family had he but known it was feeding with the female upon a turbul the size of a rowing boat. It sensed that
something was very wrong, just before a hawser of a tentacle wormed into view,
coiled and crushed the female, then snatched her backwards, squealing, through
the murk. This last remaining male fled as fast as his flat tail and paddle legs
could propel him. Another tentacle whipped out and slapped his side, cracking his
armour, but driving him beyond the predator’s reach. The monstrous whelk was
unconcerned about this escape, as it crunched down the female glister, then
turned its attention to the plenitude of turbul corpses and their concomitant crop
of leeches and prill. Perhaps it should have been more concerned about the
heirodont, irate at having been deprived of the giant whelk it had been pursuing,
and now ascending through the waterfall of organic detritus in the hope that its
source might quell the grumbling of its gargantuan stomach.

With so many eyes keeping watch for it in so many places, the Warden did not feel any guilt in
allowing its attention to stray beyond Spatterjay to observe such momentous events. In this
particular observation it was not possible to easily maintain a direct link, so it created a submind
ghost of itself that it sent hopping for lightyears: from runcible to runcible and onwards to AI
ships and ship’s drones, until it reached its destination. Here, as just one of many thousands
cramming together to view one scene, it watched through the eyes of a Golem - linked by virtual

fingernails - while the essence of the ghost ran itself in the huge processing spaces of the thinly
disguised AI battleships poised above the Prador world. It recorded the momentous events, the
AI reactions and net-space discussions, and relayed them back to itself every few seconds - a
veritable age in AI terms.
A hundred Prador transports were parked along the edge of the flat, and salt dust
glittered in the eddies of air disturbed by the cooling of their engine cowlings. Grand Prador
adults, with their retinues, were gathered in protective groups on the cracked and pinkish
hardpan: trusting each other less than they trusted the ECS monitors and the sector AI which, in
the form of this Golem, had come to negotiate and hopefully agree terms.
‘There can be no meaningful dialogue between us while this continues,’ said the sector
AI. ‘Would you ever consider trade with us if it was our habit to use Prador carapaces as
receptacles in which to take our ablutions?’
The concerted reply from the gathered Prador was both amused and angry. The Warden
noted an open message sent by one of its fellow AIs to its homeworld, informing certain
high-ranking humans to ‘lose the decorative bathroom suites’, and the brief discussion that
followed would perhaps have shocked some humans who considered AIs to be without humour.
They settled down, though, when the speaker standing out in front of the Prador
addressed the sector AI. ‘Would you deprive us of our hands?’ asked the male human blank on
their behalf.
‘You had hands before you encountered humankind,’ replied the Golem, ‘and your own
cyber technologies could provide you with hands more efficient than those of human blanks. In
truth it has become only a matter of status amongst you.’
After a long pause came the concerted reply through their speaker. ‘We must discuss
this.’
Humans, Golem and AIs together watched while Prador shifted about like huge draughts
on some unseen board. A couple of shimmering fields flickered into existence and there came
the stuttering crackle of a single railgun. One Prador, surrounded by its children, and attended by
more blanks than most of its contemporaries, hissed out a bubbling scream and crashed to the
hardpan as its AG cut out. Control units on its outer carapace detonated, and that carapace
deformed and cracked, flinging fine sprays of dark fluid across the salt.
Railguns now opened up again, and blanks and second-children exploded into a mess of
shell, flesh and numerous legs. By now the humans where hazed behind projected fields, and
autoguns were spidering out of the heavy-lifter and up its sides to get an open field of fire on the
assembled Prador. A single first-child ran gibbering towards these screens, until a missile hit it
from behind and the explosion separated upper carapace from lower. Its lower half ran on for a
little while longer, perhaps not yet realizing it was dead, then it keeled over like an unbalanced
pedestal table. Before the human side could feel sufficiently threatened by this violence, the
speaker blank held up a hand and spoke, his voice amplified all around.
‘The discussion is ended. We now feel we can negotiate,’ he said.
****

Erlin kept Ambel unconscious while she worked on his wounds. She didn’t need to work to save
his life, only to prevent the formation of ugly scar tissue, and to do this she had to cut again and
again in a race with the rapid healing of his fibre-filled body. Had Keech managed a headshot,
the Ambel she knew would have been dead and what remained of him would not have been
human. Sprine would have then been administered, and the corpse buried at sea with all due
ceremony. As it was, the Captain was bound to recover. Even with these wounds, Erlin reckoned
on the healing process normally taking about a day and a night. But Ambel had obviously
suffered other injuries recently, as his body weight was down and there was an excessive blue
tinge to his skin. She allowed him to wake just after she finished repositioning the flesh of his
shoulder and as the wound there closed like a startled mollusc.
‘Erlin . . . who is he?’ he asked.
‘Goes by the name of Sable Keech. He claims to be an ECS monitor over seven hundred
years old. He was a reification until only a few days ago, so that might be true. The bastard. I
saved his life and he goes and does this. His brain must still be rotten - probably thought you
were Hoop or something.’ As she spoke, Erlin searched Ambel’s expression with a kind of
desperation.
‘He isn’t Hoop,’ said Captain Ron behind her.
Erlin turned to see the Captain and Forlam entering the room. Forlam held a length of
black cord she recognized as something used in ship wedding ceremonies and divorces. Ron
nodded and Forlam stepped up beside her. He reached down and tied one end of the cord around
Ambel’s wrist.
‘What the hell!’ Erlin yelled.
She moved to stop him tying the cord, but Ron caught hold of her shoulders and gently
pulled her away. Ambel watched impassively as Forlam bound his wrists together. Erlin tried to
understand what was going on. Surely they knew that nothing less than a steel hawser would
hold Ambel. Forlam stepped back after he had tied the final knot.
‘By my right as member and captain,’ said Ron formally, ‘I call you before Convocation,
Captain Ambel. I want your parole until the time of the Convocation. Do you give it?’
‘I do,’ said Ambel.
Ron made a cutting motion with the edge of his hand. Ambel snapped the cords binding
him. Ron turned back to the door, with Forlam following him.
‘Do you know, then, Ron?’ Ambel asked.
‘I know,’ said Ron, without turning.
‘I’m not him any more. It was five years, Ron.’
Captain Ron turned and stared at him. Erlin thought she had never witnessed such an
expression of horror on an Old Captain’s face. She thought there was little in the world that could
produce such an effect on such a man.

‘You’ll tell it, then,’ said Ron.
‘Now?’
‘No, the monitor must hear it as well. He’s owed that.’
Ron went on his way. Erlin noted that Forlam appeared as confused as she herself felt.
****
The rope stretched just enough for Keech to slide his hand free, but it only slid because he had
lubricated it with his blood. As he held it up before his face to inspect the damage he had done
to himself, the sounds from the sea-chest became more audible. Keech then worked on the knots
tying his other wrist to the chair. His lack of fingernails made the task a lot more difficult than it
should have been. Small nubs of nails were already growing from the quick of his fingers, but
they were of no use as yet. He also found that his skin was too soft. It was like a baby’s skin and
- yet to thicken and acquire the calluses of age - it was easy to tear. He swore quietly as he
persevered.
Keech had almost worked his left hand free when he noticed how the noises from the
sea-chest had ceased. With his skin crawling, he slowly looked up and peered across the room.
The lid of the chest was partly raised, and two evil black eyes were watching him. As the lid rose
higher, Keech tried not to believe what he was seeing. His chest felt constricted and painful and
that tightness was only relieved by a hiccuping hysterical giggle.
The thing crawled out of the chest and landed with a heavy thump on the floor. It made a
snorting sound, then rolled over on to the six spatulate limbs it had grown. Keech felt the urge to
giggle again, but the giggle dried up in his throat when the thing rolled its lips back from jagged
blades of teeth that it licked with an obscene black tongue.
Then it hissed, and Keech started yelling.
****
Frisk occupied her time by luring leeches to the side of the ship with lumps of the sail’s feed,
then hitting them with her pulse-gun. When she eventually got bored with this game, she
dropped a weighted line overboard and, after a number of tries in which she caught only boxies,
she managed to hook a frog whelk from the seabottom. This she pulled up and swung on to the
lower deck, to see how her pet mercenaries would react to it.
Tors saw it first and laughed at it, as it tracked him with its stalked eyes. He pointed it
out to Shib who laughed too, until it jumped the entire length of the deck to land next to him,
then leapt again to take off a couple of his fingers. Shib yelled, swung his weapon to bear
one-handed, and blew the whelk to pieces just as it jumped again. Later, as Shib stomped about
the deck with a dressing on his hand, Frisk wondered how, some time soon, she might lure in a
prill or two. That would make things more interesting.
‘We have something,’ said Svan, coming up the ladder.
Frisk turned from the rail with her gun still in her hand. Tors had been giving her some
funny looks lately, and she didn’t like it when people came up behind her so quietly. For a

moment, she aimed the weapon at Svan’s chest, then she gave a flat smile and holstered it.
‘What do you mean, you “have something”?’
‘All the equipment we brought along, we also brought a spare for,’ said Svan, keeping her
expression blank. ‘So we brought a spare biomech detector - to replace the one you trashed.’
Frisk considered killing her right then, but decided that would be wasteful. Anyway, she
could later do the job at her leisure, when Svan was no longer of any use to her. Perhaps just an
injury for now . . . ? Then she comprehended what Svan was telling her.
‘What have you detected?’ she asked.
‘Somebody is using cyber-joint motors about two hundred kilometres north-west of here.
We had an intermittent signal for some time, but we couldn’t pin it down. It has since become
constant.’
‘Show me,’ said Frisk, tempted to berate Svan for not informing her earlier.
Svan pulled from her pocket the twin of the detector Frisk had smashed and flipped out its
screen. She turned it round to show to Frisk. On the screen was a definite trace, with slowly
drifting coordinates. Their source was not a ship under sail then, and if they were quick, they
could reach it today. Frisk swivelled to face Drum’s back.
‘Turn the ship to the north-east and increase speed,’ she ordered.
Drum swung the helm and pushed forward the throttle lever. The ship began to drone as
the newly installed motor opened up. It left a foaming wake behind it and the wind pushed the
sail back against the spars, belling rearwards.
‘Is this as fast as it can go?’ Frisk demanded. When Svan did not answer right away, Frisk
turned to glare at her.
Quickly Svan said, ‘This is about half speed, but go any faster and the ship might break
up. It’s not made for this kind of treatment.’
‘Might?’ asked Frisk.
‘There’s no way to—’
‘Full speed ahead!’ Frisk yelled.
There was no action from Drum, so she pulled her pulse-gun and put a shot in his back.
He lurched forwards then straightened back up into position.
‘I said “Full speed”,’ Frisk hissed viciously.
Svan stepped up beside Drum and pushed the lever all the way forward. She cast Drum a
speculative look before leaving the cabin-deck and going to find something to occupy herself
with, preferably something well away from Frisk. Drum continued staring ahead, seemingly
unaware of the recent damage done to him. Frisk walked round to look him in the face.

‘I know it hurts,’ she said with relish. She nodded towards the mercenaries below. ‘They
think it was a full coring, but you and I know better, don’t we? How is it, I wonder, to be utterly
under the control of that nasty little spider thrall, yet able to see, hear, and feel everything? How
much does that hurt?’
She stared at him for a long moment as she tried to discern a reaction in his expression.
But nothing - just like the blank on Ebulan’s ship. Pressing her gun against his side, she fired off
another pulse. Drum whoomphed, moved sideways, but just straightened up yet again.
Something that time? No, still nothing. Frisk shook her head, suddenly bored with this game, and
strode to the ladder. Behind her, Drum’s eyes tracked her progress for a second, before flicking
back to the fore as she turned to climb down. His wounds wept for a while, before slowly closing.
****
Janer stopped by the hatch to help Erlin out. She gave him an annoyed glance, before the two of
them rushed to the forecabin, trailing behind Forlam and Ron.
‘I thought you had the key,’ said Ron.
Forlam searched his pockets, then gave Ron an apologetic look. Inside the cabin, they
could hear Keech yelling, and then there was a crash. Ron swore as he straight-armed the door.
This was the first chance Janer had to observe how strong the Old Captain really was, for Ron’s
hand went straight through the door, rather than bursting it open - as had been his intention. He
swore again, and reached inside to tear the door off its hinges, then stood for a moment with the
door hanging from his arm before shaking it to the deck.
Forlam ducked into the cabin ahead of him, but quickly backed out again. Janer stepped
up behind Ron and peered around him.
‘What the fuck is that?’ he asked, turning to Erlin. She was backing away, shaking her
head - her eyes fixed on the thing on the cabin floor.
In his struggles Keech had tipped his chair over. The Skinner creature turned like a bull
terrier from savaging his arm and hissed at the spectators. Ron tore a length of wood from the
doorjamb on his way in, swinging at the creature and striking it hard. The monstrosity slammed
back against the cabin wall, then dropped to the floor while Ron discarded his now shattered
club. But the creature merely rolled back on to its feet, shook itself, spat out a couple of teeth,
then shot between Ron’s legs and out of the door. Janer aimed a kick at it, but it darted out of his
way before pausing to snarl at him.
‘Skinner’s out!’ Forlam yelled.
Crewmen converged from every part of the ship. Goss threw a harpoon head that opened
a wound on the Skinner before it ran again. Janer was only thankful it did run.
‘Skinner?’ he queried, but everyone was too busy to reply.
Next the Skinner aimed itself at Peck who yelled and threw a bait box at it. The lid flew
off the box, and the bait leapt out and scuttled away in every direction to make its escape. One
of the trumpet creatures came at Janer who, remembering Erlin’s warning, stamped on it before

it sought refuge in his trouser leg. It let out a pitiful squeaking as he ground it into the deck.
‘Get the bugger!’ Peck shrieked.
A gun went off with a staccato cracking. Janer glanced round to see Anne opening up on
the Skinner with an ancient automatic pistol. Her first shot knocked it over. The next two shots
splintered the deck - as it got upright again and scuttled towards the mast. A junior swiped at it
with a panga but missed, then it stumbled over backwards, reared up and hissed at him.
Someone else threw a club and knocked it tumbling. The Skinner again landed on its feet and
glared from side to side as the whole crew closed in. Abruptly it turned and leapt for the mast,
where it started scrabbling its way up. A knife thudded into the woodwork below it and it
accelerated. The crew dispersed to lockers and cabins in search of further weapons, as the evil
creature climbed outwards along one of the spars. The spar it chose was a movable one, and
turned when it was halfway out so the Skinner ended hanging upside-down like a dislodged
caterpillar, its spatulate legs detatching, one after another, from the wood. The crew closed in
below, eager to take it apart once it hit the deck.
Just then the Skinner lost its grip and plummeted. There was a sudden soggy snapping
sound as it opened out ears grown into stunted wings. It glided out over the sea, jerking each
time Anne managed to hit it with her automatic. When Boris opened up with the deck cannon,
bits of the Skinner fell away, and the thing dropped ten metres before correcting. But it glided on,
in a steadily descending course, and penetrated the surface of the sea a hundred metres from
the ship. The crew silently watched the place where it had gone under.
It did not resurface.
****
Janer no longer knew how he felt about Keech, now he had seen him try to kill someone. It gave
one a very different perspective when you saw someone behave like that. You realized how, on
an emotional level, they amounted to more than the sum of what you had previously seen, that
they had connections and commitments to a life of their own in which you played just a bit part.
As for the monitor, Erlin was tending to him: sealing up his arm with a portable cell-welder,
closing a wound that reached right down to the bone.
‘Janer, my boy.’ Ron came up to stand at the rail beside him.
Janer eyed him, this jolly hey-ho bit seeming a bit contrived. ‘Not the happy ending we
were aiming for,’ he commented.
‘No,’ said Ron, ‘we’ve just discovered some endings long overdue.’
Janer studied him more closely. ‘You mean Ambel?’
Ron shook his head. ‘I don’t mean endings in the terminal sense - at least not for him, but
for the Skinner, yes.’ He paused, studying Janer’s puzzled expression, then continued, ‘It’s not
dead, you know, and we know where it’ll go.’
Janer pursed his lips to keep his immediate retort reined in. He’d just seen a disembodied
head sprout wings and fly right into the sea, so he wasn’t going to argue about its likelihood of
being alive.

Ambel had now come out on deck and was looking about himself with a guarded
expression. Janer noted that some of the crew were deliberately facing away from the Old
Captain, and the cold way that Keech was staring at the man.
‘So what now?’ Janer asked, as Ambel approached them.
‘We go to the Skinner’s Island,’ said Ambel.
‘And there we hold Convocation too,’ Ron said.
Ambel nodded slowly. ‘I’ll be wanting to sail there as a captain, not as a prisoner. Might
be the last journey I make.’
Ron nodded. ‘I’ll leave any who don’t want to come with us on the Ahab, and I’ll send the
sail across here.’
‘Thank you,’ said Ambel, then, ‘How you going to call it. . . the Convocation?’
Ron turned to Janer. ‘Your link? Through it you can communicate with the Warden?’
‘You getting this?’ Janer asked the Hive mind.
After a brief buzz the mind replied, ‘All of it - and very interesting it is.’
‘Will you contact the Warden?’
‘I can, but nothing is for free,’ said the mind, which puzzled Janer until it went on.
‘OK, I’ll consider it,’ he said, once the mind had finished. He turned to Ron and Ambel.
‘What do you want of the Warden?’
‘The Warden can call the Convocation for us,’ said Ron. ‘Some of the Captains possess
transceivers, so word can be spread quickly enough.’
Janer nodded, and again listened to the dull flat buzzing, which went on for a little while
before being interrupted by another voice. ‘A Convocation has already been called on another
matter,’ said the Warden. ‘It is little enough trouble to have them relocate it. I will inform Sprage
immediately. The Captains should be with you at the Skinner’s Island within days.’
Janer informed the two Old Captains of this latest news, then watched them exchange a
look before turning back to him.
‘Why was this first one called?’ asked Ron.
Janer waited for an explanation, but all he got from his link was the flat buzzing. He
shrugged. ‘Didn’t say.’
Ron sighed. ‘Best we get things moving.’
****

There were ten ships now moored beyond the reefs, with two more coming over the horizon, and
yet another sweeping round from the other side of the island. Tay climbed aboard, then turned
her attention to the creaking winch being used to haul up her precious cargo. That Sprage had
even agreed to let her bring aboard this empty coffin-case was indicative of the fact that he had
been one of Hoop’s original captives. For all such men agreed that no punishment was excessive
when it concerned the Eight. Sprage moved to her side as the case swung over and was lowered.
It was too big to drop through into the hold, so some crewmen worked to secure it to the main
deck with straps and rope.
‘Old Cojan was an imaginative fella,’ observed Sprage.
‘He was that, and I think it was imagination that finished him in the end. He could never
forget, and that’s why he committed suicide,’ said Tay.
‘He didn’t kill himself,’ argued Sprage.
‘No, he did not. He did suicide though, by allowing himself to be killed. It’s the same way
a lot of people in the Polity go. When they’re very old they look for more and more danger,
thinking this is intended to relieve them of boredom, when in truth it is to relieve them of life.’
Sprage only grunted noncommittally. Tay noticed the Old Captain was peering beyond her
towards the forecabin. Turning her attention in that direction, she saw Lember carrying the
Captain’s rocker down to the main deck. The crewman positioned the chair by the mast, directly
facing Windcheater’s crocodilian head.
‘I take it you’ve yet to cut a deal with the sail?’ she asked.
‘Thought I’d wait for you,’ said Sprage. ‘It’s history.’
As Tay stared at Windcheater, she wondered if having to hold its head in that position its neck curving back on itself - was a physical strain for the sail. She grimaced at the thought of
its discomfort. Sprage’s crew were now gathering round the mast. These Hoopers wore bemused
expressions, but there was almost a party air about the gathering. This was something different;
few of them had ever before encountered a sail like this.
Tay pulled out her holocorder unit, tapped instructions into it, then detached the
holocorder itself and tossed it into the air. It stabilized immediately, then panned around, before
Tay had it focusing in on the mast area as Sprage moved to his rocker and sat down.
‘So,’ said the Captain, taking out his pipe and starting to fill it. ‘You told me that you do
the work of five crewmen and a fabric mainsail, so should earn an equivalent percentage of the
ship’s profits.’
‘Yes,’ agreed Windcheater.
‘Let me see then . . . Most captains, being the owners, take the first twenty per cent, and
the rest is equally divided - in the case of this ship, amongst ten crew. So you consider yourself
worth five of my crew. By my calculation that’s the remaining eighty per cent divided into fifteen,
of which you take five shares, one-third. Am I right?’

‘Yes, I get five shares,’ said Windcheater, but the sail now sounded a little less sure of
itself.
‘So you are telling me you deserve twenty-six and two-thirds per cent, which is even more
than a captain’s percentage? I don’t think so. The sail you scared off earlier was quite prepared
to work just for the meat we provided. Why should we deal with you?’
‘Because you have to - just as all captains will have to deal with other sails in the future.’
‘Ah, so you speak for all sails now?’ said Sprage. He put his pipe in his mouth, flicked at
his lighter for a while, then swore quietly and gave up. Taking his pipe from his mouth he studied
Windcheater.
The sail went slightly cross-eyed for a moment. ‘Yes ... I will be speaking for all sails,’ he
explained.
Sprage frowned and shot a look at some of his crewmen.
‘In that case,’ he said, ‘it’d be best we get the bargain struck now, though it’ll have to be
ratified at this coming Convocation. But I’m prepared to offer any sail the same amount as is
given to crew. Eight per cent of the journey’s net take, and the same contractual obligations
apply.’
‘What obligations?’ asked Windcheater.
‘Well, I think the one that mostly applies here is that if you go AWOL you forfeit your
percentage. Too often we’ve been left without a sail, because the one we had got bored and flew
off.’
‘Twenty-five per cent, and I want to see the contract.’
Sprage turned to Lember. ‘In my desk - you’ll find a sheaf of them,’ he said.
A dark-skinned and lanky individual clad in canvas trousers and a sleeveless leather shirt,
Lember shook his head in amazement and moved off.
‘I guess I could go as high as twelve per cent,’ continued Sprage.
‘You’re a robber and a thief!’ said Windcheater, and this statement seemed to dispel
some of the crew’s bemusement, as they now felt back on familiar ground. ‘I’ll not go below
twenty, and you know you’re getting a good deal.’
‘Twenty - are you mad?’ Sprage asked. He flicked hard at his lighter, but still had no luck.
Tay took pity on him and reached into her belt pouch, removed a burnished metal cylinder and
passed it to him. He took the object, studied it for a moment, then held it over the bowl of his
pipe. When he pressed the button on one end, red light flickered and his tobacco was soon
glowing. He puffed out a cloud of smoke and grinned with delight, and then, holding up the
cylinder, he looked questioningly at Tay. She waved for him to keep it.
With satisfaction, he dropped the laser igniter into his top pocket and returned his
attention to the sail. ‘Perhaps I can go as high as fifteen per cent,’ he suggested.

‘How would all your ships fare if not a single sail came in to land on them?’ asked
Windcheater.
Sprage eyed him, but since getting his pipe lit, seemed less inclined to argue.
‘All right, seventeen per cent.’
‘Eighteen and we have a deal,’ said Windcheater.
Sprage was silent for a moment. Then he nodded.
Just then, Lember returned with a printed contract and a pen. He held these out midway
between Sprage and the sail, then seemed at a loss as to what to do next. Sprage grabbed both
pen and contract and scribbled in his signature and the percentage.
‘You have an aug, so I presume you can read. But can you write, Sail?’ said the Captain.
In reply, Windcheater reared up in the spars and turned himself so that his foot claws
came down to rest on one of them. He then stooped down, extending one long wing, and
wriggling the two spider claws at its last joint.
Sprage handed the contract and the pen to Lember, who then handed these two items up
to Windcheater. The sail raised the contract up to his demonic eyes and squinted at it.
Tay almost burst out laughing when it held the cap of the pen in its mouth and chewed on
it gently. Sprage turned to regard her. ‘History in the making,’ he said.
‘It is that,’ she replied distractedly - another two ships had appeared on the horizon.
Returning her attention to the sail, she watched it signing the contract. Once that was done, the
sail put contract and pen in its mouth, then up-ended itself on the mast, spread huge its wings,
and reassumed its normal working position before depositing pen and contract in Sprage’s lap.
The sail had signed its name in block capitals so neat they were almost indistinguishable from
the print of the contract.
‘But of course,’ said Sprage, ‘that percentage is of the trip you happen to have signed on
for.’
‘Yes,’ said Windcheater. ‘And I do realize this trip is without profit. I am just establishing
a precedent.’
Sprage folded the contract and dropped it into his top pocket. He nodded slowly. ‘You’re a
wise sail.’
Windcheater tilted his head for a moment and his eyes crossed. When they uncrossed, he
said, ‘The Warden tells me that this trip is not yet over.’
Sprage paused in his rising from his chair and stared at the sail questioningly.
The sail went on, ‘Captain Ron has called the Convocation to the Skinner’s Island. The
Skinner is out and it has been revealed that Captain Ambel is in fact Gosk Balem.’

There came exclamations of surprise from the crew - but Tay was curious to note how
Sprage displayed no surprise at all.
‘That old chestnut,’ he muttered.
****
Disdaining assistance, Keech clambered aboard the Ahab and moved quickly to his hover
scooter. One-armed, he began to loosen the ties holding it to the deck. His other arm, though
cell-welded and now without gashes, was still bruised and painful. Ron, as soon as he was
aboard, walked up to the sail. Behind him, Boris, Goss - and other crew who had not wanted to
be part of the coming quest - climbed aboard.
‘There’s fresh meat over there on the Treader. Will you go over there for us?’
‘Might,’ said the sail.
‘How can I persuade you?’ asked Ron.
‘Boxy meat. I like boxy meat,’ said the sail.
‘Well, we can always get that,’ said Ron.
The Captain had heard of the sail called Windcheater, but not how he behaved. Had he
heard, he would have been unsurprised, Windcheater was unique, but not that unique. Ron
turned from the sail as it furled itself and climbed to the top of the mast, and faced Roach, who
had snuck up beside him.
‘What’s happenin’, Cap’n,’ said the little man.
Ron gazed down at him, then at the juniors who gathered beyond him.
‘Ambel is Gosk Balem, and the Skinner’s out, and we’re going to the Skinner’s Island to kill
it - and also have a Convocation to decide whether or not we throw Ambel into a fire.’
Roach squinted at him. ‘No, but really, what’s happenin’?’
Ron gestured to Goss and Boris. ‘They’ll tell you all you need to know. Now, can I trust
you, Roach?’
‘Of course,’ said Roach, sticking his chest out.
Ron eyed the little man dubiously before going on. ‘OK, I want you to stay here. As soon
as another sail comes along, I want you to follow on as fast as you can. No stopping for meets,
and no going after turbul. This is important,’ he emphasized.
‘Aye, Captain,’ said Roach trying, but not managing, to not look sneaky.
Ron then turned to Boris. The crewman was sombre, and Goss, who walked at his side,
looked annoyed.

‘You might think different when you hear what he’s got to say.’
‘No,’ said Boris. ‘Gosk Balem ran the furnace. My dad went to the furnace.’
Ron nodded then stood, staring pensively out to sea, with his thumbs in his belt, as if
unsure of what to say next. After a moment, he freed one thumb and pointed.
‘That,’ he said, ‘is one very persistent molly carp.’
They all gazed out at the humped shape in the sea - between themselves and the nearest
atoll.
‘It crossed with us earlier. Had a go at a leech we got. Helped us get the Captain back in
when he fell in the sea,’ said Boris. ‘Probably head back to its island in the night - unless there’s
good hunting here.’
‘Helped Ambel in?’ asked Ron.
‘Well, we think so,’ said Boris.
Ron turned to Roach. ‘Keep an eye on it. You never know what one of them might do. I’ll
be off.’ He turned and walked over to Keech.
‘Ready?’ he asked.
Keech nodded and climbed on to his scooter, Ron climbing on behind him. Keech lifted
the scooter from the deck and, one-handed, guided it out over the sea to the Treader, which was
already turning into the wind.
‘You’ll hold to your promise?’ Ron asked as Keech slowed the scooter over Ambel’s ship.
‘I’ll not kill him yet,’ said Keech.
‘You may change your mind when you hear what he has to say,’ said Ron.
‘I doubt it,’ said Keech.
****
With the wind blowing through her hair, Rebecca Frisk stared out over the waves, and smiled
happily. Come the morning, she would have the pleasure of slowly cutting Sable Keech into
pieces and feeding those pieces to the frog whelks. This pleasure would be somewhat marred by
the fact that Keech had long been beyond pain - but there would always be others on hand to
satisfy that need. She hoped Keech had a partner to whom he had some meaningful attachment.
If not, then the crew of his ship would have to do. She smiled again as she contemplated what
she might do. The disadvantage in torturing a Hooper was their high resistance to pain: it took
huge injury to cause sufficient pain to elicit a scream or two from them, but the advantage was
that Hoopers could survive huge injury. Burning was the best method of torture. Over a slow fire,
a Hooper could last for days.

Frisk started to mentally recount the many slow fires she and Jay had lit, but her
pleasurable contemplation was interrupted.
‘All stop! All stop!’ Svan yelled from the front rail. ‘Hard to port!’ She shot past Frisk to
Drum, whose hand was on the control lever, and tried to pull that lever over. With interest, Frisk
studied Drum, as Svan tugged at the Captain’s hand. There was a sudden rending crash and the
ship shuddered to a halt. Tors yelled as he flew over the front rail. Frisk and Svan fell and slid
across the deck to the side as the ship tilted.
Something huge thrashed in the sea in front of the ship. The vessel slewed sideways, and
Frisk heard the sound of many hard, scuttling feet. Tors began to scream.
‘Too fucking fast!’ Svan yelled, then looked up as a number of hard disk-shaped creatures
leapt up on to the rail, red dots of eyes skating round their rims.
‘Prill!’ Frisk shouted from where she lay. Then laughed, drew her pulse-gun, and began
shooting down at them. Svan rose to a crouch and drew her own weapon. After their volley of fire
cleared the rail, she leapt to the edge of the cabin’s desk and looked down to one side. Below
her, oozing past the side of the ship, a great glistening body heaved, and over its surface
swarmed eager prill. On that slick surface, a vaguely human shape thrashed and screamed as
the prill tore it apart. One creature made a run that uncoiled intestine. Another three were
fighting over an arm that swiftly detached.
‘Tors,’ Svan whispered, then began firing again, but within a moment she did not know
where to aim as Tors came apart and the prill fed on pieces of him all over the back of the giant
leech. The ship lurched again as the leech itself began ponderously to pull away.
‘We’re flooding!’ Shib yelled up from the lower deck.
Svan, hearing the panic in his voice, knew he was losing control since that damned whelk
creature had taken his fingers off. She went over to Frisk and dragged the woman to her feet.
‘We have to use the AG,’ she said.
Frisk laughed in her face, and Svan slapped her. Abruptly Frisk became sober. She
backhanded Svan across the chest so Svan crashed through the back rail to the lower deck. There
she lay stunned. Augmentation? She wondered, as Shib got to her side and helped her sit up. She
leant against him and struggled for breath.
‘We’re sinking,’ said Shib, sweating. He had his handgun drawn.
‘Get to the motor. Turn on the AG. We’ve no choice now,’ Svan gasped.
Shib nodded and ran for the hatch.
Svan tried to stand, but for a moment could not manage. Beside her hand, the deck
suddenly burst into flaming splinters. She looked up at Frisk, standing in the gap of the broken
rail and waited for the killing shot. It didn’t come. More prill swarmed up on to the deck and
instead Frisk started shooting at them.
‘Fucking lunatic,’ muttered Svan, and dragged herself towards the hatch. Once she
reached it, she fell through, catching a rung with her hand so she turned and came down on her

feet on the tilted floor below.
Shib was waiting for her. ‘Tors?’ he said.
‘Dead,’ she replied.
He nodded and looked up towards where they could hear Frisk still blasting away at prill.
‘She’ll have to pay,’ he said. He held up his hand with its missing fingers. ‘And for this
too.’
‘Later,’ said Svan. ‘Four thousand grams of Prador diamond-slate, remember? We
complete the contract, collect our payment, then we burn her.’
Shib nodded, but his attention was wandering.
Svan peered down towards the bows of the ship, where water gushed in and timbers were
groaning.
‘Let’s get that AG going,’ she said, and the two of them headed up the sloping deck to the
motor. Once they reached it, Shib popped the casing, and Svan flipped down a control panel
underneath. She hesitated over the controls.
‘There’s no other way,’ urged Shib.
‘Might bring the Warden down on us, and we don’t need that,’ replied Svan.
‘Better that than swimming in this sea,’ said Shib.
Svan nodded and punched a control. The ship juddered, and spillover from the field made
her face tingle. The motor now produced an AC hum and the creaking and groaning of the ship
increased. Svan watched the fixings bolted into the keel of the ship. If those tore free, the motor
would smash through the deck above, before it righted itself. But they wouldn’t tear free: she
had done them herself. When the ship heaved again, she regained her balance before making
further adjustments to the motor controls. The field tilted, and now the ship was coming level,
pivoting at the point of those fixings, which loaded them even more. The gushing of water into
the bows ceased for a moment, and then went into reverse. Svan made a final adjustment to the
control panel, then closed the cowling over the motor. She stood up as the flooring finally
levelled out.
‘I’ve set it to lift us clear by about a metre,’ she said. ‘Let’s go and look at the damage.’
She pulled her weapon and walked to the bows, Shib following a pace behind her, and it
irritated her that his breathing sounded heavy with fear. He’d never seemed xenophobic before.
Yes, it paid to be cautious around the lethal fauna of this planet, yet the creatures here were
nothing compared to an armed human - and he had dealt with plenty of them.
Frisk reluctantly holstered her weapon when it seemed she had disposed of the last of
the prill. The ship was level now and the water quite a way below the rail. She stared at it for a
long while before she realized what had happened. She thought about why it had happened thought about some of her decisions over the last few days. She cringed inwardly and pressed a

hand to her throat.
‘What’s happening to me, Jay?’ she asked.
But Jay wasn’t there to answer her, nor to back her up, and sometimes she just did not
understand why this was so. They had been happy on that Prador world hadn’t they? Why had he
felt it necessary to leave, in the end? Why had he been so angry with her? Yes, sometimes she
had behaved a bit irrationally, and of course that was to be expected: you couldn’t live together
for as long as they had without sometimes encountering something like that. It had been her
idea that maybe their crimes could be forgiven and that they could return to Earth which had
thrown him into his rage. In retrospect she realized that had been a silly idea, but his reaction
had been excessive.
She remembered him sneering at her. ‘Another excellent idea from your superior mind,
dear. I would put that on a par with your one about opening a gallery on Circe. Do you think for
one second that ECS has stopped searching for us? Do you think for one second we can breeze
easily through the Polity avoiding both capture and getting mind-wiped?’
‘But Jay, darling—’
‘I used to enjoy your little whims and sudden enthusiasms. I think I ceased to enjoy them
the moment you ceased to be you. Why did you do it? Why the hell did you do it?’
‘Jay, darling.’
‘Don’t touch me. You disgust me.’
There was a taste like iron in her mouth that she tried fruitlessly to spit away. That she
had no longer possessed the body he loved, she understood. But, in the end, it had been because
she no longer had the same mind. She gave a dry laugh and squeezed tears from her eyes, but,
deep inside she knew she was going insane. Because she’d lived too long in a body not her own,
she’d seen and caused too much horror, she’d lived too long amongst aliens, and because - in
the end - she’d lived too long.
****
Janer stepped over the wreckage of the door and into the cabin. He reached down and righted
the chair to which they had tied Keech, then carried it to the desk positioned below the
brass-rimmed portal. He sat down and studied the two sealed flasks contained in a rack clamped
to the edge of the desk. Each flask contained a number of red rhomboidal crystals resting under
a clear fluid. He removed a bung from one of these and sniffed at the pungency released. It
reminded him somewhat of old coffee, perhaps with a background of something putrefying.
‘Just one crystal?’ he said.
‘Yes,’ said the mind, and Janer wondered if he was imagining a touch of avidity in its
voice.
‘I suppose that if I don’t get it for you, you’ll get hold of it some other way.’
‘Yes,’ said the mind.

‘I’m not going to do this,’ said Janer, reinserting the bung and tapping it home with his
forefinger.
‘Why not?’
‘Because I’ve worked out what you’re up to. “Get me a sample of that unusual substance
in Ambel’s cabin.” Do you think I’m entirely stupid?’
‘I do not.’
Janer sat back in his chair. ‘Why do you want to go this route?’ he asked.
‘Power,’ explained the mind. ‘It was tried before using curare. That failed, and the hornets
in question were wiped out. The mind concerned still hasn’t regained its consciousness. But it is
the way.’
‘The same could happen again,’ said Janer.
‘Not here,’ said the mind. ‘This is a primitive society. It will work.’
‘Well, not with my help,’ said Janer. He stood, pulled the small jewelled Hive link from his
ear, and dropped it in his pocket. He gazed at the two flasks of fluid out of which pure sprine was
crystallizing, shook his head, then left the cabin. Once outside, he climbed up to the cabin-deck to go and listen to a story.
****
‘Captain Sprage,’ said Ambel looking round at Ron. Ron nodded from where he leant against the
rail. Ambel turned to face the sea again. Gathered behind him, on the main deck, were Keech and
Erlin, Forlam, Pland, Peck and Anne, and behind them, the rest of the crew. Even the sail had
extended its neck so it could turn an ear to what Ambel said.
‘It was him named me Ambel, and I’ve always thought he knew.’
‘We should ask him.’
‘Yes, we should - now. I’ve always been afraid to before.’
‘Is there a point to this?’ asked Keech flatly. He hadn’t taken his eyes off Ambel since
mounting the cabin-deck. His right hand rested on the butt of his pulse-gun. In his left hand he
held three steel spheres.
Ambel stared at him. ‘Gosk Balem was a slave, then he was slave master. He became like
Hoop and his crew because that was the only way to survive here then. Slaves were regularly
cored, and had their cored brains and spinal columns thrown into a furnace. It was just like Hoop
to put Balem in charge of that furnace,’ he said.
‘You should know,’ said Keech, bitterly.
‘But I don’t,’ said Ambel.

‘Explain,’ said Keech.
‘You came here with the ECS force that freed those slaves that hadn’t already been cored.
But you weren’t as prepared as you ought to have been, and Hoop and all his crew escaped. So
Hoop, Frisk, Rimsc, the Talsca twins and Grenant escaped off-world. They left Gosk Balem
behind to face the consequences of his actions. The surviving slaves hunted him for a hundred
years, and he was finally caught out here, by Sprage and Francis Cojan, who later went on to
form the Friends of Cojan, whom you yourself knew.’
‘I knew Cojan himself,’ said Keech. ‘He got hold of the Talsca twins and boiled them
alive.’
‘I heard that,’ said Ron. ‘What happened to him, then?’
Keech turned and stared at Ron.
‘Batian mercenaries got him with a thermite bomb,’ he said. ‘But only because he allowed
it. He was tired of the running and tired of the killing. He told me this only days before his death,
when he transferred all his funds to one of my accounts.’
Ambel nodded then continued. ‘When Gosk Balem was caught, the first Convocation was
called. All the slaves were by then captains of their own ships, and the population here was
swelled by their children, and by off-worlders coming through the gate. The Convocation decided
unanimously to carry out the ECS sentence of death on Balem. They didn’t have sprine then, and
at Cojan’s instigation they decided against burning. They decided instead to throw him to the
leeches that were swarming at the time. On the dawn of the following day, they took him to the
rail of Sprage’s ship and threw him into the sea. He screamed for four hours before he went
under. The Convocation was broken and the Captains went their separate ways, assuming Balem
was dead.’
‘Evidently he wasn’t,’ said Erlin. Janer studied her, wondering what she now thought of
her Captain.
Without turning round Ambel said, ‘No, Erlin, he wasn’t. The durability of the older
Hoopers was something not fully understood then. The leeches fed on Balem’s skin and outer
flesh, whittling him down until he was a stripped fish. He was just like a turbul or a boxy - only a
turbul or a boxy that can experience pain. Pain of that intensity drove him insane. I have no doubt
he wanted to die, yet having the fibres in him, his body could not die. He fed, on boxies, turbul,
whatever. He regrew flesh, nerves, skin - regrew them, and had them eaten off him again and
again. This went on for five years. In that time he died in the only way he could die. His mind
died.’
Ambel gazed around at them with a haunted expression. ‘My first memory is of Captain
Sprage standing over me and asking, “Jesus, is he alive?” I’d been harpooned and hauled out of
the sea. I was almost skinless and had very little muscle. In places I was right down to the bone.
I was told later that I then had a leech mouth rather than a tongue, and that I took a chunk out of
Sprage’s forearm. They tied me to the mast and fed me mashed Rhinoworm steaks and
Dome-grown corn. The leech mouth slowly turned back into a tongue. It took only ten minutes or
so before my lungs readapted to taking oxygen out of the air rather than out of the sea, but it
was a couple of days before I was able to scream again. I screamed for a while, but even that

uses too much energy, and apparently I stopped after an hour or so. It was two weeks before I’d
regrown all my skin and muscle. Sprage then asked who I was and I had no reply for him. I didn’t
even have language - I had nothing. I was an infant who had to be taught not to shit on the deck.
Sprage taught me how to speak, taught me how to read, how to learn. I was on his ship for
twenty years before I got some intimation of who I might once have been.’
The only sound now was that of the waves slopping against the side of the ship. Peck,
Anne and Pland could not look at their Captain; Forlam’s expression displayed a strange avidity;
Ron was without expression.
Keech turned to Erlin, who was looking slightly sick. ‘Is this possible?’ he asked.
Erlin nodded.
‘A Hooper of Ambel’s age can’t die unless most of his major organs are destroyed
simultaneously. The leech mouth was the result of lack of Earth food. It’s due to the Spatterjay
virus. Not only does it infest the body, but also it reprograms the DNA of that body for optimum
survival - and keeps on reprogramming. Adrift in the sea, with his muscles eaten away, he
needed some way of feeding. The virus grew him a leech mouth so he could attach to other
animals that got close to him.’ Erlin shook her head and stared down at the deck.
‘What about his mind?’ asked Keech.
Erlin said, ‘His nerves would have been regrowing all the time. He would have been
suffering varying degrees of agony all the time that was happening to him. It would work in much
the same way as the overload employed in a mind-wipe, though that’s done by shooting a full
sensory overload down every nerve channel, and takes only about ten seconds.’
Keech studied Ambel. ‘Then you’re like the Talsca twins and Rimsc,’ he said, and
pocketed the three spheres he had been holding.
Ambel returned his stare and waited.
Keech said, ‘The sentence pronounced upon you has been executed.’
‘Does this mean you won’t try to kill me?’ Ambel asked.
Keech stared at him expressionlessly. ‘Probably not.’ He turned and left the cabin-deck.
****
One after another, the blanks were now walking away from the gathered Prador towards the
heavy-lifter. One of the Warden’s fellow AIs was ruminating over the huge possibilities now,
perhaps, opening for such corporations as Cybercorp, and wondering if this had been the sector
AI’s purpose in coming to the Prador home world in the form of a Golem - Cybercorp could
certainly provide the Prador with more efficient hands than those of the human blanks, and
perhaps commence trade in Golem and robot technologies. Another AI was observing that trade
in such technologies would give AI a foothold in the Prador Third Kingdom, so that it would not
be long until it was absorbed into the Polity. The Warden of Spatterjay acknowledged all this and
shifted its attention away from the sector AI Golem and to the interior of the heavy-lifter.

The blanks’ control codes were being switched over to the control of subminds that had
been briefly initiated by the sector AI, then downloaded into the blanks’ thrall units, and these
minds were moving them into cold-storage lockers on the lifter. As each one went into storage,
sampling drones the size of flies took snips from their skin, which were instantly taken for
analysis.
Joseph Best, ECS monitor, lost in action . . . Erickson Sewel, medical orderly on the
obliterated Hounger Station, lost in action . . . Seben Daes, housewife, disappeared . . . and so
the list scrolled on and on, as DNA was matched to ancient records and those records then
completed and closed down.
The Warden now pulled further back, to get an overview of yet more heavy-lifters landing
and taking off on other Prador worlds, as the thousands of essentially dead were taken away for
respectful disposal: a transmigration of the undead - a ghoulish chapter that should have closed
the Prador war, though that war had ended long ago, but did not.
The final closing words, the Warden knew, would be written on Spatterjay. And so it
continued to watch and send information packages back there - to itself.
****

13
The surviving male glister, having come within a whisker of falling prey to one of
the deep-sea denizens, instinctively headed for the shallows where such creatures
never came, and where it might digest in peace the hundredweight of turbul flesh
now cramming its gut. It was this last huge meal, putting excess pressure on the
network of blood-vessels lacing the creature’s body, which forced one such vein up
against a sharp fragment of its own damaged shell. This circumstance would not
have proved so unfortunate had the creature stayed in the depths; but the drop in
external pressure, as the glister rose to the surface, caused the vein to expand,
sawing against the shell as it swam. The vein burst just as the creature reached
the surface near a small isolated atoll. The injury, in itself, was a minor problem
for the glister and would have healed in a few days, had not the leakage of blood
left a trail for the molly carp resident close by. Feeling a surge in the water behind
it, and tasting molly carp — a taste that elicited only terror in it - the glister
accelerated away from the shallows towards open sea, though it was sluggish
after its gorging. Swimming over a declivity into deeper water, the glister
experienced something like relief, assuming that the carp pursuing it from the
shallows would be unlikely to pursue it any further. But when it flipped its tail to
dive, the tail remained rigid and its body moved up and down instead. Sculling in
panic with its flat legs it found itself rising inexorably out of the sea. As the carp
somersaulted it into the air, its last view in this world was of a large mouth gaping
where it would rather have seen ocean.

The adolescent Vrell mistook the grinding of Ebulan’s mandibles as an indication of hunger, and
nearly lost a leg trying to feed the councillor a nicely decayed hock of human meat. Sliding on his

AG, Ebulan slammed Vrell up against the weed-pocked stone-effect wall.
‘An adult Prador initiates and manipulates. But what does an adult Prador not do?’ Ebulan
asked.
‘An adult Prador does not physically intervene, Father,’ Vrell signed.
Ebulan again slammed the child against the wall, putting a crack in Vrell’s carapace as a
reminder, then backed off to let the child escape. As the adolescent scuttled away, Ebulan
accessed Speaker’s thrall unit and looked through the blank human’s eyes. Prill everywhere,
water rushing in through a hole in the hull, screams and shots: chaos. Stupid human.
It had all been so simple: send Frisk off in pursuit of Keech, let it be known there that she
was on-planet and, using adulterated eonides, destabilize her nerve linkages with her host body
so that she operated below efficiency. He had predicted how she would quickly be captured and
a Convocation called. In such circumstances all the Old Captains on-planet, as well as Keech and
Frisk, would be assembled in one place. And in that same place, he would have a Prador
multipurpose motor with a totally improbable antimatter power supply - and that with a little tab
of planar explosive stuck to the side. Ebulan ground his mandibles again and quickly sent four of
his more heavily armed blanks hurrying off to his shuttle.
Then he summoned Vrell again. The adolescent edged his way into the chamber and
waited, shivering, for instructions.
‘Things have not entirely gone against us. We have enjoyed some of what the humans
call “luck”. A Convocation has been called, so we must be sure that the motor gets to its
location.’
‘What about Frisk . . . Father?’ asked Vrell.
‘The motor is of main importance. Frisk we must retain in case this Convocation is broken
off and we need some method to set up another.’
‘I understand, Father.’
‘You will go along with the four blanks to assure the fruition of my plan.’
Vrell suddenly stopped twitching and went very still.
Ebulan went on, ‘Take the ship to that Convocation. Go along with Frisk’s plans unless
they begin to interfere with this purpose. As it is primary, I do not expect you to return.’
‘I understand, Father.’
****
The chamber was a thirty-metre sphere of mirrored glass, with a floor of black glass. The
runcible itself stood at the centre of this, mounted on a stepped pedestal. Its apparent similarity
to some kind of altar had long been the subject of holodrama and VR: gleaming ten-metre-long
incurving bull’s horns jutted up from the pedestal, and between them shimmered the cusp of a
Skaidon warp: an interface with the supernal. When asked why this was so, most AIs gave

equivocal replies. The Warden’s reply to this question was uncompromisingly direct. ‘What
design do you expect, from someone who calls a tachyon “pea-green”?’ it always retorted.
Through the cusp now stepped four people. The Warden noted the presence of an
ophid-adapted human, two women dressed in the utile garb of seasoned travellers, and a free
Golem android. Tourists, doubtless. No ECS monitors as yet, though it expected them at any time.
It flashed its attention down to the planet’s surface and took in multiple views through its
thousands of eyes positioned there, noting nothing more untoward than a fight between a couple
of Hoopers, then returned all its attention to the eye mounted on one of its satellites.
The AG reading was coming from a ship, and this was all it could ascertain through the
thick cloud layers. It wasn’t a registered antigravity device, of this the Warden was certain, and it
wasn’t one of the many unregistered ones it already knew about. It took the AI less than a
second to interpolate the likely source of the device. It opened its ‘anomalous’ file and inspected
more closely what it found there - focusing on the instant before the antimatter explosion. The
Prador ship had passed through the cloud layer, and been effectively hidden by the ionized gas it
left behind it. It seemed entirely likely that the explosion had been a subterfuge covering more
than just the jettisoning of an escape pod. Something more significant than Frisk’s arrival here
had occurred. As a precaution, the AI sent a coded underspace transmission of activation to a
satellite on the other side of Spatterjay.
That satellite, a polished cylinder twenty metres long, jetted out two blades of fusion
flame and began to change its orientation. Inside it, systems came alive, and ten matt-black
objects began to draw energy. The Warden now turned its attention elsewhere.
SM12 and SM13 exploded from the surface of the sea and shot into the air.
‘I don’t know who is aboard that sailing ship, but it seems unlikely that whatever is going
on down there is unconnected to the arrival of that Prador vessel. You, Thirteen, have
chameleonware - though I don’t remember approving it. I want you to get on board and report
everything you see. Twelve, I want you scanning the entire area for anomalous signals anything,’ the Warden ordered.
‘It might not be Frisk. If it is her, though, there’s no way she could have got that far
merely in an escape pod used as a submersible,’ said Twelve.
‘I am aware of that,’ said the Warden. ‘If it is her, then it seems likely she has had more
assistance than that of a handful of Batians. If it is not her, then you can return to your search for
her, or work from that point, should there be a connection. Twelve, I want you to confine your
scans to very low power, as I do not want you detected. Thirteen, you will transmit direct to me
via underspace. For now we just watch and learn.’
‘You got it, boss,’ said Twelve as the Warden withdrew.
‘Creep,’ muttered Thirteen as they sped on through the sky.
****
Prill had entered through the gaping hole in the ship’s bows. Bits of their bodies lay smoking
round that hole, though some of them had made it further in before being hit. A legless prill lay
on a coiled pile of rope, its red eyes still shooting round and about its carapace. Svan thought

how like an adult Prador it seemed, and equally vicious. She looked to where Speaker sat against
a bulkhead, a pulsed-energy weapon on her lap and a cord round her right upper arm, above
where the limb had been cut away.
‘Need any help?’ asked Svan, forgetting herself. She glanced at Shib, who was staring at
the legless prill with a horrified fascination.
‘It is unfortunate that this unit has lost its arm,’ said Speaker, and Svan stared back at
her, reminded that this Speaker was not actually a human being; she was just a tool of the Prador
in its ship; its eyes and ears, and . . . hand. She shook her head in annoyance, then ignored the
blank while she inspected the damage to the ship.
‘Do we have enough equipment to deal with this?’ she asked Shib, gesturing at the
breached hull.
‘I’ll rig a couple of sheets - inside and out - and fill the gap between with crash foam.
Shouldn’t be a problem,’ he said, still staring at the prill.
‘There is a more immediate problem,’ said Speaker. Both the Batians turned and looked at
her as she removed the cord and dropped it, then stood, holstering her weapon. She continued,
‘Rebecca Frisk has been going into deep nerve conflict with her body for some days now. She
carries the drug to alleviate this problem, but since arriving here has not taken it with any
regularity. The nerve conflict is therefore causing in her a psychosis with schizophrenic
episodes.’
‘Pan-fried AI,’ said Shib, turning from the prill. Svan was glad to see that he seemed to
have himself under better control now.
‘What are we supposed to do?’ asked Svan.
‘She must start to take the drug regularly. If she does not she could become a further
danger to this ship. Also, while she is acting like this, you will find it difficult to effect repairs,
and we do not want it running on AG for much longer.’
‘You go and tell her to take her damned drug,’ said Svan. ‘She just took a shot at me out
there.’
‘It should be possible for you to bring her down with a high-energy stun setting,’ said
Speaker.
‘Right,’ said Shib, rolling his eyes.
‘I repeat, if you do not do this, she will become a danger to herself as well as to others.’
‘Tell me about it,’ said Svan, turning back to inspect the hole in the hull.
‘Also, if you do not do it,’ said Speaker, ‘you will have to find some alternative method of
transport from this planet.’
The Batians stared at her.

‘What’s your interest, Prador?’ asked Svan. ‘Her I can understand. She wants Keech off
her back. She wants him dead. What’s in it for you?’
‘Friendship,’ said Speaker.
‘Answer the question then I’ll do what you ask,’ said Svan with contempt.
‘You don’t believe I do this for friendship’s sake?’ asked the Prador through its Speaker.
‘No, I don’t.’
‘Very well - politics. Our Kingdom is slowly but certainly developing closer ties with the
Polity. As these ties grow, I become ever more of an outcast in my own society because of my
connections with the trade in cored humans. I have come here to sever all such connections.’
‘But Frisk is one of those connections,’ said Svan.
‘I do have a certain affection for her,’ said Speaker.
‘Keech is also one,’ said Shib, ‘but surely you could have left him to her, to us.’
‘There are others too,’ said the distant Prador.
‘Who?’ asked Svan.
‘Anyone who was once a slave here when the coring operation was being run. They are
still here, many of them. They are people like Drum: the Old Captains.’
‘All witnesses,’ said Svan, nodding in understanding. Shib eyed her questioningly. She
explained, ‘It’s the nature of Prador politics. Since anything written or recorded can be falsified,
only the verbal statements of witnesses are given any credence in law. It basically works out that
you can get away with anything so long as you leave no living witnesses to it.’
‘In this you are correct,’ said Speaker.
‘Be difficult tracking them all down,’ said Shib.
‘For really important events, all the Old Captains come together in Convocation. The
presence of Hoop’s mistress here would certainly bring about such a Convocation.’
‘Then what?’ said Shib.
‘They are very primitively armed here.’
‘Point taken,’ said Shib.
Svan pulled her stun gun from her belt and altered the setting. Shib watched her for a
moment, then did the same with his own.
‘Let’s go put our leader to sleepy-byes then,’ she said.

Up on deck Frisk was still blasting away at this and that - and giggling at things only she
could see.
****
‘I can’t even begin to imagine such suffering as he experienced,’ said Janer, watching the sun
descend into dull sunset.
‘None of us can,’ replied Erlin. ‘It’s beyond even his understanding - which is why his mind
died, why he became Ambel.’
‘I’m confused,’ said Janer.
‘That’s not surprising,’ said Erlin. ‘It’s a very long and involved story.’
‘No, not about that - just about a couple of other points,’ he said.
Erlin watched him and waited.
He continued: ‘I know Hoopers have a very high pain threshold, but obviously they do
suffer pain.’ He nodded towards Forlam who stood at the stern, near Keech. ‘I saw him get his
guts pulled out in a contest, yet that was an arranged bout he got into willingly. Was it just for
the money, or what?’
‘Some of them do have a strange relationship with pain,’ said Erlin. She seemed
uncomfortable with the knowledge.
‘What kind of relationship?’
‘Some of the neural pathways get mixed up. Severe injury can cause it. They get hurt time
and time again, then find themselves going on to put themselves in more danger. It’s
unconscious, mostly, though some of them begin to realize what they want.’
‘They want pain?’
‘It makes them feel alive.’
Janer shook his head and stared down at the sea.
‘Maybe that’s why they want to keep on pursuing that dreadful thing,’ he said.
‘Maybe, but it is something that has to be done. It must be killed.’
‘Why?’ asked Janer, surprised at her vehemence.
‘The head will go to where its body is, and its body is on the Skinner’s Island. They intend
to go there and destroy the Skinner completely.’
‘This Skinner is Jay Hoop, then? You know I never believed that story until now.’ He
paused for a moment. ‘And now it’s . . . heading for its own body—?’ He allowed himself a weak
grin at the unintended pun.

‘To rejoin it, yes. And that cannot be allowed to happen.’
Janer studied her for a long moment. He felt as if someone must have shoved him into
one of the weirder type of VR scenarios. Every time he thought he had a handle on the situation,
it just got stranger.
‘What about this Convocation?’ he asked, trying instead for a discussion of the prosaic.
‘The Old Captains will meet and sit in judgement on Ambel. They might decide to throw
him back into the sea - or into a fire. But they might decide he’s suffered enough.’
Janer studied her again.
‘How do you feel about it?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Erlin.
Janer nodded and toyed with the Hive link in his pocket. He did not know how he himself
felt either. Ambel he considered a rival for Erlin’s affections but, like Ron, with his slow, huge
power and calm assurance, the Old Captain was difficult to dislike.
****
Frisk playfully burnt holes in the deck as Svan dived for cover. The shot Svan returned splayed
mini-lightning along a rail but caused no damage. Her second shot hit Drum, and the Captain
coughed as if slapped across the chest, but he remained by the helm as steady as a monolith.
‘Come out, come out, wherever you are!’ shouted Frisk, and burnt a couple of holes
through the captive sail. The sail’s wings hung flaccid, but its stapled neck quivered.
‘Frisk!’
Frisk turned just in time to see Shib straddling the port rail. The pulse hit her in the chest
and knocked her backwards. She tried to raise her weapon, but a second and a third pulse struck
her. She staggered away while Shib made an adjustment on his weapon. Then the fourth pulse
slammed her back against Drum, and blackness engulfed her.
‘Got her,’ yelled Shib, and went to stand over the woman. Svan came out of hiding and
climbed on to the cabin-deck. She glared down at Frisk.
‘What setting?’ she asked.
‘Six,’ Shib replied. ‘Hooper.’
‘No sign of leech marks on her though,’ said Svan, ‘but maybe that doesn’t mean
anything. We’ll have to remember that.’ They both turned as Speaker made her way precariously
up the ladder.
‘What now?’ Svan asked.

‘Repair the damage to this ship. Using AG will bring us unwanted attention. Then we wait
for my shuttle,’ said Speaker.
‘One thing,’ said Svan as Speaker turned to go. ‘To bring about this Convocation, you
spoke of the Captains needing to know that Frisk is here. Our pursuit of Keech brings you no
closer to that goal.’
‘The Captains do know that she is here, but even that is now unnecessary since a
Convocation has been called at our next destination. It would seem Rebecca is not the only
remaining member of Hoop’s crew here, beside himself. Gosk Balem has been found, alive.’
‘Hoop is here as well?’ said Shib, but Speaker descended to the lower deck without
replying, then quickly returned to the hold.
‘I’ll watch her,’ said Svan, nodding at the prostrate Frisk. ‘You go and get on with the
repairs.’
Shib glanced down at his mutilated hand. After a moment, he stepped closer to Frisk and
trod his heel down hard on her face. He was about to do so again when Svan pulled him back.
‘I wouldn’t bother,’ she said. ‘If she’s Hooper, she probably won’t even notice when she
wakes. Now, as I said, the repairs?’
Shib stared at her hard.
‘She’ll pay,’ he snarled.
‘Repairs,’ Svan repeated, her voice flat.
Shib retained enough survival instinct to recognize her tone, and moved off to do as he
was told. With her hand resting on the butt of her pulse-gun, Svan watched him go. Unnoticed by
the both of them, a seahorse the colour and texture of the sky, had drifted to the top of the main
mast and settled there. It immediately changed appearance to the colour and texture of the
mast, providing it with a baroque and somewhat odd adornment. The sail opened one crusted
eyelid to expose a dark red pupil, then quickly closed it. Drum’s glance flicked impassively to the
top of the mast, then down to his hands on the helm. With painful slowness, he lifted one finger
from the wood, then returned it. At the back of his neck, a hole had appeared, exposing the dull
metal of the spider thrall.
****
With a fair wind in all her sails, the Treader moved out of the atolls and into Deep-sea. The sun
set in a silent viridian explosion and thick clouds hauled a deeper darkness up behind the ship.
Keech shivered at the rail, testing the fingers of his injured arm.
‘Hurt?’ asked Forlam with undue interest.
Keech nodded, closing his hand into a fist. He wanted to be fully functional for what was
yet to come. He hadn’t decided about Ambel yet - but if his eventual decision went against that
of this Convocation, he wanted to be ready and able to carry it through.

‘The Skinner gives pain,’ said Forlam.
‘You don’t say,’ replied Keech.
Forlam went on, ‘They say it caught Peck, stripped him completely of his skin and ran
around waving it about like a set of overalls. Peck’s never been the same since.’
Keech didn’t suppose he would be. He also wondered about the reason for Forlam’s
intense interest.
‘Why was it allowed to live for so long? Didn’t you all know about it?’ he asked.
Behind and to either side of the ship, the sea reflected a yellow glow as Peck and Pland
moved about lighting lanterns. Keech glanced around the ship. Anne was standing by the mast,
cutting up rhinoworm meat for the sail. Janer and Erlin had gone below, and Keech wondered if
they would be sharing a bunk this night. From the cabin-deck could be heard the low murmur of
Ambel and Ron in conversation. Ambel was at the helm: his huge bulky shape silhouetted against
the sunset. When Ron moved up beside him there was little to distinguish between them.
‘Not everyone knew about it. Kept it to ‘emselves’ said Forlam, as if bemoaning that the
location of some treasure had been withheld from him.
‘Who did, then?’ asked Keech.
‘The Old Captains mostly.’
‘That still doesn’t tell me why it was allowed to live.’
‘I guess it don’t.’
‘Balem knew and he did nothing,’ said Keech, testing.
Forlam appeared distracted as he said, ‘Its final death - maybe a Convocation decision,
not just Captain Ambel’s.’
Keech let that ride: there had been no Convocation decision to pursue and kill the Skinner
this time.
‘How many Captains?’ he asked.
‘Twenty-three at last count,’ Forlam quickly replied, lost now in some strange abstraction
- his eyes wide on the dark.
‘And your Ambel is one of the most respected of them.’
‘Yes, he is that.’
Keech nodded and turned to head for his bunk. This man made him feel uncomfortable as
there was something definitely not quite right about him - which was an interesting assessment
from someone who had only recently been a walking corpse. Also, Keech felt tired and even with
all his doubts and wonderings, he was relishing the experience. Even unpleasant sensations

were better than having no sensation at all.
****
‘No action,’ the Warden decreed.
‘But they’ve put a thrall unit in him,’ argued the submind.
‘No action.’
‘But they’re criminals. She’s Rebecca Frisk. I should do something.’
‘No action.’
‘But—’
‘I can always recall you, and send SM Twelve instead,’ suggested the Warden. ‘He too
has chameleonware - which, incidentally, was approved by me.’
An incoherent mutter came from the drone.
‘What was that?’
‘Nothing, Warden. I hear and obey.’
The Warden shut down communication and considered its options. It logged the situation
with ECS as low priority, and ran a quick summation of the facts that were certain. The
spacecraft being blown in orbit had, apparently, been a cover for Rebecca Frisk’s arrival on
Spatterjay. And she had come shortly after the arrival of Sable Keech. Here she had met her
mercenaries, and set out after the monitor. That all seemed quite simple until you started
factoring in some other items.
Firstly, agents of unknown employ had been disseminating the information that Rebecca
Frisk was on-planet, which information had led to a Convocation being called. Frisk had moved
rather quickly to join the sailing ship she was now on, and had installed an AG motor. This was
worrying, because the spacecraft that had supposedly been blown was only capable of carrying a
certain class of escape pods, which in submersible mode could not move as fast as she had.
What was going on?
The Warden decided to widen his logic field. Results: the immediate consequence of
Frisk’s presence here being known had been the calling of a Convocation of the Old Captains.
That made no sense. But perhaps something to do with the Prador? The Warden opened its Hoop
files and began to check Prador associations, and to compare them with present events in the
Third Kingdom. Ebulan, a human name given to a very old adult Prador, seemed the most
prominent name. Slowly, the Warden began to discern a possible scenario emerging.
****
SM13 continued its silent vigil. It watched as Shib hung two sheets of plass across the gaping
hole in the front of the ship, moulded them to the shape of the hull by means of a small heating
unit, then injected crash foam in between both sheets. The foam set instantly, then Shib went to

carefully shut off AG. The ship settled back into the sea, and the patch-up held firm. Thirteen
momentarily considered introducing a few weaknesses around the repair but found it didn’t have
the nerve to defy the Warden. It turned its attention elsewhere.
The sail was slowly recovering, though the damage done to it had been severe. Its brain
had been partially cooked, but not completely destroyed, and was now regenerating. It could do
nothing as yet, by dint of it having had its neck stapled to the mast, but it was working on that:
methodically flexing its neck muscles against the strips of metal securing it.
Drum was a much more interesting possibility. Thirteen had noted the Captain’s finger
movement and, listening in on conversations between Shib and Svan, it surmised that the
accident was in some part due to Drum not immediately obeying a verbal instruction from Svan.
It also noted the typical Prador metal exposed at the back of Drum’s neck, and surmised that a
spider thrall had been used on him, but that the Captain had not been fully cored. Now, his
virus-filled body was attempting to reject the device controlling him - just as the body Frisk had
stolen was attempting to reject what remained of her. Such endless possibilities.
At present the sail and Drum were in no immediate danger, however. Yet, if either of
them became capable of any more decisive action, they would likely put themselves in mortal
danger. Then, the submind decided, it could act, despite the Warden’s orders. So it sat up on the
mast, with the AI equivalent of smug satisfaction, and awaited events. Then it saw the
one-armed woman climb out of the hold and, when it read the Prador glyphs tattooed on her
body, it suddenly realized that something very important had been missed.
‘Warden! Prador blank!’ was the extent of the message it shrieked, before other events
came upon it rather abruptly. A flash of intense light haloed the ship, and a thunderclap shook it.
Thirteen had just detected something metallic in the sea - before its senses whited out and a
power surge fused its AG.
‘Damn,’ it managed, before tumbling from the masthead and axing down into the deck
timbers.
****
Shib drew a bead on the baroque metal drone. The seahorse wobbled in the splintered planking
and little gusts of smoke puffed from a couple of its small vents. ‘Drone shell - probably loaded
with one of the Warden’s subminds,’ said Svan. ‘That was an EM burst hit it. So it won’t be
getting up again.’
‘What do I do with it?’ Shib asked.
‘Throw it over the side.’
Shib lowered his weapon and moved towards the drone. He tried to pick it up with his
injured hand, and then had to holster his weapon and use both hands to tug the device from the
deck timbers. When he finally lifted it, he found it as heavy as a cannon ball. It was hot as well,
continuing to puff smoke and make small buzzing sounds. He tossed it over the side, watched it
rapidly sink - and then turned quickly, drawing his weapon at the splashing sound behind him. He
lowered his weapon on identifying the wedge-shaped Prador transport rising out of the sea on
the other side of the ship.

The transport drew level with the rail, and opened like a clam. Out of it, in full war
harness, sprang the large adolescent Prador he had earlier seen inside the destroyer. The
creature rocked the whole ship as it hit the deck, the armoured spikes of its feet driving like
daggers into the planking. Throwing up splinters, it turned - and demolished a section of rail with
a sweep of its claw. Quickly following the creature through this gap came four heavily laden
human blanks, just as fearsomely armed.
‘Get us back on course - now,’ rasped the Prador’s translation box.
‘And if we don’t?’ said Shib.
He did not even have time to duck. An armoured claw, reeking of the sea, closed round
his neck and lifted him from the deck.
‘All are dispensable,’ Vrell rasped. ‘All.’
As Vrell lowered him back to the deck, Shib glared at the Prador with hate and disgust.
When finally it released its hold, he glanced up to the cabin-deck where Svan stood at Drum’s
shoulder issuing instructions. The motor churned the sea behind the ship, and Drum swung the
helm over, turning the vessel away from where it had been drifting, the transport attached
limpet-like at its side.
Moving away from Drum, Svan watched cautiously as one of the blanks came up the
ladder. The blank looked straight into the polished barrel of Svan’s weapon, then went and
crouched down by Frisk. The blank pulled the injector from Frisk’s belt and quickly hurled it over
the side. Using a new injector, the blank gave the woman a dose, before substituting the injector
in her belt with the new one. As Svan watched this she realized immediately that she had been
lied to - then she climbed down to the lower deck and moved up beside Shib. They watched
silently as blanks started bolting armament and defences to the deck. Their transport, now
empty, sank back into the sea.
‘Getting a little complicated,’ observed Shib, staring at the Prador, with beads of sweat on
his forehead.
‘Next chance we get, we’re out of here,’ murmured Svan.
‘Nice to get a chance,’ said Shib, still rubbing at his throat.
****
The Warden registered the message, and the EM blast, and then all its speculations and
calculations slammed together in a logical whole. There was a Prador adult somewhere on the
planet below. There had to be one, to run a human blank. Now, all of a sudden, Rebecca Frisk
and the events on Drum’s Cohorn were only important in how they pertained to the presence of
that Prador.
‘SM Twelve, keep away from that ship. I won’t tell you again,’ warned the Warden when it
detected the little drone moving in close again.
‘Sorry, boss.’

The Warden went on, ‘Did it occur to you that the debris you scanned earlier might have
been planted in orbit, that in fact no ship was destroyed in the atmosphere?’
‘No, boss.’
The Warden scanned back over its visual files, only confirming that - of course - none of
its eyes had been close enough for it to identify what kind of vessel had approached Spatterjay.
‘Obviously didn’t occur to you either,’ interjected another voice.
‘Sniper, this is a private channel,’ said the Warden.
‘Yeah, and your security sucks. Come on, when are you gonna get with some direct
action?’
If the Warden could have smiled, it would have done so then. It had only taken the
smallest chink in its armour for the war drone to break through, and then from under the sea, in
the belly of a molly carp: proof that even after all this time Sniper had still not lost his edge.
‘Our priority is to trace the Prador vessel. SM Thirteen was knocked down by an EM burst
shell, the kind of weaponry often found on their war craft. That, combined with the tricky
manoeuvring it executed on the way in puts it at nothing less than an attack ship.’
‘Yeah, so whadda you doing about it?’ demanded Sniper.
‘SMs numbers one to ten, activate and upload to drone shells in defence satellite Alpha,
and run diagnostics,’ said the Warden.
‘Now that’s more like it, but is it enough? That lot are only police-action spec. You want
soldiers not enforcers,’ said Sniper. ‘Why don’t I come and play, too?’
‘You will remain exactly where you are unless the situation becomes critical - though
there is something else you can do for me.’
‘What?’ said Sniper grumpily.
‘I want an overlay program from you. You know the kind I mean.’
Sniper’s reply bounced through subspace: a tight package of viral information. The
Warden studied its format and its pasted-on title, then beamed it directly to the cylindrical
satellite that was now moving into position. One of its long ports opened and ten black
coffin-shapes dropped out of it. Hitting atmosphere they started glowing like hot irons.
‘SM Twelve, I want you there in position to shepherd them. They’ll be a bit erratic to
begin with.’
‘Yes, as I can hear,’ said SMI2.
The Warden listened in to the close chatter between the ten SMs.
‘Let’s kick arse!’ was the gist of their excitement, overlaid on sounds as of mechanical

projectile weapons being loaded and primed. With the amused tolerance of a parent, the Warden
watched their continued descent to the surface of the planet. Subminds that had previously only
been used for ecological, geological and meteorological surveys had changed very little even
when they uploaded into the newest enforcer shells. Sniper’s overlay program had immediately
changed that. But then that program had, after all, been called ‘attitude’.
****
No matter how hard he tried, Ambel could not go back behind the pain. His first screams on the
deck of Sprage’s ship all those years ago had been his birth screams. I’m Ambel now, I’m not this
monster that fed Hoopers to the furnace - they’ll recognize this. But even as he thought these
things, he could not rid himself of the memory of the look of hurt betrayal Boris had given him.
Yet there were no lies: I am not Gosk Balem. I’m not.
‘I’m for bed,’ said Ron. ‘Wake me in a couple of hours.’
‘Use mine,’ said Ambel.
‘I’ll do that,’ said Ron. He patted Ambel on the shoulder as he went past him to the
ladder. Ambel listened for the sound of a door closing then abruptly remembered that there was
no door any more: the Skinner was away and all secrets were out. He glanced back and saw that
Sable Keech, too, had finally gone to his bunk. The only ones remaining on deck were a single
junior checking the lamps, and Anne and Forlam, who by the attention they were giving each
other, would be heading bunkwards soon anyway. An aberrant thought crossed Ambel’s mind:
Ron could be a problem to him, but a harpoon dipped in sprine would quickly solve that issue.
The rest of them he could kill with ease, with the possible exception of Keech. There was no
telling what kind of weaponry the Earth monitor carried. Ambel shook his head. Did others ever
think such thoughts?
Did he think such thoughts because, underneath all those years of being Ambel, he still
really was Gosk Balem? No. He believed others did think such things. The test of character was
in what you did, not what you thought about doing. He could no more actually murder these
people than could a molly carp fly.
‘Deep thoughts?’
Ambel glanced sideways at Erlin as she slipped up on to the cabin-deck beside him. He
hadn’t heard her approach. He looked down at her bare feet, then to the thin slip she wore, then
at her face.
‘Boris calls them “long thoughts”, because if you think too deep you lose sight of the
point. Full of daft comments like that is Boris,’ said Ambel.
‘He hurt you,’ said Erlin.
‘It hurt, but I expected nothing else. I’m surprised that Anne and Pland still call me
Captain and still act friendly. Either they feel no betrayal or they’re just waiting for their chance
to shove me over the side.’
‘I doubt that. You’re not surprised at Peck still calling you Captain?’

‘Nothing Peck does surprises me. The Skinner turned his skin inside out and turned his
head inside out as well. He stepped off the far side of weird long ago.’
‘He’d kill for you.’
Ambel turned his calm gaze upon her for a long moment, then faced forward, nodding
slowly. Erlin moved a little closer and rested a hand on his arm.
He said, ‘I’d best have a little talk with Peck. Don’t want him doing anything drastic.’
‘Do you want to know why I came back?’ Erlin asked.
Ambel turned to look at her. ‘I guessed you’d get round to telling me in your own time,’ he
said.
Erlin pulled her hand away, annoyance flashing across her face. ‘Do you even care?’ she
asked.
Ambel glanced at her. ‘Of course I care. The critical question has to be: do you?’
She took a breath and started again. ‘Then you know why I’ve come back,’ she said.
‘Yes,’ said Ambel, his hands resting easy on the helm, his face almost tranquil, ‘but it’s
best you tell me all about it.’
Erlin took another slow shuddering breath, but all her rehearsed words dissipated like
smoke. ‘I came back because it gets so empty out there,’ she said. Sometimes I can’t see the
point of going on. Achievement or failure? After a time you don’t care about the difference . . .’
Erlin trailed off and stared at Ambel in the hope that he might understand.
Ambel nodded. ‘I’ve felt that too, and I’ll feel it again maybe. In the end, you find a calm
centre and you just keep on living. You live for friendship and a bright sunrise, for a cool breeze
on your face or a peppered worm-steak. You take as much pleasure in the taste of sea-spray as
in the discovery of the hyper-light drive or the saving of a human life. Because you can live for
ever you take pleasure in the now. You don’t have to rush about living on account of having only
a finite span. That’s trite, but true,’ he said, his words rolling out as rhythmically as the slow
splash of waves against the hull of the ship.
‘I hear what you’re saying, but I don’t feel it,’ said Erlin.
Ambel regarded her thoughtfully. ‘I can’t help that. It comes with the years or it doesn’t
come at all. There’s twenty-three of the Old Captains here, and that don’t mean just the
ex-slaves of Hoop. The Old Captains are those of us that have managed to “live into the calm”
as they say. Some are only five or six centuries old. Including those off-planet, we reckon on
there being a hundred or so of us. The rest. . .’ Ambel shrugged.
‘It’s why I need to be with you.’
Ambel waited.
‘I need help. I need a guide. I already know the figures: it’s fewer than one in a hundred

who “live into the calm”. Those same figures apply to people stretching all the way back to
Earth.’
‘You want to live, then? That’s the best point to start from,’ said Ambel straight-faced.
‘I’m not sure I do,’ replied Erlin.
‘If you don’t, you’ll probably regret it later,’ said Ambel.
Erlin laughed. Out of the corner of his eye, Ambel noted the abrupt easing of her tension.
He continued to steer the ship, content in silence, at his still point.
‘Janer . . .’ Erlin began hesitantly.
‘I know,’ said Ambel. ‘Nothing lasts, you know. Even we change over the years. There’s
joy and pleasure in that, if you think about it the right way. Stay with him for a while then come
see me. Anything that keeps you interested keeps you alive, and right now you need to
accumulate years. In my experience, most suicides occur before the three-century mark. Deaths
after that are usually due to accident or someone else’s intent. Survive that mark and you’ll likely
carry on, unless you’ve got some enemies I don’t know about.’
‘I don’t think so.’
‘Good,’ he glanced at her. ‘In a way this is academic. I myself might not be around in the
near future. I might be back in the sea, or in a fire . . . Can we make a pact here and now?’
‘What do you want?’ Erlin asked apprehensively.
‘If the judgement is in my favour, I promise to do everything in my power to help you to
live: to bring you to your calm and still point. In return I want a promise from you, should the
judgement go against me.’
‘Tell me.’
‘In my cabin are some crystals of sprine. You must bring me a crystal before they throw
me in the sea or roast me. I came here out of a world of pain, and it’s not somewhere I wish to
return to.’
‘I can promise you that.’
‘Good, Erlin. Go to your hornet man now.’
Erlin smiled and went off to do as he told her. Ambel watched her go, and smiled as well.
The breeze was cool on his face and he could taste the salt of sea-spray on his tongue.
****

14

Whelks, as they grow in size and calorific requirements, descend deeper and
deeper into the ocean, their bodies adapting to the intense pressure there. Its slow
ascent, of hiding in crevices and clamping down hard to rock faces whenever the
heirodont got near, and a long concealment in that final crevice until the
heirodont grew impatient and went away, had enabled this particular whelk to
slowly adjust to the decreasing pressure, and not experience the whelkish
equivalent of bends. Unfortunately, due to other conditions, such as differing
salinity and temperature, and the extreme change of diet, the giant whelk was
now beginning to feel rather queasy, and wished it had just returned to the depths
in search of filter worms. So thinking, it began to slide towards the edge of the
trench. It was a few metres from its goal when the heirodont rose out of the
depths before it - even more irritable now that leeches had begun attaching to its
body.

Boris tried, without much success, to accept that his life had changed now and that there was
really nothing to regret. Because of his tetchiness resulting from his failure to come to terms
with it all, Goss had kicked him out of her bunk.
‘And don’t come back until you’ve figured out what you really want!’ she’d shouted, then
turned over with her back towards him.
As he climbed up on to the deck of the Ahab, he wondered just what exactly she had
meant by that. He greeted Gollow and a couple of Ron’s juniors, who were sitting playing cards
below a deck lantern, and then went to the port rail to urinate over the side. When he was
rebuttoning his trousers, he glanced over at Roach, standing at the helm, and the man gave him
a knowing grin.
Boris turned away. Obviously the man had heard Goss shouting at him. He decided then
that he would try to patch things up with her, rather than talk to this weasely man. He didn’t like
Roach. He didn’t like this ship - felt uncomfortable aboard it. Did he really like Goss all that
much? Most importantly, did he really hate Captain Ambel? Regret was there - there was no
escaping it. He stood on the crux of indecision, and while he pondered, he noticed the approach
of the other ship.
‘Vessel to starboard!’ he yelled at Roach, and reformed his attention on the ship. There
was something wrong with it, its lights had a much whiter tint than was usual, and they lit a
wake that indicated the ship was travelling at a hell of a rate. Yet there was little wind, and from
what Boris could see of its sail, it was hanging in the wrong direction.
That’s Drum’s Cohorn!’ Roach yelled back at him.
Boris hurried back towards the forecabin. ‘What’s he doing out here? Last I heard, he’d
got a full load of turbul on and was heading back for port,’ he said as he approached the ladder.
‘Drum’s a changeable fella,’ commented Roach.
Boris climbed up and joined him on the cabin-deck. ‘I don’t like this,’ he said.
‘Sail ain’t right . . . Take the helm for me,’ said Roach.

Boris did as instructed while Roach went over to Captain Ron’s telescope. He swore once,
took his eye away, and then put it back.
‘I see Drum at the helm, but there’s others there that ain’t his crew.’ Roach turned from
the scope and shouted down along the deck. ‘Scart! Get everyone up on deck, and get ‘em up
armed!’
‘Aye, Captain!’ one of the card players yelled back.
‘ “Captain”?’ said Boris, and Roach gave him a sour look. Boris then nodded towards the
deck cannon. ‘That loaded?’ he asked.
‘No,’ said Roach.
‘Might be needing it,’ Boris observed.
‘Best you load it, then,’ said Roach, squinting at the lower deck to see if his orders were
being carried out.
The Cohorn rapidly closed in while Boris packed the deck cannon with a paper-wrapped
charge, then a bag of stones. He noted, as he worked, that the prow of the approaching ship was
white and misshapen; it had many things on its deck that should not have been there. One of
those things was moving about, and seemed to have too many legs for comfort.
‘Goss! Get yerself on deck! And bring up the guns!’ Roach yelled.
‘Biggest prill I ever saw,’ said Boris, taking a box of sulphur matches from his pocket and
striking one on the rail.
‘That ain’t no prill,’ said Roach, who was a century older than Boris. ‘That’s a buggering
Prador.’
Boris grimaced as he got the cannon’s igniter wick smouldering. It hadn’t been necessary
for Roach to tell him that. Boris had seen plenty of pictures of the creatures, and heard quite
enough stories from drunken Hoopers in the Baitman.
Goss charged up on deck clutching a handful of ironmongery, which she began to
distribute. After this, she studied the approaching ship for a moment, then ran for the ladder.
Boris leant over and accepted the weapons she handed up: two pump-action shotguns and one
pulsed-energy handgun. The handgun had to be Ron’s. No one else but an Old Captain could
afford such a thing.
‘Maybe they don’t want trouble?’ said Roach with what might have passed for humour.
‘In your arse,’ said Goss, feeding shells into one of the shotguns.
There was no warning. Something flashed, leaving shadowy afterimages in their eyes.
There was a dull crump, the ship lurched, and a spar crashed to the deck. Next, there was a
double flash and one rail exploded into splinters. On the other side of the ship the other rail
sagged, where it too had been broken, and was now being pulled down by the weight of the

ship’s rowing boat. Boris pointed the deck cannon, fired, and had the pleasure of seeing two
figures keel over on the Cohorn.
Goss began firing shells at the approaching ship. But then all of them were rocked back
as something crashed below and sea-spray fogged the air. Boris looked over the side at the hole
blown in the hull, just above the water line, and the fires burning within.
‘We’re gonna sink,’ he said to Roach.
The little man just appeared angry as he aimed again at the figures visible on the
approaching ship. Boris picked up another paper cartridge, then stepped back from the cannon
when it suddenly began to smoke.
‘Huh?’ he said brilliantly, as heat spectra travelled the length of the barrel, and it blued,
then began to glow. Abruptly he realized that there was either a laser or some sort of inductance
weapon being pointed at it. He ducked at the same time as Goss, and she slid the other shotgun
across to him. Roach was now down beside him aiming with the handgun, a dangerously furtive
look on his face.
‘They’re just playing with us,’ he said. ‘We’ve had it.’ Through the cross rail he shouted
down to the main deck, ‘Scart! Gollow! Cut the boat free and get the rest of ‘em into it!’
‘But, sir!’
Do as you’re bloody told! You reckon you can take em’ on with that club?’
Boris looked down to see Roach’s orders being obeyed. Two of the juniors were busy at
the sagging rail trying to untie the rowing boat. Something else hit further along the ship and a
lantern went down spreading flame across the deck. A third crew-member joined the two at the
boat and hacked at the ropes with his panga. That was Gollow, and Boris felt unaccountably
proud. The ship’s boat crashed into the sea and those on the lower deck quickly began to follow
it down. Goss stood upright now, a wild look on her face, as she provided covering fire.
‘Goss! Get down!’ Boris yelled.
She staggered back then stared at the smoking hole under her breasts.
‘Shit,’ she said - and was blown in half.
Boris yelled and stood up again, firing at the ship as it swung alongside, then blasting at
the figures that came leaping across. One of them was the bloody great prill!
Something hit him right in the stomach and sent him staggering. He felt it exit through his
back and heard it clatter to the deck. Both he and Roach stared at the small black cylinder, just
before it exploded. The blast threw Boris over the rail, so he found himself hanging off one side
of the ship. Roach, who had been knocked back against the remaining rail, struggled upright,
then reached over to catch Boris by the scruff of his neck. He was about to start hauling him back
onboard when a huge armoured claw closed on his arm, and something cold and metallic was
pressed against the back of his skull.
‘Shit,’ he said - just like Goss had done.

The claw clamped shut, making a sound like a vegetable knife going through a carrot.
Roach yelled as his bones shattered and muscle was crushed. His hand went flaccid, and Boris
yelled out and plummeted into the sea. Then, hand-things like iron pulled Roach around and
hurled him aside. For a second he thought he too was going to end up in the sea, but instead he
slammed against the main deck, and bounced. Then someone grabbed him again and flung him
against the mainmast. He slid down it, waiting for that terminal shot. But it never came.
‘Oh look,’ someone sneered. ‘They’re escaping.’
Roach turned his head to one side and dimly made out the silhouette of the ship’s boat
out on the gleaming sea. The Prador now loomed over him as it moved forwards and brandished
a weapon in one of its main claws. The object was long and heavy-looking, and was fed by tubes
and cables from a pack strapped underneath the creature’s body. There followed a whooshing
roar, and the sea all around the escaping boat turned white. There was no time even for
screams, as the rowing boat and everyone in it disintegrated under rail-gun fire.
‘Bastard,’ Roach managed, just before a hand closed in his hair and slammed his head
back against the mast. He thought how the woman would have been attractive if her face wasn’t
so twisted by whatever it was inside her.
‘Now, you and I are going to have a little chat,’ she told him.
****
With a feeling of chagrin, Janer watched as Erlin slept in a tangle of sheets, then he rose from
the side of the bunk and took up his clothing. As soon as he was dressed, he shoved a hand into
his trouser pocket and took out the jewelled Hive link. Some new species of loneliness, he
wondered, and then fixed the link back into his earlobe. There came a vague clicking as it
induced a signal in the receiver imbedded in the bone behind his ear - for the visible ear stud
was not the actual link, rather it acted as the on/off button - but he received no communication
from the mind. Still none came as he left the cabin, passing Forlam in the gangway, and headed
for the ladder. The link only buzzed into life once he was on deck, watching the slow grey roll of
the predawn sea.
‘It was foolish of you to cut communication with me. You are now in extreme danger,’
warned the mind. This was not what Janer had expected.
‘What do you mean?’
‘There is a ship now coming towards you. Aboard it is one Rebecca Frisk, with two Batian
mercenaries, and possibly others. They are coming to kill Sable Keech, and no doubt any others
who are with him. They have Prador weaponry.’
‘That’s not so good,’ said Janer, at a loss for anything else to say.
‘It is not good,’ agreed the mind. ‘I would suggest that you tell someone.’
Janer glanced up at Captain Ron standing at the helm, then around at the morning activity
on board. All seemed so slow and tranquil that what the mind had just told him did not gel for a
moment.

‘Now would be a good time,’ urged the mind.
‘Oh fuckit,’ said Janer and trotted down the deck to the forecabin. As he mounted the
cabin-deck, Ron gave him an amused look that suggested he might want to slow down a bit.
Without more ado, Janer told him the mind’s wonderful news. Ron’s expression lost its humour
and he looked over Janer’s shoulder as Ambel joined them.
‘Seems we got problems,’ said Ron.
Ambel gazed enquiringly at the two of them.
‘We got Rebecca Frisk and some Batian mercenaries with Prador weapons coming right
up our backsides,’ said Ron.
Ambel glanced around at the open sea. ‘We don’t stand a chance out here,’ he said.
‘The island,’ Ron stated.
‘Seems the best option,’ said Ambel.
‘What do you mean?’ asked Janer.
‘Does your Hive mind know how long we’ve got before they reach us?’ asked Ambel.
‘The Warden informs me that at present they’ve stopped to . . . that they have halted their
journey. You still have time to reach the island,’ said the mind.
‘We’ve time to reach the island,’ echoed Janer, wondering exactly what their pursuers
had stopped to do.
‘Alert the others,’ said Ron. ‘Tell them to get their gear together. We’ll be at the Skinner’s
Island in about five hours.’ He turned to Ambel. ‘Might not be time to ferry everyone in.’
‘Beach her then,’ said Ambel, his hands tightening hard enough on the helm to make the
wood groan in protest.
Janer went to do as bid encountering Keech on the main deck and telling him what was
happening.
‘I thought it a bit improbable that she handed herself over to ECS,’ the monitor said.
‘How’d she manage it?’ Janer asked.
‘Not sure, but I’d bet she’s now not wearing the face I knew her by.’
Janer brooded on that as he rushed to wake Erlin up and to find Pland. Anne had by now
joined Ron and Ambel on the cabin-deck.
For the next hour, there was a continuous flurry of activity as supplies were brought on
deck and weapons were taken out of waterproof packaging to be checked over. Keech cut the

lines holding his scooter to the deck. From its baggage compartment he took out his attaché case
and opened it.
As Janer approached him, Keech tossed him an item from the case. Janer nearly dropped
it, finding it heavier than he’d assumed.
‘Never seen one of these in real life,’ he muttered.
‘Give your handgun to one of the crew. You won’t be needing it now. That’s a QC laser
carbine. Half an hour continuous fire, thousand-metre kill range, and auto-sight.’
Janer handled the weapon as if it had suddenly turned into a snake. ‘Bit drastic,’ he said.
‘You might well need it,’ said Keech.
Janer turned to Forlam, who at that moment came up beside him.
‘Here,’ he said, passing over his handgun. Forlam stared at the weapon for a moment,
then suddenly looked pleased and thrust it into his belt. Janer thought it was rather a strange
grin the crewman wore.
Forlam pointed at the weapon Keech was quickly assembling from the case. ‘What’s
that?’ he asked.
Keech clicked the twin barrels - as of a shotgun - into place, then the folding stock, before
opening out the fan of cooling fins from the main body of the weapon. He gave it a slow visual
inspection then carefully took up a gigawatt energy canister and screwed it into place
underneath.
‘This,’ he murmured, ‘is completely OTT.’ With that, he mounted his scooter, pulled the
leg straps across his thighs and secured them in place, then slammed his vehicle up into the sky.
He gave no one time to ask where he was going. No one needed to ask.
****
Amazingly, one of the juniors, who had either somehow survived the burst of rail-gun fire or had
gone over the side during the attack, now yelled nearby as darkness seeped out of the sky.
Before dawn, one of the mercenaries, perhaps out of boredom, finally shot a shell into him.
Roach wished they would do the same to him.
Through a haze of pain, he tried to concentrate on what she was saying.
‘Now I want to be utterly sure of this. Think about it a little before you reply,’ said the
woman he now knew was Rebecca Frisk.
He’d thought about it a little when she’d asked him the last time, and the time before and on every occasion he’d told her the truth. She didn’t care about truth, though. She wasn’t
doing this for truth. She was doing it because she liked to see suffering. Roach bit on his tongue
as she played the laser, on wide beam, over his feet and legs. He’d screamed the third time
she’d done this, in the hope that would satisfy her. But it hadn’t. She’d just go on until there was
nothing left of him to scream. It was Frisk’s way, just as it was the way of her husband, or what

was left of him.
‘Think carefully now,’ warned Frisk.
She seemed oblivious to everything else - had a crazy look in her eyes and jerky shudders
running through her body with metronomic regularity. Roach did pretend to think carefully, while
he listened to the low conversation going on behind her.
The mercenary woman was speaking to the Prador. ‘. . . time for this?’
‘Delay . . . Convocation . . . does not matter.’
‘Fucking lunatic’ That last came from the male mercenary. He seemed to find Frisk’s
pursuits contemptible, but then his kind tortured people only for business, not for recreation.
‘Tell me again about Jay,’ demanded Frisk.
Roach leapt at the chance. At least while he was speaking, she wasn’t burning his legs.
‘Ambel . . . y’know, Balem Gosk, kept the head in a box in his cabin. I reckon Peck musta aaaargh!’
‘Oh I know all about that. Tell me something new, something interesting.’
‘AG vehicle approaching.’
Roach could not identify from where that voice had come. The others were blanks, so
perhaps it was their master speaking. He knew that this Prador on board wasn’t an adult. It still
had all its legs.
‘Rebecca Frisk, we must return to our vessel,’ grated the translator box of the same
Prador.
Roach prayed that this would mean the end.
Frisk stood up and confronted the Prador, angry that her little game had been interrupted.
‘I want to take him with me,’ she spat.
‘We do not have time. To the vessel - now.’
The Prador turned away. The blanks were already leaping from the Ahab, ahead of it.
Frisk seemed about to rebel. Abruptly she turned, walked up to one of the mercenaries, and
snatched his weapon from him and thrust her carbine into his hands instead. This is it, thought
Roach. This is when I end up spread all over the deck.
Frisk, though, did not shoot him. She moved to the deck hatch, kicked it open releasing
gouts of smoke, and then fired shot after shot below. Roach could feel the ship shuddering.
When she was finished, she grinned at him with satisfaction, before following the Prador from
the ship. The mercenaries went last, and without looking back.

Roach couldn’t believe it: he was going to survive. All he had to do was work on these
ropes tying him to the mast ... It was then that he realized what the smoke meant, and what Frisk
had been doing. He saw how smoke was also wisping up through the holes in the deck and could
hear the crackle of flames from below. He continued to struggle at his bonds, but the torture had
weakened him too much and he only had one arm to work with - his broken arm still being dead
meat from the shoulder down. He listened to the sound of the Cohorn pulling away, its flaccid
sail booming in the wind of its passage, and wondered which would get him first: the fire or the
sea.
‘You bitch!’ he yelled, and heard her laughter growing distant. He sat panting for a while,
then had another go at his bonds. Doing so, he heard sounds coming up from beside the ship,
and had a horrible vision of prill clambering aboard. He stared over at where the ship’s boat had
been suspended and saw a rope there jerking. The sound, he began to realize, was a continuous
cursing monologue. Shortly after, Boris hauled himself over the rail, the bottom half of his body
covered by a writhing mass of leeches. With further cursing and the occasional yelp, Boris began
to detach them, one by one. Roach didn’t even have the energy left to yell at him to hurry up,
even though he could feel the deck getting hot underneath him.
****
Keech stared down at the wrecked and burning ship, and the two figures remaining on its deck,
then he turned his image intensifier to examine the second ship. Over there, a Prador and a
number of humans - any of which might be Frisk herself. He set his scooter on hover, took up his
weapon, and aimed. Half charge: he’d flame the deck.
Keech pulled back one of the three triggers, and lit the air between himself and the target
ship with a line of purple fire. Seawater erupted and flashed into a ball of flame that splashed
across an invisible disk.
‘Shields,’ was all he managed to say before his scooter dropped out of the sky. Letting his
APW hang by its strap, he grabbed the controls, and saw the message flashing up on the screen:
‘EMERGENCY DIVE: EVASIVE’.
A missile screamed past overhead and made a slow turn beyond him. Keech slammed the
control column forward and put all the scooter’s power into the dive. Gs threatened to steal his
hands from the controls, and tried to drag him from the seat, but his leg straps held him in place.
He went into cyber mode as his flesh began to fail, and used his arm motors to pull the scooter
out of the dive at the last moment. The missile streaked past two metres below him, entering the
sea with a crack. An explosion lit the underside of the waves, with a rapidly spreading disk of
light. He was a hundred metres up from the surface when it erupted. No time for
self-congratulation, he told himself, as another two missiles sped towards him.
Keech slammed the control column forward again and sped away from the two ships. As
he departed, he took two of the guard spheres from his pocket, and held them in his hand.
Glancing back he spotted the noses of two missiles like two chrome eyes. The ships themselves
were still visible. He went into rapid descent. Only a second or two more and he’d be out of
sight. Only a second or two more and the missiles would reach him. He tossed the two spheres
up in the air and they shot away behind.
****

‘Fuck you, monitor!’ Frisk yelled, shaking her fist at the double explosion on the horizon. She
turned to Vrell, grinning maniacally. After a moment of gazing at a creature with no emotions she
could identify, she sobered and turned towards the forecabin.
‘Bring us about,’ she instructed Drum.
‘No,’ said the Prador - and the ship did not deviate from its course.
‘We have to check,’ said Frisk.
‘There will be nothing to see,’ replied Vrell.
‘We have to be sure!’ Frisk yelled.
Vrell did not consider this worthy of further reply.
‘This is what we’re here for, you shell-brained prawn!’ Frisk yelled and kicked out at
something on the deck. A metal staple went skittering across the timber and the sail cautiously
opened one red eye to track its progress. But no one seemed to have noticed.
‘Restrain her,’ ordered Vrell.
Abruptly several arms closed about both of Frisk’s. She whipped her head from side to
side at Svan and Shib - who were doing the restraining - and considered freeing herself until Svan
shoved a gun up under her chin.
‘I’ve had about enough of you,’ said the Batian woman, then looked to Vrell.
‘Take her away and confine her in one of the cabins. She may yet serve a purpose.’ Vrell
turned with a complicated scuttling of legs, and regarded Drum still stationary up at the helm.
‘Continue on course, no deviation.’
Drum reached up to scratch at the back of his neck, then nodded and continued with what
he had been doing anyway. The Prador noted this unprogrammed action but thought nothing of
it. It did not have the experience of humans to know whether such scratching was an
autonomous action or not.
****
‘Well, there went the cavalry,’ said Boris.
‘Yeah,’ said Roach, and gritted his teeth while Boris put in another stitch to close the split
in Roach’s arm. It seemed a somewhat pointless exercise, what with a fire raging below and
gouts of steam hissing through the holes in the deck.
‘That was Keech,’ explained Boris, now applying the needle and thread to some of the
more embarrassing rips in his own tattered trousers.
‘Yeah,’ said Roach and, feeling a vague tingling in his fingers, he tried to flex them. He
managed a little movement, but there would be no real strength in either his hand or his arm
until flesh and bone began properly to knit. He thought it would be nice if they enjoyed the time

to do so.
‘Should we try and put it out?’ Boris wondered.
‘No chance. This ship’s bound with sea gourd resin. Once you get that alight, you ain’t
gonna get it out again,’ Roach replied.
‘Maybe the ship’s boat’ll come back,’ Boris suggested, while studying Roach’s
expression.
‘The boat ain’t coming back,’ said Roach.
Boris nodded his head once at this confirmation - he hadn’t seen what happened to the
juniors in the ship’s rowing boat, but he’d a damned good idea.
Abruptly, the deck tilted, and swathes of steam roared out of the open hatch. Boris and
Roach peered over the side at the swarm of leeches attracted by the commotion, and by bits of
Goss floating in the water. Beyond this writhing mass, the molly carp was cruising.
Boris instantly dropped his needle and thread and scuttled across to pick up the handgun
Roach had dropped earlier.
‘I’ll not have happen to me what happened to my Captain,’ Boris swore.
‘I ain’t neither,’ said Roach, thinking what a waste of time it had been to sew up his arm.
It had kept the boy occupied anyway. He stared at the water, ignoring the weapon Boris was
handling so nervously. He tried not to wince when Boris reached over and pressed the warm
snout of it against his head.
‘Wait a minute,’ he said.
‘No point delaying,’ said Boris. ‘Only makes it harder.’
‘I said wait a minute,’ said Roach, angrily knocking Boris’s hand away.
‘What for?’
‘Look,’ said Roach, pointing at the sea.
An iron seahorse had just risen to the surface, the seawater fizzing all about it, and
leeches jerking spastically in their hurry to get away. It tilted so as to glare up at them with one
topaz eye, the other one burnt black.
****
‘We should attack ‘em, splash ‘em, kill ‘em, hit ‘em . . .’ was the essence of the communication
between drones one to ten with ‘attitude’. All ten of the drones, now they were in atmosphere,
had extruded stubby wings to which were attached their weapons pods. In one part of itself, the
Warden agreed. Frisk’s ship had encountered one other and left it burning. Sable Keech’s
seven-century search for justice and vengeance had ended in a few brief explosions, and it
seemed unlikely there would be any chance at another reification for him. But all these were

emotional issues. On a flat calculation of life and death, the sailing ship was unimportant. First,
the Warden had to find the Prador spacecraft, for from it could issue destruction perhaps an
order of magnitude greater.
‘SM Twelve, I want them in pairs, covering the relevant eight sectors - same division as
for geostudy. I want all signals reported. Specifically I want thrall-unit carrier waves and
command codes. It won’t be a direct transmission, as that would be too easy to trace should we
get hold of any thrall units at the receiving end. Somewhere down there, the enemy will have
secondary and perhaps tertiary emitters.’
‘Coded U-space signals are difficult to detect,’ observed Twelve.
‘Almost impossible would be a more accurate summation. It is not the signal itself you
will detect, but overspill from the secondary emitters before the signal starts tunnelling. On
detecting this overspill, you will have found an emitter. I want no action taken against emitters
located. Just transmit everything you get to me.’
‘Yes, Warden,’ said Twelve.
The muttering from the other drones, which formed a backdrop to SM12’s reply, made the
Warden wonder just how good an idea it had been to load Sniper’s little program into them. No
matter - the AI returned its attention to the information packages coming in through from the
submind ghost of itself trawling the loose AI net forming around the Prador worlds. These
packages now detailed the rabid progression of events in the Third Kingdom and were
fascinating. It seemed that the Prador were almost desperate for closer ties and trade
opportunities with the Polity and, as had been demonstrated quite graphically before the sector
AI, with such drastic changes in the offing, the old guard there was having trouble hanging on to
power. Already some further high figures among them had not done so well. Three had been
assassinated by direct methods: in two cases by explosives and in the third case by an injection
of a putrefying virus. Two others had been killed by their own blanks after control programs had
been subverted. Now that was what the Warden had found most interesting.
Ebulan, one of the highest-ranking Prador in the Kingdom, was also of particular interest
to the Warden. It was he who once had dealings with Hoop and his merry crew, and who had
become rich and consequently powerful on the trade in human blanks. This hideous practice was
now becoming frowned on in the Prador Kingdom, because of the change of Zeitgeist that had
led to this aim for closer ties with the Polity. So Ebulan’s power was waning.
Ebulan - that name came up repeatedly. Could it be that agents of his were the ones here
on Spatterjay? If so, what was their purpose?
****
Floating just below the surface of the waves, the turtle-shaped remote probe folded its emitter
dish and switched to passive observation. Twenty similar devices scattered across the surface of
the sea performed a similar action, only two of them remaining in the relevant areas to maintain
the U-space signal relay. They were not AI these machines - the Prador neither liked nor fully
understood such technology - but they had proved more than sufficient to their limited task. Now
that would have to change, however.
In his ship deep in an oceanic trench Ebulan watched the pictographic information sliding

in on one screen then turned his attention to another screen showing a real-time image. Foam
bubbled from his jaws as he chewed on a lump of putrid meat, and then spat it out for the
delectation of the lice skittering round the floor.
The Warden had to know that a ship was down here, or it would not have brought out this
kind of firepower, though the AI obviously did not yet realize just what kind of ship it was dealing
with, else it would be screaming for help right now. Ebulan disconnected one control box - the
human blank concerned slumping at a scanning console - and direct-linked into a rear hold.
There, through the box, he got an image of the four heavy-armour drones he carried with him.
Each was a flattened ovoid four metres across, armed with rail-guns, missile launchers, and
screen projectors. These, again, were not AI: the intelligences inside each of them derived from
the surgically altered and then flash-frozen brains of four of Ebulan’s many children. They were
totally loyal, fixed as they were in a state of constant adolescence - enslaved by their parents’
pheromones.
As Ebulan sent a signal, red lights ignited in recesses in the drones’ exotic metal shells.
The hold was flooded with muddy seawater and rapidly filled up, then a triangular door opened
on to the deep ocean. The four drones motored out into the murk, the images viewed by their
recessed eyes coming up on the screen before Ebulan.
‘Children,’ Ebulan said to his four kin. ‘You will assume the roles of remote emitters, once
you are in position. If detected you must defend yourselves, then immediately reposition. I want
the signal maintained at all times.’
‘Yes, as you will,’ they replied as one.
****
‘Skinner’s Island,’ indicated Captain Ron as, out of mistiness across the sea, the purpled mounts
of the landmass came into sight.
The atmosphere on the ship became even more subdued than it had previously been, and
the crew, about their tasks on the deck, proceeded with the care of people not wanting to wake
someone, or something, from sleep. As they drew closer, Janer tried to study their destination
with a clinical eye. Was it this place’s reputation that made it seem so sinister, or was it just
sinister anyway? he wondered. The island appeared little different to the others he had seen: a
rocky mass thrust out of the sea, shallows and beaches and then a thick wall of dingle. Janer
scanned the expanse of sea between the ship and the island’s beaches. Out of the shallows
jutted sandbanks on which frog whelks and hammer whelks clustered like herds of sheep, while
small molly carp and occasional glisters patrolled the waters around them. And there were
leeches of course - always plenty of them. He couldn’t nail it down: the same yet not the same.
There was something brooding about this place. An air of menace emanated from that deep
dingle and the rocky outcrops.
Ron steered the ship for a suitable cove and kept right on going.
‘Brace yourselves, boys!’ he shouted.
The Treader slid into the shallows, the sandy bottom speeding underneath liberally poxed
with leeches. It passed a mound that seemed entirely composed of frog whelks, and a hundred
stalked eyes followed the ship’s progress. Janer braced himself for the crash, but none came.

First there was a deep vibration, then a grating, then the ship was slowing and he was gradually
dragged towards the bows by his momentum. Peck caught hold of his belt and didn’t let go until
the ship had shuddered to a halt five metres from the shore.
‘Let’s be doing it then, Captain Ron,’ said Ambel.
‘Right with you, Captain Ambel,’ said Ron, sliding down the forecabin ladder.
Ambel moved to the prow and dropped the anchor over the side, towing its chain - now
wiped clean of grease - after it. Janer couldn’t see why the chain had been thus cleaned, or why
the anchor had been dropped at all, as the ship was unlikely to drift.
‘Shoo, bugger off,’ Ron told the sail.
The sail snorted in indignation, released all its various holds and, in a folding of spines
and sheeted skin, it hauled itself up to the top spar, and from there launched itself into the sky.
Janer watched it go, then turned back to observe Ambel - but Ambel had gone.
‘Right with you,’ said Ron, and leapt off the prow of the ship.
‘What the hell?’ muttered Janer, moving down the ship to the bow rail. He got there in
time to see Ambel wading ashore through the metre-deep water, with Captain Ron following just
behind him. The two of them dragged the anchor chain ashore and once there quickly stripped
the leeches from each other and stamped the creatures to slurry.
Erlin moved up to stand beside Janer. ‘This is what brings it home to you,’ she murmured.
The two captains then took up the anchor chain, Ambel in front and Ron behind, pulling
on it until it grew taut. Janer doubted he would have been able even to take the curve out of the
heavy chain.
The Captains looked at each other. ‘On the count,’ said Ron. ‘One and two and three . . .’
Janer realized his mouth was open, but couldn’t think straight enough to close it. With a
deep grinding the ship itself began to move. He saw that, with each step the Old Captains took,
their feet sank deep into the sand. Two, three metres, the ship moved. Ron and Ambel dropped
the length of chain they were holding at the edge of the dingle, then moved back to take up
another section of it at the shoreline.
‘One and two and three.’
The prow of the ship was heaved up on to the beach, then the two captains dropped the
chain. They pulled themselves out of the sand and walked back to the vessel, as casual as if
having just completed some very menial task. The rest of the crew had not even bothered to
watch, but continued gathering together supplies.
‘Collect your stuff,’ Erlin advised Janer.
‘It is estimated that a Hooper in his third century has the strength of a three-gee
heavy-worlder,’ the Hive mind observed. ‘But no one has measured the physical strength of an
Old Captain.’

‘How much does this ship weigh?’ Janer whispered to it.
‘Its dead weight is considerable,’ said the mind, and Janer translated this as meaning it
didn’t know. It went on with, ‘Obviously, being partially supported by the sea, and with it being
dragged, there are matters of friction and so forth to be factored in.’
‘All I asked you was how much the ship weighed,’ said Janer.
‘Not less than thirty tonnes,’ the mind replied, almost grudgingly.
‘Oh, is that all?’ said Janer. ‘There I was thinking it might be a lot.’
****
It took a quarter of an hour for them to get supplies, weapons and most of the crew on to the
beach. It took another ten minutes for Ambel to persuade Peck that it was in his best interests
not to stay on board. Janer could not understand why the ship’s rowing boat had also been
lowered, until they were all gathered on the sand, where Ambel and Ron addressed them.
‘Too many of us crashing about inland there’ll spook the Skinner, and we’ll never catch
him,’ said Ron. ‘So some of you boys’ll not be coming.’
Janer glanced around at gathered crew. The strongest reactions came from the juniors, as
it was obvious where Ron’s speech was leading. Some of these Hoopers wore looks of
disappointment; however, most of them looked relieved.
‘Thing is,’ said Ambel, ‘you lads cannot be hanging about here in full sight, what with that
lunatic woman coming after us, so me and Ron here think it best you take the ship’s boat round
to the east of the island’ - he gestured in that direction - ‘and find yourselves a handy cove to
moor up in.’
‘Now, I know you’re all disappointed,’ said Ron, ‘but that’s the way it’s got to be. Any
questions?’
Some of the crew-members addressed were already heading back towards the ship. A few
hung back, Sild amongst them.
‘What is it, lad?’ Ambel asked the man.
‘I’m not a lad. I was a hundred last birthday and I know me own mind,’ Sild grumbled.
‘And?’ Ambel asked.
‘I’ll go,’ said Sild. ‘I know we ain’t got your muscle, and I don’t want meself stripped by no
Skinner. . . . but I just want to say that you’re my Captain, and you’ll always be that.’
Ambel seemed at a loss to find a reply and he stood there dumbly as Sild moved off with
the others. After a moment he shrugged, then turned to face Janer and Erlin.
‘Best you two go with them,’ he said.

‘Not one chance in hell,’ said Janer, and Erlin just shook her head. Ambel nodded,
expecting this response, then, hoisting his blunderbuss up on to one shoulder, turned towards
the dingle.
Ron took up a huge machete, advanced on the wall of vegetation, and set to. Ambel
followed, and the rest of them, after taking up their packs of supplies, followed after him.
Beyond the first thick layer of dingle, things began to get a little easier, though there
were numerous peartrunk trees, with their concomitant crops of leeches, to get past. Janer
clutched Keech’s carbine to himself and kept a wary eye on the dingle. There were things moving
around in the bluery - big, slimy things with buzz-saw mouths.
‘Mask,’ Erlin warned him at one point and, not having encountered putrephallus weeds
before, he was a bit slow to cap the filter mask over his face. He nearly filled it with vomit.
‘What’s that?’ he asked when he had recovered enough to point at the horrible baggy
bird-thing clinging to one of the phallic flowers.
‘Lung bird,’ Erlin told him. ‘They’re about the only creatures here that other creatures
won’t eat. They stink worse than their food, and are full of toxins. No one’s figured out how they
manage to stay alive. But no one’s really wanted to get close enough to find out.’
‘And those.’ Janer pointed again.
‘Frogmoles. Don’t step on one. They’ve got barbed spines that’ll go through just about
anything, and you’d need surgery to have them removed,’ said Erlin.
‘Charming.’
Beyond the peartrunk trees and stands of putrephallus, yanwood trees reared into the
sky. Below them the ground was clear of new growth, though thickly layered with oily oval leaves
that smelt of kerosene. With the vegetation now thinning sufficiently for Ron to put away his
machete, they picked up their pace and soon came to a place where ahead of them reared
something like a grassy slope. What was growing on it - though the same green as ordinary
grass - consisted of small translucent spheroids that popped when trod upon and let off a smell
like coffee and curry powder combined. They were also slippery underfoot when burst, so
climbing the slope became hard going.
At the crest of the slope, bare rock jutted up like bones flayed of flesh. Here they halted,
mainly to let Janer rest, him being only a newly made Hooper. Sitting on one of the rocks he
gazed down another incline into dingle like a green and blue sea resting between mounds. This
landscape beyond stretched on into a haze of distance and was lost. Strange hootings and
squeals came up regularly from this tangle of vegetation.
‘Bigger island than I thought,’ said Janer. ‘How’d they expect to find the Skinner here ... if
he is here?’
‘He’s here,’ said Erlin.
Before she could go on, Peck muttered, ‘Bugger’ll find us, I’ll be buggered.’

‘That’s a comfort,’ said Janer, standing up and shrugging his pack into a more
comfortable position on his shoulders. Ambel and Ron glanced back at him for a moment, then
set off down the slope towards the dingle, Ron already drawing his machete in readiness.
‘Another point to note is how easy we’ll be to track, if Rebecca Frisk does come here,’
said Janer.
‘If?’ said Erlin.
‘Well, Keech might have solved that problem for us.’
‘Emphasis on the “might”,’ muttered Erlin.
They continued on down the slope, after the others.
For most of the afternoon, Ron hacked a trail for them, and Ambel took over thereafter.
He did not take over the chore because Ron was tired, but because he was bored with the task
and Ambel had got bored with just walking behind him. They slogged on until it was getting too
dark to easily dodge the leeches falling from the peartrunk trees. Then Ambel hacked out a
clearing in an area with few overhanging branches, and marked its perimeter by jabbing sticks
into the ground.
Pland lit a fire of peartrunk wood while Anne prepared rhinoworm steaks to roast over it.
They ate in silence as the moon, Coram, rose into the sky like a mouldy pearl, and then laid out
their bedding.
‘You take first watch, Janer. Don’t let any leeches past the perimeter. If anything comes
that’s too big for you to handle, wake me or Ron,’ instructed Ambel.
Janer patrolled the perimeter with his carbine held ready. With this weapon he doubted
there would be anything too big for him to handle. The smaller leeches - the ones about the size
of his arm - he kicked back into the undergrowth. Frogmoles kept well clear, their eyes glinting
from the firelight out there in the darkness. No one warned him about anything else.
****
Keech found the best way to keep himself out of the water was to use what power the remaining
thruster possessed to drive down towards the sea, then up again and away in one burst.
Thereafter he drifted along fairly levelly until the thruster cooled down enough for him to use it
again. A problem was the scooter’s tendency to try to flip over whenever he applied thrust.
Further problems consisted of the failing AG, which was taking him closer and closer to the
surface despite his use of the thruster, the fact that the thruster was taking longer and longer to
cool down each time he used it, and also that there were some horrible noises and occasional
sprays of sparks emerging from under the cowling. His burnt back and mauled arm now seemed
of secondary importance. And all these hindrances were of less importance than the fact that he
had miscalculated.
Both missiles aimed at him had been of the EM-burst variety. Not only did they have the
capability of turning an enemy vehicle into a disperse spray of molten metal, but they released a
burst of radiation that scrambled any electronics in the vicinity of the explosion. The thruster had

burnt out after taking in a cloud of ionized gas; the EM had not been kind to the AG coils, and
com was completely out; the screen had melted and buckled.
Keech had been in worse situations than this – after all, he wasn’t dead yet, and he’d
been in that one before. So he nursed the scooter along, using manual and jury-rigged controls
and a modicum of prayer, wondering if he was imagining seeing eager movement in the sea
whenever the scooter dropped lower.
****

15
The giant whelk’s immediate response to the presence of the heirodont, was to
spit out the last leech-covered turbul body it was chewing, and attempt to clamp
itself down against the bottom. But up here the bottom was comprised of a thick
layer of stones and silt and broken shell, so that there was nothing firm to hold on
to. With a flick of its tale the heirodont drifted forward, eyeing the desperate
creature as it struggled to find purchase, then cruised round it in a slow circle. The
whelk turned as it did this, stalked eyes keeping its nemesis in view. The heirodont
finally seemed to comprehend its luck, and suddenly drove into the whelk and
tipped it over. Flailing its tentacles, the whelk opened huge wounds across the
heirodont’s head, but to a creature quite used to being fed upon by leeches every
day, these were as nothing. With its mandibles the heirodont gripped the rim of
the whelk’s shell and twisted it over so it was forced upside-down into the
treacherous surface it had been unable to grip; driving its snout into hard flesh
with teeth admirably suited to the purpose, the heirodont began to chew.

The heavy resinous yanwood of the ship was not buoyant. Like a steel hull holed in the same
manner, it started to go down, water breaking through smashed timbers and gouts of steam
blasting from the deck hatches. Boris emerged from one of those hatches, hauling up two sprine
carboys on a rope behind him. Once on deck he danced about and swore as he beat out his
smouldering clothing. When the ship suddenly lurched and tilted he grabbed the carboys and slid
them to the edge, pounded the corks to make sure they were secure, then tossed both containers
over the side, down to where the drone floated below. Lying by the shattered rail, to which he
had crawled, Roach peered down into the water.
‘This a good idea?’ he queried.
‘The only one,’ confirmed Boris as he helped him to his feet.
Roach was about to say something more when the ship lurched again. Without more ado,
they leapt into the sea and splashed towards the carboys. Near the fizzing seahorse the water
tingled with an electrical charge and was warmer than expected.
‘Aargh, that smarts,’ yelped Roach.
Boris just grunted an acknowledgement and stared at all the creatures swarming beyond

an invisible perimeter. He looked beyond them to where the water swirled occasionally as a
large rhinoworm cruised by, snapping up stray leeches.
‘Must tell the Captain he needs floats,’ said Roach.
‘You’ll have to tell him he needs a new ship,’ said Boris. As if to reinforce his words, the
ship groaned, slowly tilted further to one side, and water surged inside it, extinguishing the last
of the fires. Soon its whole deck was awash, and as if making one last attempt to stay afloat the
ship righted itself as it went down. The two masts slid last into the sea, and the water was
turned into foam all around by escaping air - not just the activity of leeches and other creatures
as they moved in to investigate. For a little while there were remarkably few of these in the
water immediately surrounding the two men, but they knew this situation would not continue.
Roach looked alternately thoughtful and sneaky.
‘Ain’t my fault,’ said Roach, both reflection and sneakiness in his tone.
‘No, I guess not,’ said Boris, peering at the little man in the halflight and thinking how it
didn’t really matter any more, as he’d soon be joining Goss and the rest of the crew, chewed up
in the stomachs of leeches and prill. He checked again that the laser was still in his belt, though
exposure to water might prevent it from working.
As the leeches returned from inspecting the empty ship, their cordon appeared to be
narrowing and it seemed to Boris that the fizzing around the seahorse had subsided - either that
or the leeches were becoming inured to it and slowly moving in on them.
‘Cavalry’s back,’ said Roach, pointing.
Boris couldn’t quite grasp what he meant, until his eyes followed the direction of his
companion’s finger and, after first discerning the glow from a malfunctioning thruster, he
witnessed the erratic approach of the AG scooter. Both men stared at it in dubious silence for a
moment before shouting and waving. Soon the machine was close enough for Keech to spot them
so he brought it in right over their heads and tried to keep it hovering there.
Boris watched open-mouthed as it slowly sank towards them.
‘Jump on as quickly as you can!’ Keech yelled. ‘We’ll only get one chance at this!’
‘Great,’ said Roach flexing his half-dead arm.
‘You go first,’ said Boris.
The scooter continued to drop towards them, now tilting in the air so its rear end met the
surface of the water first. Roach shoved down on his carboy to lift himself up enough so that he
could grab the rim of the luggage compartment with his one operable arm. He was hanging
there, unable to pull himself further, until Keech himself reached back with one hand and
grabbed him. The scooter sank half a metre into the sea as Roach struggled up on to one of its
wings beside Keech.
Boris then snatched at the same area, and began pulling himself on to the other wing.
Keech reached back intending to help him, then abruptly turned away to slap some control in the

partially dismantled console, as the AG’s hum became a vibration. Boris found it easier boarding
with two operable arms, and soon the two crewmen were squatting either side of the driver’s
seat, clinging on to whatever they could. Meanwhile Keech manipulated the controls, but
seemingly to no effect.
Abruptly the seahorse leapt out of the water and landed with a thud in the luggage
compartment. The scooter now rested deep enough in the water for the occasional wave to
splash in after it.
‘Here goes,’ said Keech, very carefully upping AG. The motor under his seat issued a
grating hum, then spat out a couple of black smoke rings. The scooter rose briefly, until its back
end was just clear of the water, then slowly began to sink back again. Keech then opened the tap
that supplied pure water to the thruster still functioning. It cracked out a brief blue flame that
had them drifting across the surface of the sea. Again, he tried AG, but swore when it failed to
lift them clear.
‘Can’t you give us some lift?’ he said.
Behind his back Boris and Roach looked askance at each other.
‘What can we do?’ Boris whispered.
‘We ain’t got no lift,’ added Roach.
Keech ignored them and turned to peer down into the luggage compartment.
‘Did the EM burst get you as well?’
The seahorse gazed straight back up at him, with its remaining topaz eye flickering. It
emitted a stuttering crackle that sounded vaguely apologetic. Keech swore once again, then
turned to Boris. ‘What about the rest of the crew?’ he asked.
‘Dead,’ said Boris.
‘Tell me what happened,’ continued the monitor as he nursed the scooter along.
In a flat tone, Boris began to tell the monitor about the Prador, about the human blanks
and the weapons they carried. At one point Roach interjected a bitter monologue about Rebecca
Frisk, while eying an ominous swirl in the water behind them.
****
The big leech turned up when even Ron’s and Ambel’s drain-cleaner snoring had ceased to keep
the others awake. Janer was over on the opposite side of the perimeter when it surged out of the
dingle and bore down on those he was guarding. Even so, he hesitated before taking aim. He’d
never seen anything quite like this; the huge slimy creature was the size of a hippopotamus and
the gaping tube of its leech mouth as wide as a bucket. It didn’t move fast, but it moved
deceptively. One moment it was oozing over the perimeter at full width. The next moment it drew
itself out thin and long, then flowed forwards again - and was poised over the curled-together
bodies of Anne and Forlam. Not familiar with the settings on the weapon he held, or even which
trigger to pull, Janer aimed it and fired.

The carbine made no noise whatsoever, and there was of course no kick. Drifting smoke
from the fire vaguely traced out the pulsing path of a beam of coherent light the width of Janer’s
wrist. Where it struck the leech, bright flame flashed, and its slimy flesh melted away. The beam
cut through the creature like boiling water poured on ice, smoke and steam condensing in a flat
cloud in the air immediately above. The leech made no sound other than a hiss that could have
emerged from its boiling insides, and it oozed its way out of the clearing just as fast as it had
oozed into it. Janer kept firing at the monster until he could no longer see it behind the clouds of
smoke and steam.
The frogmoles quietened, and other sounds issuing from things Janer had no name for,
ceased as well. He stood gasping with shock, nausea churning his stomach. He realized his back
was right up against the perimeter and leapt away from it, turning his weapon on the dingle. No
movement. Nothing. After a moment the nausea subsided and he looked around at his
companions. Ron and Ambel were still snoring loudly on opposing sides of the clearing. Forlam
and Anne had not even stirred, while Erlin was still sound asleep in her padded sleeping bag, and
Pland was showing no signs of life either. The only one to move was Peck, and that was just to
grunt and turn over. For a moment Janer couldn’t believe that not one of them had woken. Then
he grinned to himself and stood up straighter. What a rush!
****
The molly carp surfaced ten metres behind them, and sculled along like a faithful dog until Boris
managed to get his gun out of his belt, but the creature submerged before he could draw a bead
on it. A sinuous swirl appeared five metres to one side of it, and the pink snout of a rhinoworm
broke the surface.
‘We got problems,’ muttered Boris, aiming at its snout, but electing not to fire when it
also resubmerged.
‘How observant of you,’ said Keech. He had the side of the AG motor cover hinged open
so he could inspect the burnt-out control system. After a moment he pulled an optical IC and
plugged in an optic cable from the control column. The motor surged for a moment, lifting them a
metre above the waves. A quick burst from the thruster had them skating away, and they were
fifty metres from the two escorting creatures before the scooter started to lose height again.
‘Fsk pock . . . help?’ said SM13 and the three of them turned to stare at it.
‘Self-repair?’ asked Keech.
‘Sprerz-sprock,’ said Thirteen, and rose a few centimetres out of the luggage
compartment before dropping back.
‘It speaks?’ said Roach.
‘They often do - but usually only to say “Take that, fucker”. But then my own experience
of SMs has mainly been restricted to those uploaded into war drones. They don’t normally
employ a wide vocabulary. They don’t really need one,’ replied Keech.
‘Sprzzz carp Sniper.’

‘Makes no sense at all,’ muttered Boris. ‘What’s SM stand for anyway?’
‘Submind. So the Warden’s obviously taking an interest in what’s happening down here.
We’ll probably be seeing a few of this one’s brothers and sisters some time soon. Pass it here.’
Boris hefted the probe out of the luggage compartment and handed it carefully to Keech.
The monitor grabbed it in one hand and shoved it under his seat, on top of the AG motor, which
was now letting out faint wisps of black smoke.
‘It might be able to give us some lift in a bit. We’re going to need it,’ he explained.
‘Scugger-fuck,’ said the probe. It thumped against the underside of the seat, and the
scooter lifted fractionally. Keech gave the thruster a quick burst, and the scooter surged forward
just enough to avoid the rhinoworm that had chosen that moment to try for a mouthful of Roach.
‘We ain’t gonna make it,’ whined Roach.
Keech passed him the weapon he’d used against Frisk’s ship. ‘This still works, but be
careful; there’s no control system, so it could fire in any mode. Don’t use it unless you really
have to,’ he warned.
Roach held the weapon in one hand and pensively inspected its controls. He peered down
the silvered insides of the twin barrels, then quickly pointed them away from himself.
‘These are illegal, ain’t they?’
‘Yes, does that bother you right now?’ asked Keech.
Roach aimed the weapon at the two following swirls. ‘Not particularly,’ he admitted.
****
When Pland took over the watch he began by joyously zapping even the smallest leeches that
entered the clearing, until Janer thought he’d never get to sleep. Sitting up, wrapped in foil-like
heat blanket by the fire, he opened his pack in search of a suitable pill. For a moment he eyed
the hexagonal package he’d brought along at the mind’s insistence, then closed his pack again,
as he’d decided against the pill. He didn’t want to fall into a heavy sleep, with things like that
huge leech out there. He lay down again and stretched himself out on the lumpy ground.
‘Anything from the Warden?’ he whispered.
‘I’m allowed to speak now, am I?’ asked the mind.
‘I didn’t want you distracting me while I was on watch.’
‘You did not want me talking about the packet of sprine crystals Captain Ambel has
brought along.’
‘That too,’ said Janer.
‘Just one crystal in the front of the box and I will cease to . . . bug you.’

‘Very funny.’
‘Would independent finance be a suitable motivation?’
‘Explain.’
‘At present you are effectively in my employ. You travel where I wish you to travel, and
you take my eyes with you. Ten million shillings paid into your private account would make you
independently wealthy and you could travel wherever you wished. You could go to Aster Colora,
as you have always wanted. You could return to Earth any time you wished. There are many
things you could do.’
‘Ten million just to put one crystal in the front of your little box?’
‘Yes,’ the mind replied.
‘That can only mean your intentions are against Polity law, and I’d probably be charged as
an accessory. Accessory to multiple murder would mean being mind-wiped at best.’
‘Spatterjay is not within the Polity.’
‘It is not in the Polity yet, and are you telling me your hornets will stay here on-planet?’
‘No crime has been committed.’
‘Yet.’
‘You argue that, yet under Polity law any Polity citizen may bear arms.’
‘Within limits,’ said Janer.
‘The only proscribed items are explosives and energy weapons. That proscription is very
specific as concerns weapons in the gigawatt range, which, incidentally, is precisely the level of
weapon that a representative of Polity law has already been using here.’
‘What?’
‘The monitor, Sable Keech, was in possession of an antiphoton weapon capable of a
gigawatt burst. The penalty for owning such a weapon is moral reconditioning.’
‘So that’s what it was,’ said Janer.
‘I would be in possession of no such weapon. What I would possess would merely be for
personal defence.’
‘I’d like to go to sleep now.’
‘You have no way of refuting my arguments. Consider this: you get ten million in your
account and my aims are achieved now. The alternative is that they are achieved in the next
solstan year and you do not get ten million in your account. You would, in fact, have to seek

gainful employ with someone else.’
‘Threats now.’
‘Promises.’
‘I just don’t think it’s a good idea to inflict this planet with hornets carrying sprine in their
stings. Individual hornets are still just insects and they’ll react to defend themselves unless
directly under your control. A lot of people here could die.’
‘Ten million shillings.’
‘I’ll sleep on it,’ said Janer guiltily.
The mind made a buzzing, self-satisfied sound.
****
When Janer woke again, he felt as though he’d only been asleep for a moment - until he noticed
that he could now distinguish sky from dingle. He looked around to see who was on watch, and
saw Forlam sitting at the perimeter, the carbine resting across his lap, and his back turned to the
dingle. The crewman looked tired and bored - no doubt Pland had scorched all the leeches in the
immediate area earlier in the night - and much in need of relief.
Janer was about to call out to him, when he realized he must still be asleep and
dreaming. Standing behind Forlam was a blue man - or rather the body of a man. This figure
stood about four metres tall, and impossibly thin and long-boned. His hands looked like giant
harvestman spiders, his torso a long arc of ribs, and his arms and legs seemed to possess more
joints than they should do. Also, he had no head. This is what persuaded Janer he must be
dreaming - that and the slow and silent way the blue man moved. Anyway, surely Forlam would
not court disaster by sitting with his back to the trees, would he? As Janer tried to wake up, tried
to call out, he became aware of Ambel’s snores, and connected them with some kind of reality.
Suddenly he realized this was no dream. Between the blue man’s shoulders sprouted a
questing leech’s mouth, and Janer now knew who this man had been.
‘Forlam!’
But his cry came too late. One long bony hand reached down and took Forlam up like a
doll. Forlam yelled once and the carbine dropped to the ground. Then he saw what had hold of
him and suddenly went silent, mesmerized. The man-thing raised him to its horribly eager
leech-mouth and that mouth attached to Forlam’s torso.
Forlam screamed.
‘What the bloody hell!’ Ambel sat upright.
Janer leapt across the still-prostrate form of Captain Ron and dived for the carbine. He
seized it just as other questions were shouted. Ambel’s blunderbuss went off with a huge bang
and the sound of its shot striking the man-thing was the slap of a spade on flesh. The blow
peeled back skin which immediately rolled back into place. The thing kept grinding at Forlam and

Forlam kept on screaming.
‘Bugger! . . . Bugger! . . . Bugger!’ yelled Peck, pumping his shotgun and blasting away
with each repetition of the word. Each hit slewed away fragments of the creature’s skin and
punched a grey hollow, but each hollow quickly refilled and blue skin slid back into place. There
were other shots, Janer did not discern from whom. He aimed at blue gut and fired. The
creature’s torso smoked and it jerked backwards, skin charred away to expose knotted woody
fibre underneath. As Janer fired again, it pulled Forlam away from its mouth and hissed out a
cloud of blood. A third shot charred skin from its legs, but seemed to cut no deeper than that. It
suddenly dropped Forlam to the ground and took a long stride back into the dingle. It was gone in
a moment.
‘Oh God, it was him.’ Erlin shuddered.
‘Bugger!’ Peck yelled again, and went roaring across the clearing after the man-thing.
Ambel caught him by his jacket collar and nipped him on to his back. With a sick expression on
her face, Erlin grabbed her medkit and went over to where Forlam lay moaning in the
undergrowth. Ron chose that moment to snort awake and sit upright.
‘What’s going on?’ asked the Captain.
Janer stared at him, then cracked up. This was all just too bizarre. He sat on the ground
and laughed so hard his stomach hurt - this inappropriate hilarity ending with a fit of coughing.
Ron stared at him with a puzzled expression, then transferred his attention to Ambel, calmly
reloading his blunderbuss, then to what Erlin was doing. Pland and Anne were holding Forlam
down while she worked on him. She had picked up Janer’s heat sheet and was cutting it into wide
strips. Nothing else was big enough to suffice as a dressing for the hole in the crewman’s body.
‘Bugger,’ said Peck, sitting upright.
Ron stood up and walked over to examine Forlam. There he exchanged a few brief words
with Erlin before coming back, obviously irritated, to Janer and the rest.
‘Best get packed and moving,’ he said.
‘Forlam?’ asked Janer.
‘I’ll carry him. We gotta catch that thing afore its head finds it,’ explained Ron.
‘Catch it?’ said Janer, but Ron was no longer listening. He had his attention fixed on
Ambel who had pulled on gloves to open a waxed packet secured at his belt. Ambel then took out
a single red crystal and crumbled it into the sheath of his knife. He then spat into that sheath
and replaced the knife.
‘Best be moving,’ he growled and stared towards where the Skinner’s body had vanished.
The Hive mind chose that opportune moment to address Janer. ‘Frisk’s ship has moored in
the cove,’ it announced.
‘Better and better,’ Janer spat.

****
Rebecca Frisk stared at the open door, and the two human blanks waiting there. The leading one,
a heavily muscled man with virus-blue skin and a mass of scar tissue down the side of his face,
gestured at her with the nerve-inducer he held. She rose and walked forwards, and the two of
them parted to allow her past. She considered trying to snatch a holstered weapon, then shelved
the idea. These blanks were as old as the Captains and, like all the other bodies she and Jay had
supplied to the Prador, had been infected with the Spatterjay virus from the moment of capture.
Their bodies would be much stronger than the body she inhabited, since it had been infected for
several centuries less than theirs. She might be able to knock the Batians about, but not these
two.
Vrell waited for her on the lower deck, turning to watch as she climbed through the hatch.
To one side the two mercenaries stood glaring. Frisk immediately noted that they had been
disarmed.
‘You will go ashore,’ said Vrell. He gestured with one of his legs to a ship beached there.
‘Ashore are Sable Keech, Gosk Balem and the thing that was once Jay Hoop. It does not concern
me what you do there.’
‘I’ll get Jay,’ said Frisk.
‘That does not concern me. You will not remain aboard this ship.’
‘Why not?’
Vrell turned away from her, and she felt the hard hands of the blanks close on her upper
arms. They moved her over to where the two Batians stood.
Vrell continued, ‘You no longer serve a purpose. The Convocation has been called and all
the Old Captains are coming to attend it. Within days they will all be here, to discuss the fate of
Gosk Balem. I must keep this ship here until then. You pose a threat to the completion of my task
merely by being on board. You are not under my control - nor are your mercenaries. You will all
go ashore.’
‘Will you let us have weapons at least?’ Frisk asked.
While Vrell considered the matter, it was Speaker who replied.
‘She and her mercenaries may indeed take weapons ashore. They will not be able to get
back through your defences.’
‘Ebulan! What is this? What are you doing? I thought we were friends,’ cried Frisk.
‘You wax sentimental, human. You have been an inefficient tool I tolerated only because
there was no easy replacement for you. You became a living proof of what I achieved during the
war with your kind and a demonstration of the source of my power. I brought you here to serve
another purpose, even though you had become an embarrassment to me and a danger to my
political ambitions. As Vrell has stated: You no longer serve that purpose.’
Rebecca Frisk stared expressionlessly at Speaker, and then turned to the rope ladder

leading down to the ship’s boat. One of the blanks filled a rucksack with a selection of weapons
and tossed it over to the Batians. Svan picked up the sack with a glare at the heavily armed
blanks. With a final look of hatred flung at Vrell, she followed Frisk down the ladder. Shib went
after her with a similar expression.
‘Isn’t it dangerous to let them live?’ asked Vrell, as he watched the boat being rowed
ashore by the male Batian.
‘Not really,’ said Speaker. ‘And it pleases me for things to end this way.’
‘I do not understand, Father,’ said Vrell.
‘I do in fact retain some feeling for Rebecca Frisk and find in myself a reluctance to kill
her, as would be logical - here and now. So it pleases me that she is going ashore, since I know
that it will please her to hunt these allies of Sable Keech. It also pleases me that humans will be
running around killing other humans; that there will be so much irrelevant drama. In the end they
will all die: the Old Captains, Gosk Balem, Hoop and our dear Rebecca too.’
‘They may try to seize this ship,’ warned Vrell.
‘The weapons they now have are not sufficient to the task. You are safe where you are,
and you are sure to complete your mission successfully. You will be remembered,’ said Ebulan.
‘Thank you, Father,’ said Vrell.
****
‘The Convocation - that was the reason, nothing else,’ said Svan.
‘I don’t understand,’ said Frisk, eyeing the weapon Svan held trained on her while Shib
rowed them ashore.
‘Of course you don’t. For too long you’ve thought the world revolved around you. Ebulan
has his own agenda, and you’ve been incidental to it all along. I had that figured as soon as Vrell
came on board. Ebulan brought you here because only the presence of someone as notorious as
you would be considered important enough to bring all the Old Captains together in Convocation.
Coincidentally Gosk Balem was also discovered still to be alive, and a Convocation already
called. That probably happened even before Ebulan’s agents finished spreading the news that
you were on-planet.’
‘Ebulan wouldn’t do that,’ said Frisk, just for form’s sake. She eased herself into an
apparently more comfortable position - one that put her hand closer to Svan’s weapon. As Svan
backed away and slowly shook her head, Frisk showed her teeth in what might have been a grin.
‘Ebulan, like all Prador, thinks of humans merely as prosthetic limbs,’ added Svan dryly.
‘Why does Ebulan want a Convocation?’ asked Frisk. ‘What can the Old Captains, those
old humans, possibly do for him?’
‘They can die,’ said Svan. ‘The Prador is severing all his prior connections with your coring
trade in a permanent manner. I find it surprising that he let you live like this, considering that you

are one of the strongest connections. Perhaps that Vrell creature will be sent ashore to mop up
the last of us, once it’s finished wiping out the Convocation fleet, and once we’ve meanwhile
finished killing each other.’
‘Great, so where do we go from here, then?’ asked Frisk, a sneer in her voice. She shifted
closer again, testing Svan’s tolerance, pushing it.
Svan leant back and fired. Frisk jerked back as the beam scorched the side of her face,
then reached up to probe the burn with her forefinger. Svan watched her, the flat snout of the QC
laser directed at her eyes. Frisk glared back, then carefully settled down where she was, and
didn’t try to get nearer again.
‘I’m not sure where we go from here,’ said Svan, as if nothing had just happened. ‘The
Warden knows about all three of us so there’s no way for us to get off-planet via the runcible. If
we handed you over, however, I imagine the Warden might be inclined to be lenient. The only
alternative seems to be to stay here, and I do not like that alternative. The Warden would hunt
us down. It’d hunt us for the rest of our lives. It would just put a submind on the task, making it
that mind’s one purpose of existence. Wardens can be very patient about things like that.’
‘There is another way,’ said Frisk, ‘if you dare to trust me.’
Svan said nothing and waited. Frisk went on.
‘Off-planet I have billions of credit units in numerous accounts, all easily accessible. I
have agents and whole organizations under my control. All I need do is get to a net access point
and send a few coded transmissions. I could have a ship here in a matter of months,’ she said.
‘Burn her,’ said Shib. ‘She’ll do us at her first opportunity.’
‘I’m thinking about it,’ said Svan.
Frisk said, ‘You both know how lenient the Warden would be. These Polity border AIs
don’t always stick to the rules. Its “leniency” would probably consist of giving you a choice
between slow mind-wipe, the furnace, or being handed over to the Old Captains.’
‘Burn her,’ Shib repeated as he brought the rowing boat up against the beach.
Svan said nothing while Shib pulled the oars in, stood and, with the rucksack of weapons
slung over his shoulder, hopped over the bow on to the sand. Svan slowly stood and backed away
from Frisk. The mercenary felt her way with her feet and did not stumble once. She too stepped
out on the sand while Frisk remained seated in the boat. If it came to the worst, Frisk reckoned
on diving over the side as her only option.
‘Come ashore,’ ordered Svan, as if reading her mind.
Frisk hesitated, then quickly followed the mercenaries on to the sand. Svan flicked a
glance at the ship beached further down the shore.
‘You can’t keep me at gunpoint all the time,’ said Frisk.
Svan said, ‘Ebulan upset your nerve linkages deliberately with the intention of making you

behave irrationally. You were set up as a target, like a wounded animal. But it was a
miscalculation that jeopardized his primary mission. The drugs you now possess should stabilize
you.’ Svan could not help resorting to sarcasm: ‘Are you stable enough to understand you are
unlikely to get away from here on your own?’
‘That bastard crab,’ said Frisk, glaring back out to the ship they had left before returning
her attention to Svan. ‘I’m stable enough - stable enough to offer you the same fee for your hire
as I did before. Do we have a deal?’
Svan glanced round at Shib, who now held a laser in his hand.
‘Give her a weapon,’ she said.
Shib reached in the sack and took out one of the short black shell-projectors they’d
brought along specifically for Hoopers. He pointed this weapon casually to one side as he tossed
Frisk the laser.
‘I’m sure you won’t be needing much more than that,’ he said.
She caught the weapon and held it aimed at the ground for a moment. After that
hesitation, she slid it into her belt and glanced towards the beached vessel.
‘What now?’ asked Svan.
‘We get Jay,’ said Frisk.
‘Is that entirely necessary?’ asked Svan.
Frisk turned back to her. ‘That’s part of the contract. We go after Jay and those hunting
him. There’s clearly Old Captains in their group who must have pulled this ship ashore. Them we
don’t kill. We bring them back here to relaunch this ship, then we head back for the Dome.’
Shib looked askance at the ship and snorted.
‘You got any better ideas, mercenary?’ snapped Frisk.
‘We have no better ideas,’ admitted Svan. She nodded towards the path cut into the
dingle. ‘They should be easy enough to track.’
Frisk stared at the two of them for a moment, then abruptly turned and headed for the
path, the two mercenaries lagging behind her. Shib attracted Svan’s attention, pointed at his
weapon, and made a twisting motion with his hand. Svan gave him a smile he did not notice, for
by then he was too busy watching the dingle.
****
Forlam was white and as unmoving as a corpse. He wore the expression of the brain-damaged,
and the dressing made from Janer’s heat-sheet was stretched tight across the hideous injury
under his rib cage. His trousers were stained with blood, and other substances. What now? Janer
wondered. How does the man live with half his guts missing from his body? While watching Anne
and Pland strap the drained crewman to Ron’s back, he put this question to Erlin.

‘He’ll live,’ she explained. ‘The question is whether or not he’ll be human, though. He
might become something like . . . something like the Skinner’s body - like the Skinner himself.’
‘What about nutrients, liquid? ... How can any body heal with half its internal organs
missing?’ Janer persisted.
‘In Hoopers internal organs can grow and heal much more quickly than damaged or
missing limbs. The Spatterjay virus alters DNA to optimize survival. An arm is unnecessary, a
digestive system is necessary. Think of that monster we just saw. In survival terms the most
essential item missing from it wasn’t the brain, it was the mouth - so it grew a mouth,’ she said.
‘Surely a brain is necessary, and what about the senses located in the head - hearing,
smell and sight?’ said Janer.
‘It’ll have the same senses of a leech: heat and vibration. As for a brain, it’ll have some
rudimentary ganglion at the top of its spine. That it was standing upright tells me it has grown an
inner ear, and that it could continue to use its limbs tells me that same ganglion may even be as
complex as an insect’s brain. It’s likely that such alterations required less energy than convening
a basically human body into the body of a leech.’
‘That can happen, then?’ Janer asked, ignoring the filthy comment that came over his
Hive link at Erlin’s reference to ‘an insect’s brain’.
‘Oh yes, the virus optimizes survival, optimizes flesh growth: the leech’s harvest. This
isn’t necessarily what’s best for humans, though. Flatworms are better survivors than us
humans,’ she said.
‘Well, that’s nice to know,’ said Janer, thinking he really didn’t want to know any more.
Erlin continued remorselessly as they followed the others away from the overnight camp.
‘The worst thing is when a human mind ends up in the body of a leech. That didn’t
happen to Ambel, probably because he was fed upon too much to build up the energy to make
that change; and when Sprage hauled him up out of the sea, he was fed Dome-grown food to
prevent it. When the transformation does start to happen, and can’t be prevented, Hoopers feed
the victim sprine. For all of them it’s their greatest fear: to end up being only able to feel
vibration, heat, pain or hunger.’
‘Could there be many of them about?’ Janer asked, thinking with horror of the huge leech
he’d burned during the night.
‘There could,’ said Erlin, offering no comfort.
As they stomped on, deeper into the dingle, Janer began to notice pronounced changes in
the flora and fauna. The swollen trunks of the peartrunk trees were larger, and they often had
large splits running through them, so that they seemed more like barred cages than solid trees.
The leeches in their branches were dark red rather than the usual brown of coastal or seagoing
leeches, and here the frogmoles were absent. After a time, Ambel no longer needed to use Ron’s
machete, as the growth of foliage became steadily higher. The large flat leaves that grew at
ground level near the coast now sprouted at the top of thorny trunks standing five metres tall. It
was dark here and the ground was coated with soggy rolls of leaf and brittle white twigs. Fungi

were scattered amidst this like droplets of orange blood. Now the leeches falling from above
were not their worst problem; it was the leeches lurking in the fallen foliage that oozed towards
one’s ankle if standing in one spot for too long.
When Ambel suddenly called a halt, Janer thought this a foolish place to choose, until he
realized they were pausing only to allow another denizen of the dingle to pass.
Through the shady trunks came a huffing squeal and something huge moved painfully
into view. To Janer it looked like a lizard made in the shape of a buffalo, but with some extreme
differences to either creature. It did not have hooves or claws, but huge flat pads; the horns on
its head were repeated in rows along its neck, and it had no tail. Janer mistook it as being
four-limbed until he spotted the mandible limbs folded under its three-cornered mouth. Its tough
hide was heavily pocked and Janer realized that the circular marks he had assumed were scales,
were in fact healed leech scars.
The creature lumbered on past, flinging only a glance at them with its single
double-pupilled eye. At the shoulder, it stood twice the height of a man and seemed a formidable
creature. That it was a vegetarian, was evident when it halted by one of the thorny trunks and
ground a lump out of it with its serrated mandibles. The vibration this caused had leeches falling
on to it out of the tree. They immediately attached themselves and bored into its back. It grunted
on finishing the mouthful it was chewing, then turning its head each way it used its mandibles to
pull off any leeches it could reach. It then champed another mouthful - and more leeches fell.
‘We’ll go round,’ said Ambel.
‘Is that thing dangerous?’ asked Janer, his carbine held in readiness.
‘No, but they are,’ said Pland, pointing to the leeches wriggling on the ground or oozing
back up the tree trunks.
‘What is it?’ Janer asked Erlin, as they gave the huge creature and the rain of leeches it
was causing a wide berth.
‘Its name? I think it’s called a tree pig or something.’
‘Wood pig,’ Pland corrected her.
She nodded and went on, ‘It’s one of the heirodonts. There’s thousands of different kinds
- some no bigger than a pin head. That’s one of the largest types you’ll find on land. It’s
rumoured there are oceanic ones that grow larger, but that’s never been proven,’ she said.
‘Does it have any predators?’ asked Janer, wondering about some of the sounds he’d
heard in the night.
‘There’s only two predators here on land: us’ - she pointed up into the foliage - ‘and
them.’
‘Why only two?’
‘The leeches and the virus evolved together. There may have been other land predators at
one time, but the leeches left no room for them. I’d guess that the leeches took to the sea only a

few million years ago, so that’s why you find other predators there. Give this place another
couple of million years and there’ll be nothing in it but vegetation, herbivores and leeches.’
‘A grim prospect.’
‘It’s life,’ said Erlin simply.
In time, the vegetation began to thin and sprouted closer to ground level again. Janer saw
Pland pointing at something, and it took him a moment to distinguish, amid the surrounding
trunks, what he was indicating. It was an octagonal metal post, half a metre wide and higher
than a man, its surface thick with grey corrosion.
‘We’re closer than I thought,’ said Ron.
Janer glanced at him, then at Forlam who was now showing some interest, and staring at
the metal post. ‘Perimeter,’ the crewman managed to utter.
‘What is it?’ asked Janer, puzzled.
‘Slave post,’ said Ambel.
Janer was still none the wiser, but he saw Erlin nodding in understanding. Before he could
ask her what Ambel was talking about, the Captain led them out of the dingle, and she had
moved back to escort Forlam.
They came out on to the crest of a hill sloping down to a valley. Below them, a river
rumbled between red-brown boulders. On the other side of this stood structures built of the
same stone: tall many-windowed buildings sprawled like a disjointed medieval fort. Crenellated
walls stretched between them and there were signs, under thick vegetation, of what had once
been a moat. To one side the ground had been levelled, and the vegetation there was having
trouble getting a hold on the glassy surface. A wrecked landing craft of very old design stood
decaying on that same surface.
Janer moved up beside Ambel and stared.
‘Hoophold,’ said the Captain.
‘And those posts?’ Janer queried, gesturing behind with his thumb.
‘The posts broadcast a signal to activate the explosive collars his captives and slaves
wore. Here was where he kept them imprisoned, then cored them, and from here he shipped
them out to the Prador,’ Ambel explained.
‘You think that . . . the Skinner has come back here?’ Janer said.
‘I don’t have to think,’ said Ambel, and pointed.
Squatting on a merlon of the nearest stretch of wall was something that could have been
taken for a gargoyle - until it shifted its position and briefly opened its stubby wings. The head of
Spatterjay Hoop was watching them approach.

****
It all came down to Prador politics, the Warden realized now. It continued observing through the
many eyes of the enforcer drones below, and saw the ships of the Convocation fleet moving
towards the Skinner’s Island, and far ahead of them the ship Frisk had seized. Of course: Ebulan
wanted all living witnesses dead so he could claw back power in the Third Kingdom. One large
explosion, when that fleet reached the island, and all the Prador’s problems, here at least, would
be solved.
‘SM Twelve, I want four enforcers to get between the main fleet and that ship. If it shows
any sign of moving from its present location I want it destroyed.’
Accessing Windcheater’s server took a little while longer, as the sail was deep into
studying a political history of Earth and obviously quite fascinated. Though it might cause
Windcheater a headache, the Warden broke the sail’s connection and linked in.
‘Windcheater.’
‘Yes, what, wadda y’want?’ snapped the disgruntled sail.
‘I want you to tell Captain Sprage that he should halt the fleet at least ten kilometres out
from the Skinner’s Island. I myself will inform those captains who possess radios or augs.’
‘And why should I tell him that?’ asked the sail, still irritated.
‘Because if you do not, that whole fleet - and you yourself - will end up as a crust of ash
spreading on the ocean.’
‘Why’s that?’
‘Because I think it highly likely that waiting for that fleet at the Skinner’s Island is a CTD.
You should have no trouble finding information on such devices through your aug. If you do have
trouble, then try “contra-terrene device”.’
****
As the Warden withdrew, Windcheater had no trouble locating an encyclopaedia entry
concerning CTDs. After reading it carefully he suddenly felt very vulnerable and very small.
Snapping his head up from the deck he tried to locate Sprage. However, the Captain was in his
cabin, so the sail shifted his head up behind Olian, who stood at the rail gazing out at the
growing number of ships. He nudged her in the back with his snout.
‘What is it, Windcheater?’ Olian asked him.
‘Did you know,’ said the sail, ‘that a CTD the size of a coffee flask can erase an entire
city?’
‘That’s common knowledge to us, and we’ve lived with it for centuries now. Did you know
that during the Prador war five entire planets were destroyed with them?’
Windcheater went slightly cross-eyed for a moment. ‘This fleet must not get closer than

ten kilometres to the island, so the Warden warns. He claims there’s a CTD waiting for it there. I
suppose it will be a relatively small-yield device, but even that’s too much. I think that if we
continue to move any closer I’ll consider my contract void and get straight out of here.’
Olian’s face went a little white as what the sail had just told her slowly impacted. She
pushed herself back from the rail and hurried to Sprage’s cabin.
Windcheater lifted his head higher to scan the many ships now under sail. Eighteen so
far. He thought deep and hard about all of the things he had learnt over the last few days. There
was the Polity, huge and embracing thousands of worlds; there was the Prador Third Kingdom;
and beyond these there was probably an awful lot more. His own kind, he realized, needed to
gain some real leverage - in terms of political, economic, and possibly military power. Not so
they could become major players in the grand scheme of things, but just to make sure that others
would not inadvertently wipe them out.
And, so brooding, Windcheater began to make plans for his people and his world.
****

16
The huge whelk shell was now nearly empty of flesh and the heirodont felt sated
enough to return to the depths. Soon all the leeches clinging to its surface would
be turned to mere threads by increasing pressure and, unable to feed, would
detach and rise back to the surface. For the heirodont, leeches represented the
bane of its life: never having evolved the nerveless fleshy covering of turbul or
boxies, it was put in constant pain by the onslaughts of smaller leeches, and could
even be killed by some of the larger ones. This last danger should perhaps have
made it more observant of its surroundings but, though intelligent enough to know
that this giant whelk had been the same one that had evaded it earlier, it was also
stupid enough to concentrate on its meal too closely. It still had its nose deep
inside the cavernous shell, tatters of flesh hanging about it like cave moss, when
an enormous leech struck it from the side.

SM3 likened its appearance to a Harrier jump-jet, an ancient flying machine it had spotted on an
‘historical weapons’ site, but SM4 argued, on surveying the same site, that it looked more like a
helicopter gunship. At their inception, the two subminds had not possessed sufficient mental
differences from each other to have anything to debate, but as the hours rolled on they slowly
began to develop individuality.
‘Why do you think the boss put that nancy in charge of us?’ Three asked its companion as
they searched their assigned sector.
‘Well,’ said Four, who was becoming the more dominant of the two enforcer-drones, ‘I
reckon it’s all down to prior physical experience of this world. We got the programming but we
ain’t got the experience.’

Flexing its nacelles, Three harrumphed.
‘Yeah, Twelve might have done a bit more than us, but it ain’t got the firepower.’
Four, who had been playing ‘devil’s advocate’, moved into the defensive. ‘It’s not all
about what you can do, but about what you can understand.’ Even as it said this, the drone was
not quite sure what it meant.
‘Twelve might have more experience of the physical world, but he sure ain’t got the watts
to handle it. That’s what we’re for,’ argued Three.
‘Well,’ began Four - and then fell silent for a moment. ‘Did you get that?’
‘Sure did!’ said Three excitedly.
The enforcer drones dropped low, and decelerated on ribbed fusion flames. Below them,
the sea was kicked up in two tracks of white spray when they turned as one to nose back along
the course they had been following. They moved more slowly now and slid apart, their dishes
and antennae swivelling as if scenting prey.
‘There: underspace signature,’ said Four with satisfaction.
The drones turned again and hovered over the seawater like a couple of wasps zeroing in
on a fizzy drink. They bobbed in the air as they attempted to read something from the tightly
beamed signal - trying to pick something up from it by inductance, without interrupting it.
‘We have something!’ Four bellowed across the ether.
Flashes of quaternary code flashed through from their receivers, as they tried to nail
down some sequence of the code.
‘Direct transmit all you are receiving,’ SM12 instructed them.
‘We’re getting it!’ shouted Three, as it tried to pull together something coherent to pass
on. Then, ‘What’s that?’
Four did not get a chance to answer its companion, as a black line cut from the surface of
the sea directly towards SM3. The drone fragmented round a disk of light, its weapon nacelles
cartwheeling across the waves. Four blasted away from the surface, and something detonated
below it. Then, to one side, a Prador war drone broke from the surface and headed towards it.
Four released two seeker missiles and planed away. One missile exploded way out of range, but
the remaining one blew just ten metres from the Prador drone and swallowed it in fire. Four
slowed then abruptly accelerated, as the Prador drone came through that flame with only a
coating of soot on its armoured skin.
‘You cannot survive,’ the Prador drone transmitted.
Two missiles came shooting after Four like hunting garfish. The drone blasted higher,
only to be slammed sideways as its path intersected that of a stream of rail-gun fire. Pieces fell
from Four’s body as it tried to swerve out of the way of this hammering fusillade. But the gunfire
tracked it, and the drone could do nothing but sling power into its fusion engine. The EM shell

extinguished the drone’s engine only fractions of a second before the two missiles came up at it
from below. Four didn’t even see them. It disappeared in a double explosion, nothing of it larger
than a fingernail surviving the twin blasts.
****
The shore was already in sight as the rhinoworm chose its moment to attack. It thumped against
the scooter, slewing it sideways, and its beaked mouth clamped over Roach’s foot. Roach let out
a yell, and promptly dropped Keech’s antiphoton weapon into the water. Keech reached over and
caught hold of Roach’s jacket, while Boris lunged over the driver’s seat to link his arms around
Roach’s chest.
‘Shoot the fucking thing!’ Keech yelled at Boris.
‘I can’t! He’ll go in!’
Keech swore, and tried reaching for the weapon in Boris’s belt.
‘I ain’t going! I ain’t going!’ Roach yelled.
‘Hang on!’ Boris yelled pointlessly.
Keech’s arm felt leaden as he tried to move it with its cybermotors, then his face became
a mask of pain as something crunched in his wrist. He finally managed to pull the weapon free
and aim it at the rhinoworm.
‘Damn! I can’t pull the trigger! Try to hold him aboard!’
Keech released his hold and swapped the weapon to his right hand. Boris, still holding on
to Roach, was dragged over the seat when the worm tried to haul his companion into the sea.
Keech’s first shot burnt a hole into the worm’s head. It paused in its tugging only to blink at
them, then started pulling again. Keech fired again, then a third time, opening a smoking crater
in the bone between the worm’s eyes. Abruptly the creature released its prey and rose up out of
the water like a cobra about to strike. Keech took aim at the underside of its head: one shot that
blew open something soft and yellow. The worm went rigid, coughed, then dropped into the sea
like a puppet with its strings cut.
‘I told you I weren’t going!’ Roach shouted at the creature floating limply beside the
scooter.
‘Oh shit,’ said Boris, staring in another direction.
Keech and Roach turned and gaped at the approaching mound of molly carp.
‘This isn’t going to stop it,’ said Keech, holding up his pulse-gun. ‘What we need is
something like my APW.’ He glared accusingly at Roach, who tried his best not to look sneaky.
‘I can’t help it. Me arm ain’t working properly,’ the crewman protested.
‘This is it, then,’ muttered Boris.

The molly carp surged up to the scooter, but turned at the last moment and snapped up
the rhinoworm. Because of its unusual mode of propulsion, it was able to stop dead once it had
hold of its prey. It rested right beside the stationary scooter watching the occupants with one eye
while it noisily munched on the rhinoworm’s head.
‘Nice molly,’ soothed Roach, while Keech tried to generate enough AG to lift them clear of
the waves that were beginning to swamp his vehicle. The motor merely whined and grated.
‘Sprzzck burnt-out, safe Sniper,’ said SM13 from under the seat.
‘Can you give us more lift?’ Keech asked it quietly.
The SM thumped against the seat’s underside and jerked the scooter free of the waves.
Roach swore as he nearly fell off again, but pulled himself back on while muttering about ‘talking
lumps of scrap’. Keech eyed the molly carp as he reached for the tap that fed pure water to the
one working thruster. He opened the tap and the thruster coughed and began to smoke. As areas
of it began to turn red hot, Boris hurriedly shifted his feet off it.
‘What about thrust?’ Keech whispered.
‘No chance,’ said SM13.
The thruster coughed again, and spat out something that skated hissing across the
surface of the sea before it sank.
‘There goes the grid,’ said Keech.
The thruster began to belch steam and pure water started to pour out of it. Keech took his
hand away from the tap and watched this steady stream.
‘Might as well leave that tap on. It’ll bring our weight down.’ He leaned over and peered
under his seat at the SM. ‘You’re all that’s left now. I suggest you try something.’
‘It’s finished eating,’ said Roach.
The three of them glanced over at the molly carp as it sucked in the last bit of the worm’s
tail. About now, thought Keech, it should belch loudly. The carp did nothing so amusing. Instead
it turned towards the scooter, with a movement so abrupt it appeared surprised by it itself, and
came shooting at it head on. Before Keech could raise his pulse-gun and fire, the creature struck
the scooter and propelled it over the waves. A second time it rammed against the scooter, still
driving it before it.
Keech took aim at its eyes, but Roach caught hold of his wrist.
‘It’s only playin’. Won’t do to annoy it,’ he warned.
The scooter tilted over as the carp shoved it towards the shore. It was now travelling
faster than it had moved for some hours, waves slapping against its underside while the AG
motor puffed out smoke and whined alarmingly. The molly carp abruptly stopped propelling it,
the scooter continued on, only the occasional wave slowing its progress.

‘Beach ahead!’ yelled Boris.
The scooter skipped over a mound sticking out of the water, smearing frog whelks with its
underside. It continued to skip waves like a skimmed stone and the AG finally started to give out.
The probe said something nonsensical that nevertheless sounded obscene. The scooter ploughed
right into the beach, flinging its three passengers on to the sand.
Keech swore, sat up and spat out a mouthful of sand. Boris groaned and stayed lying on
his back. Roach was the first to his feet and limped unsteadily to the waterline. The molly carp
rounded the mound they’d just bounced over, cruising in close to the shore where it drew to an
abrupt halt.
‘Did it mean to do that?’ asked Keech.
‘I reckon,’ said Boris.
‘Like hell,’ said Roach.
The carp now started shaking violently, so that the water foamed all around it. It then
tilted back, opened its mouth wide, and made a loud groaning sound.
‘Weird,’ said Boris.
Suddenly the beast sank out of sight - but not for long. It exploded from the water,
straight into the air, and seemed to hover there, hanging nose-down for a moment, before
crashing back into the sea.
‘I ain’t never seen one do that before,’ observed Roach.
‘Me neither,’ said Boris.
Keech stared at the creature in perplexity. The way it had hung there in the air for a long
moment had been . . . well, very strange. The carp was out of sight again, but left evidence of
where it was by the gas and silty detritus bubbling to the surface. A putrid smell wafted in across
the waves.
‘I reckon it isn’t well,’ commented Boris.
Just then, something exploded from the water with a whoosh and flash of light and shot
over to hover above them.
‘I see,’ said Keech, though he wasn’t sure he did.
Sniper settled lower, opened his heavy claw, and dropped the monitor’s antiphoton
weapon to the sand. He flexed his legs and shook himself. Rancid pieces of meat fell from his
scarred armour. Keech felt a stirring of memory: hadn’t there been something like this involved in
the clean-up operation here all those centuries ago? This was a war drone of very old design, he
realized, and though ancient and without human expression it certainly managed to appear
pissed off.
‘You all right?’ grated the drone.

Keech was about to give an answer when a movement caught his eye. He glanced down
at the seahorse SM, as it made a buzzing sound and flipped itself upright on the sand, balancing
on its tail.
‘Sprzzt, kill ‘em,’ the little SM managed.
Sniper turned and faced out to sea, then turned back to them.
‘Fucking Prador drones,’ he said. ‘Let’s see how they handle a real war drone.’ And with
that, Sniper racketed into the sky, opened up his fusion engine and was soon just a dot on the
horizon.
‘What was that all about?’ Keech asked, studying the SM. The effort had obviously been
too much for Thirteen, who went over sideways on the sand with a thump.
‘Prador drones?’ Keech queried the two Hoopers. Boris and Roach appeared just as
confused. Keech went over to retrieve his weapon.
‘Maybe they’re back here. Maybe the war’s on again,’ said Roach.
Keech shook his head as he moved to the luggage compartment of the grounded scooter.
From it he took out the portable medkit Erlin had given him, sat down on the sand, then injected
and bandaged his wrist. This was the problem in using cybermotors ungoverned by an aug: they
could over-reach the strength of the bones they were attached to. As an afterthought, he looked
up at Roach.
‘You need this kit?’ he asked.
Roach flexed his hand then batted at his legs. Thick scabbing fell away from the burns
exposed through his charred trousers, and clean skin was revealed underneath.
‘Don’t need none of that stuff,’ he said.
‘I thought not,’ said Keech.
When he had finished working on his wrist, Keech stood and turned towards the dingle.
The sudden and disconcerting appearance of that war drone he had to dismiss as irrelevant,
simply because he had no explanation for it. Now he must concentrate on the matter in hand. It
occurred to him that if Frisk thought he was dead, she might leave Spatterjay. Then again, she
might also have come here in search of Jay Hoop, and Keech wanted both of them.
‘Ambel and the others should be here somewhere, searching for your Skinner,’ he said.
‘That’s so,’ said Boris, staring contemplatively at Thirteen.
‘How do we find them?’ Keech asked.
‘They’ll have landed on the other side of the island,’ said Boris.
‘Best we head over there, then.’

He fired his APW into the dingle. There was a blinding purple flash and a thunderclap.
Once the debris had settled, Boris and Roach got up from the sand and glared at Keech
accusingly. Keech gestured to the avenue he had opened up lined with burning trees. He grinned
and went stomping on in there. Roach limped after him and Boris moved to follow, hesitated,
then went back to Thirteen. He picked up the SM before hurrying after the other two.
‘Sprzzt thanks,’ said the submind.
****
Pieces of bubble metal floating in the sea pinpointed where the two drones had died.
‘That Prador drone won’t be here,’ said Sniper. ‘You realize it was your secondary emitter
and that there’ll be more of the bastards?’
‘I am aware of that, Sniper,’ the Warden replied.
‘You also understand that you’ve got no chance of pinning down that signal until we’ve
thinned a few of them out and whoever’s sending it starts getting desperate?’
‘I am aware of that also, Sniper.’
‘What is it you’re after, then?’ asked the war drone.
‘Enough code to decipher, then I can break into the transmission.’
‘To get that’s gonna mean a stand-up fight. These bastards ain’t gonna hang around
while we record their overspill.’
‘How fortunate, then,’ said the Warden, ‘that you are no longer anally retentive, so to
speak.’
‘Look, we need to work out how to do this,’ snapped Sniper.
‘What would you suggest?’
‘I suggest we find the fuckers and blow them. The more we blow, the less of them can act
as secondaries. That way we’re sure to get more and more of their code.’
‘Well, that sounds like a good plan. How do you suggest we locate them?’
‘Sarcasm don’t help,’ said Sniper. ‘I know Prador, and if there’s one here, it’s in the
deepest hole it can find. So what’s the deepest hole in Nort Sea?’
There was a long delay before the Warden replied, and its tone had somewhat changed
when it did. ‘Yes, there is one very deep trench down there.’
‘And I’d bet that where I am now has a clear and direct line to the bottom of that trench.’
‘Why is that relevant?’ asked the Warden. ‘Underspace transmissions go under space.

They are not affected by anything less than a planetary gravity well.’
‘It’s relevant,’ Sniper lectured, ‘because Prador stole U-space tech from us. They still think
like they’re using realspace transmitters, and in terms of direct links and control. That’s their
psychology. Put a mountain in the way of the signal, and a Prador will think it’s not quite in
control of that signal’s recipient. Your secondary emitters will be found in an area above that
trench.’
‘Very well,’ said the Warden. ‘SM Twelve, stay with drones Seven to Ten at the ship. The
rest of you move into sectors immediately over the Lamant trench. Sniper, you take command
there.’
With this communication came a deep-ocean map and Sniper saw immediately where he
must go, and that it was not far. Slowly he slid up high above the ocean, with his antennae
waving and a dish extruded from his stomach plates. As he travelled, he activated a system that
he had not used in centuries, and bled power from his U-charger. Slowly, laminar gigawatt
batteries built up to a huge charge inside him. Over the sea, he grinned his antiphoton grin. Soon
he would get a chance to show his teeth - but he did not realize how soon.
Radar returned four signals as the enforcer drones the Warden had sent out came into
the area.
‘Spread out singly and search. Stay up high to give yourselves time to respond to any
attack.’
‘Sure thing!’ the drones responded eagerly.
‘If one of them comes at any of you, you don’t try to take it alone. You run for me.’
Their response this time was less enthusiastic.
Sniper watched the four signals separate and spread out, and then, from memory storage,
he downloaded differing programs into his carousel of smart missiles. He knew that nothing less
than a direct hit by one of these on that Prador armour would do the trick, and even then . . .
These Prador drones were certainly not the pushover they had been in the old days. Sniper
accelerated and was soon at the precise centre of the area to be searched.
‘Shit!’ shouted SM1.
Sniper received a fragmented picture of explosions, and one fleeting image of a Prador
war drone. On radar he saw that SM1 was hammering towards him at Mach II. Close behind this
SM came another signature that did not show up so clearly on radar. Sniper froze that second
signature and studied it.
‘Exotic metal . . . right,’ he said. Then, ‘SM One, go higher, then straight down into the
sea once you’re a kilometre out. I will give you the signal. Don’t deviate, you’ll have incoming
straight over you.’
‘Poxingmissileupassgunning!’ was the SM’s reply.
Sniper opened up his fusion engine and sped towards the drone in trouble. After

calculating vectors, he spat out one missile and watched it accelerate away. By the time it
reached its intended target, it would be doing over Mach V. Little time to manoeuvre for either
target or missile. Next, Sniper cruised to the right and opened up with his rail-gun. A swarm of
carborundum fingers, needle-pointed and weighted, sped out in front of him. In seconds SM1
came into sight, swiftly pursued by the Prador drone. Sniper watched the missile making small
corrections to its course, then sent the signal. SM1 dived, pieces falling away from it as the
Prador hit it repeatedly with rail-gun fire. The missile flew over SM1, straight into the Prador’s
face. It managed to shift aside only slightly before it was struck. Sniper tracked it as it came
tumbling out of the explosion, its armour glowing white-hot. It corrected and swerved towards
him, only to run straight into the swarm of carborundum fingers. As they struck, it shuddered in
midair, jets of metal vapour issuing from its softened armour as the fingers penetrated and
smashed its insides. Sniper turned in on it like a raptor as it dived for the sea. He allowed it to
get within ten metres of the surface before grinning his grin. Violet fire speared the Prador war
drone. It hit the surface and rolled along it like a droplet of water on a hotplate. Then it blew,
scattering fragments that bounced and sank in clouds of steam.
‘Take that, fucker,’ said Sniper, as he jetted above those fragments.
****
The disembodied head dropped away before Janer could acquire it in the autosight and centre
the beam on the thing’s perch. Stone flaked and exploded away, as he tried to follow its course.
In a moment it lost itself in the vines growing over the ruin. Janer only stopped firing when Ambel
placed a hand on the barrel of the carbine.
‘The power supply isn’t endless, lad,’ said the Captain.
Janer lowered the weapon and studied its displays. He swore when he realized there was
only a quarter of a charge left.
‘We’ll go in after him,’ said Ron, undoing the straps that held Forlam to his back. ‘Erlin,
Anne an’ Pland can stay here with Forlam.’
Janer surmised that this meant he himself was included in the hunt, so there’d be a use
for that quarter-charge yet. He watched as Ambel removed a packet from his belt and handed it
to Pland.
‘Wet your knife for the body if it turns up,’ said the Captain. ‘Same for the head.’
Pland nodded and gingerly accepted the packet.
Ambel pointed to the QC laser in his belt. ‘That’ll burn either of ‘em, but it won’t kill ‘em.’
Now he turned his attention to Peck, who stood clutching his shotgun and looking surly. ‘You
wouldn’t stay here if I told you to, would you, Peck?’
‘Buggered would I,’ said Peck.
Ron laid Forlam on the ground, with his back resting against a rock.
‘Feelings bits betterst,’ said Forlam.

There seemed something funny about his tongue. Ron studied him dubiously for a long
moment, before turning to Erlin.
‘He’s not well,’ said the Captain meaningfully.
‘I’ll get some more Earth nutrients into him,’ she said.
‘Let’s go then,’ said Ron.
The four of them set off down the slope towards the river, and the ruin beyond. Janer
walked with his nerves jangling, and his attention flitting to every movement in the undergrowth.
Peck proceeded with his shotgun close to his chest, and Ambel plodded stoically along, with his
blunderbuss resting on one shoulder and his hand on the hilt of his sheath knife. Captain Ron ran
a stone across the edge of his machete as he walked. Once they were halfway down the slope,
he pocketed the stone and held out his hand. Ambel passed across one of the small packets of
sprine.
In the river, leeches clung to the bottom, looking just like trout swimming against the
current. In the deeper water, Janer spotted a creature that had the appearance of an onion with
spider legs, and though it showed no inclination to come out of the water after him, he kept a
wary eye on it. They crossed by using the boulders as stepping-stones and shortly reached one of
the overgrown moats extending below a crenellated wall. Peck stared down into the moat and
spat. Janer also gazed into it, and saw only stagnant water filled with a tangle of white branches.
He was about to move on after the others when he realized that branches were not what he had
just seen. He took another look at them and realized that what he was seeing was a tangle of
human bones.
‘They shouldn’t be there,’ he pointed out.
‘Hoop’s place,’ reminded Ambel.
‘But that was centuries ago.’
‘Human bone don’t rot here, not unless it’s Hooper bone,’ said Ron.
Janer was about to ask why, but realized Erlin was not here to answer him.
‘A more suitable monument than that, I guess,’ he said, referring to the Hoophold.
‘Bugger,’ said Peck, with reference to nothing in particular.
They walked on, moving parallel to the moat, until they came to a place in the wall where
there had once been a steel door. Some fragments of corroded metal still jutted from the
stonework and the earth below was stained red with rust. Here, Ron scrambled down the slope
to the edge of the stagnant water. He tucked his machete under one arm, pulled on his gloves
and squatted down. He dipped the blade into the water then with great care sprinkled a few
sprine crystals on to the wet metal before grinding them all to paste with the stone he had
retained. After smearing the paste all along the razor-sharp edge, he tossed the polluted stone
away.
‘Cross here,’ he ordered, holding the machete carefully away from his body as he waded

through the stinking water.
Ambel quickly followed, then Peck. Janer halted at the edge, trying to detect movement
below the oily surface.
‘No leeches there. The bones have poisoned it,’ said Ambel.
Janer decided to take him at his word and waded across. He tried to ignore a skull that
they had disturbed from the bottom, which was now bobbing about in the silt like a Halloween
novelty.
Once they had climbed the other side of the moat, they entered Hoop’s demesne through
the rusted door. The wall was two metres thick and above their heads were open murder holes
the purpose of which, in an era long before this place had been built, would have been to pour
molten lead over unwelcome visitors. Janer wondered if Hoop had ever used them for such a
purpose. Probably yes, just for the hell of it.
Inside, was an open courtyard, with stairs all around leading up to the top of the walls.
Beyond this lay a further confusion of walls and buildings. Ron led the way across the courtyard
then halted to point down at the flagstones. No one commented on a long distorted footprint
clearly visible in the dust. Hefting his machete, Ron gestured for them to continue. He guided
them through a long tunnel into yet another courtyard, then beyond that into an overgrown
garden.
Janer stared around him at familiar Earth plants that had managed to survive here,
seeding and reseeding themselves down the centuries. Wild rose covered one wall and some
sort of orchid sprouted from the black ground below a tilted sundial. The wall bordering the far
end of the garden had some kind of vine embedded deeply in its strange decorations. On top of
that wall rested the Skinner’s head.
Janer raised his carbine just as the head moved, and he realized this was the second time
he had been mistaken. The head was actually behind the garden wall, not resting on it. Behind
the wall - and reattached to the long body that was now stepping into view.
‘Oh bugger,’ said Peck, more pertinently this time.
The Skinner was complete again and Janer had never before witnessed such a terrible
sight. For here was a real monster: a blue man four metres tall and impossibly thin, hands like
spiders, a head combining elements of warthog and baboon with much of a human skull, evil
black eyes and ears that were bat wings, spatulate legs depending underneath the long jaw like
feelers and, when it opened its long mouth, row upon row of jagged black teeth.
‘Only just reattached itself,’ said Ron calmly. ‘Look at its neck.’
Janer gazed at the neck and saw a leech mouth located where an ordinary man would
have his Adam’s apple. He raised his carbine again, wondering how Ron could sound so
analytical.
The Skinner roared, and came charging at them in ridiculous but horrible loping strides.
Peck was already blasting away with his shotgun before Janer could fire. Janer’s hit burnt skin
from the monster’s chest and seared one bat-wing ear. Yet the Skinner didn’t even slow down, so

Janer kept firing - as an arm like softball bats joined by pieces of elastic came sweeping in his
direction. The hand hit him with horrible force - as if he’d run full tilt into the iron bars of a cage.
He flew back into a tangle of roses and was slammed against a side wall. The breath whooshed
out of him and he found he just couldn’t move.
He was aware of Peck crouching behind the sundial, still blasting away, and next saw the
sundial and Peck both taken up in a single grasp, heard stone crunching, and saw something
bloody being discarded to one side. Then Captain Ron was there with his machete, and the
Skinner became more wary, as it dodged Ron’s attempts to lop off its limbs. Suddenly it darted
forward in a blur of motion. There was a clang and a whickering sound as the machete spun
through the air, then another clang as it bounced off the wall to Janer’s right. This second sound
seemed to return the life to Janer’s limbs, and he started to haul himself out of a tangle of roses,
swearing as thorns snagged the skin of his face.
As Janer recovered the carbine and sighted it on the Skinner’s head, he saw it looming
over Captain Ron as if relishing the prospect of tearing him apart. Ron just stood there with his
arms folded, his legs braced, and a placid look on his face. This made the Skinner hesitate. Janer
stepped forward, then promptly fell flat on his face - briars had become looped around his
ankles. As he struggled to right himself and draw a bead on the creature again, he saw Ambel
sneaking in behind.
The Skinner drew back one hand clenched into a fist, but Ron merely grinned at it. As
Ambel drove his sprine-poisoned knife into the calf of the Skinner’s leg, Janer opened fire again.
The scream it made was deafening: an amalgam of a human scream of agony and the
squealing of a pig going to slaughter, but with its volume stepped up five-fold. Janer winced at
the hideous sound, but kept firing at the Skinner’s head. As it screamed, it lashed back with its
foot and hurled Ambel ten metres through the air behind it. It then struck out at Ron, slamming
him so hard into a wall that the Captain nearly went through it, rubble falling about him. Still
screaming, it took two loping steps towards Janer, who thought he was done for then. His laser
burnt away skin, but seemed to have no other effect on this monster.
The Skinner ignored him as it hurtled past, scrambling over the six-metre wall behind him.
****
‘What the hell was that?’ said Keech.
‘Hell’s ‘bout right,’ muttered Roach.
‘What do you mean?’ Keech asked.
Roach glanced at Boris, and shrugged. ‘Ain’t like nothin’ I’ve heard before,’ he said, then
promptly sat down to inspect his charred boots. After searching the pockets of his ragged coat,
he found a length of fishing line, which he used to bind one loose sole back into place. Keech
watched Roach impatiently as the crewman finished this task, then stood to test his weight on
the makeshift repair.
‘Are you quite ready now?’ Keech demanded.
‘Ready as I can be. Had me arm busted and me legs fried, so I ain’t gonna be hurrying

anywhere,’ Roach grumbled.
Keech stared at him, unable to find a reply, then turned and set off through the dingle
again. Roach and Boris exchanged a look, then slowly moved after him. A few paces farther on,
Roach gestured at the SM Boris was cradling like a baby.
‘Why don’t you get rid of that thing?’ he asked.
‘It saved our lives,’ said Boris.
Roach snorted. ‘It’ll slow you down,’ he said with a sneaky grin.
They both glanced ahead at Keech, and began to walk just a little slower.
‘Yeah, definitely slow me down,’ said Boris, then grunted in surprise.
The SM had abruptly become the weight of something made of paper. He held it out on
the flat of his hand and looked askance at Roach.
Roach shook his head. ‘Didn’t say we was in any hurry.’
Boris grinned weakly, tucking the SM under his arm, and together the two crewmen
dawdled after Keech.
****
‘Signal detected. Transmitting,’ said SM5.
Sniper slammed himself into the sea as the only effective method of high-speed braking.
As he went in, his course cut like a white icicle under the waves, until he had slowed enough to
turn and explode from the surface again. In seconds he was accelerating towards SM5’s last
location - only the drone was gone. All that showed on radar was a dispersing signal.
‘It got him,’ said SM1 angrily, as it came hammering in from the west.
‘No kidding,’ said Sniper. He now routed the radar signals through a clean-up program
and detected the Prador drone a couple of kilometres from where SM5 had been, and moving
away.
‘I can see you,’ he sent.
The Prador drone swerved in a ‘u’ and came hammering back towards him.
‘That you behind me, Two?’ Sniper asked conversationally.
‘Sure is,’ replied Two.
‘Good, I want you to veer off and go drop a cluster of mines here.’ Sniper sent
co-ordinates. ‘Seems these arseholes always miss the upswing.’ Behind Sniper, Two shot away,
chuckling over the ether.

‘One, you put a laser on it, and keep it on it,’ Sniper instructed.
‘Won’t touch that armour,’ SM1 pointed out.
‘I know it won’t, but it’ll have to keep on juggling its sensors. It won’t lose me, but it may
well miss something smaller.’ Sniper turned so he was hurtling sideways and, reaching precisely
where he wanted, spat two missiles into the sea.
‘Warden, how much code did you get?’ he asked as he observed the missiles torpedoing
away on their preprogrammed course.
‘I could do with more, Sniper,’ said the Warden. ‘Why - are you getting bored?’
With the Prador drone hurtling towards him behind its two rapidly accelerating missiles,
Sniper swore then slammed down into the sea. He was fifty metres down when one of the
Prador’s missiles detonated on the surface spearing white lines after him with its shrapnel. The
second missile followed him down. He released some chaff, then a couple of mines, before
abruptly changing direction. There were explosions behind, then a huge splash to his right. The
Prador drone was coming straight after him, vapour and bubbles exploding from armour that had
been heated by SM1’s laser.
‘Over here, arsehole!’ Sniper sent.
‘You are dead,’ the Prador sent back.
‘Ooh, now I’m all frightened.’
Sniper instantly changed course and shot up to the surface at forty-five degrees. The
Prador went straight back for the surface, knowing it could come on Sniper quicker through the
air. With its sensors confused and misreading, it saw only at the last moment the mines Two had
dropped there. Emerging from the sea in a swarm of explosions the Prador shuddered into the
air, seemed merely to shrug to itself, then accelerated towards Sniper again. Sniper turned on it
and fired his antiphoton weapon. Violet fire ignited on the disk of a projected screen.
‘OK, so you’re tougher than I thought,’ sent Sniper.
The Prador slowed, its screen still out in front of it.
‘You’re looking forward to this, ain’t you?’ Sniper sent, bouncing his signal off the sea.
‘I am,’ returned the Prador, ‘and now it will end.’
Below the Prador, two white fumaroles speared up from the sea. The first missile was
powerful enough to blow a bar of plasma through its armour. The second missile went in through
the same hole and gutted it. The distorted shell, which was all that now remained of this Prador
drone, arced into the sea. Still burning inside, it planed for a moment on superheated steam,
then sank.
‘Stupid,’ said Sniper as he tracked the glow into the depths.
****

The screams were terrible, and Erlin was glad to hear them recede into the distance. If the
Skinner had come her way, she was not sure what she could have done, other than die.
‘Do you suppose that’s it, then?’ she said. ‘Do you think they’ve poisoned it?’
‘You’d know as well as me,’ said Anne.
Erlin shook her head and concentrated on the task in hand.
Pland finished knocking a length of peartrunk wood into the ground nearby on which Erlin
suspended the drip she had prepared, then turned on its plastic tap. Next, she pressed another
tranquillizing drug patch against Forlam’s upper arm. The recumbent crewman was completely
out of it, and that’s just how she wanted him to stay - for the present. She pressed a thumb to his
bottom jaw and pulled it down. Forlam’s tongue had turned into the feeding mouth of a leech,
but at present it lay flaccid behind his teeth. Erlin inspected the back of her hand and the hole
where a neat circle of flesh had been excised. Forlam’s tongue had done that to her when she
tried to look in his mouth earlier, while he was conscious. He’d been most apologetic afterwards.
‘Needs lots of Dome food,’ suggested Pland, staring off in the direction the other four had
gone.
‘I know that,’ said Erlin, ‘but right now we haven’t got any - just a few supplements.’
‘There’s plenty on the Treader,’ said Anne. ‘Maybe I ought to sneak back and fetch some.’
Erlin glanced at Forlam, then back at her.
‘He certainly needs some Dome food. Could you manage it without getting yourself
killed?’
Anne gave her a pitying look, then stood up.
‘I’ll run,’ she said, and turned to go.
Just then, three figures stepped into sight. All three wore black crabskin armour. All three
were armed.
‘Shit,’ said Pland, and reached for the laser at his belt.
His hand touched the grip just as there came a sound as of a hammer striking an apple,
and he flew backwards, landing on his back and skidding along the ground. Wisps of smoke rose
from his chest. He just had time to lift his head and blink at his attackers, then a dull explosion
turned his torso into an expanding ball of fire. In an explosion of torn flesh and blood, his head
flew one direction and his arms and legs in various others.
‘Nobody move!’ yelled the figure which had fired.
Anne moved to draw her automatic and Erlin quickly grabbed her arm.
‘Don’t!’ she warned. ‘Your bullets won’t get through that armour.’

Anne seemed about to ignore her and Erlin knew that she could not restrain her. Anne
stared round at the steaming remains of her fellow crewman, and for a moment wore a puzzled
expression. Erlin had seen this look before; because death was such an uncommon occurrence
among them, Hoopers found it a very difficult concept to accept. Slowly the expression of
puzzlement turned to one of resigned anger.
Anne returned her attention to the approaching three, slowly moving her hand away from
her weapon. ‘I hope I don’t regret this,’ she said.
‘So do I,’ said Erlin.
The foremost of the three removed her helmet, and looked from Anne to Erlin with a
deranged expression.
Here is something horrible, was Erlin’s immediate thought.
‘What have you done to my Jay?’ the woman asked.
So, this is Rebecca Frisk, concluded Erlin. Superficially she appeared an attractive young
woman, but that this was merely a veneer over something old and ugly was also evident. Erlin
kept silent.
Frisk turned from them and gazed at the Hoophold, smiling wistfully.
‘You’ll walk ahead of us,’ she instructed. ‘Try anything and you know what will happen to
you.’ She gestured to Pland’s remains.
‘What about him?’ asked Erlin, gesturing at the unconscious Forlam, then instantly
regretting that when one of the Batians turned his weapon on the prostrate crewman.
Frisk held up her hand. ‘No, I don’t think so,’ she said. Gesturing with her laser for Anne
and Erlin to move aside, she approached then squatted down beside Forlam. With one finger she
pulled down his jaw to peer inside his mouth. She gave a small laugh and rocked back on her
heels. ‘We’ll leave him here,’ she continued, then abruptly yanked the drip from his arm and cast
it aside.
Anne went rigid.
‘The weapon - throw it on the ground,’ ordered Svan, levelling the snout of her weapon at
Anne’s middle. Anne hesitated for only a moment, then undid her belt and dropped it to the
earth. Svan now turned to Erlin, who wondered what she might want of her. The mercenary’s
hand snaked out at Erlin’s belt, and she glanced down to see her QC laser being removed. How
alert am I? she wondered. She’d been wearing the thing for so long, she’d forgotten its purpose.
‘Step back, both of you,’ said Svan, and the two captives did as directed.
Svan walked over to the belt, and stooped to withdraw the holstered automatic. She
inspected it for a second, and then gave a bark of laughter before tossing it aside. The QC laser
she tucked into her own belt.

‘Get moving.’ She pointed, as she stood up again.
Erlin and Anne turned and headed down the slope.
****
The Warden observed that the warning Windcheater had delivered earlier had been heeded, then
concentrated its attention on another area of ocean. Even from one of the orbital eyes it had
been possible to track the occasional flares of energy. It had to admit Sniper knew his business.
Even with ‘attitude’, the enforcer drones remained pretty ineffectual in this situation. They were
constructed for local police actions involving human terrorists, so could only cope with the kind
of weaponry such groups normally possessed. They should still, though, have outclassed the
antiquated war drone, just as the Prador war drones, with their heavy armour, outclassed them.
But every time Sniper had come up trumps. The Warden suspected that Sniper had been
constantly upgrading himself over the centuries that had passed since the war. Back then the old
drone had certainly not possessed ballistic programs of such accuracy, nor did he own an
antiphoton weapon. Even so, those Prador drones, with their armour and weaponry, should still
technically have been superior. The Warden supposed Sniper’s victories indicated that it wasn’t
the size of a weapon that counted, but how and when it was used. Each of Sniper’s victories was
like that of a medieval pike man bringing down a mounted knight in full armour.
‘Signal detected. Transmitting,’ piped up SM1.
The Warden soaked up the signal and hoped that there would be enough information this
time before the fighting recommenced. It carefully studied the quaternary code as it came in,
then loaded it into the same program as the rest.
‘That’s it,’ concluded SM1.
‘Where is it?’ Sniper queried, as he hurtled towards the war drone.
‘No sign of any Prador war drone,’ said SM1, managing to sound utterly casual.
‘You know what this means?’ said Sniper to the Warden.
‘Enlighten me.’
‘It means that the Prador that’s down there can’t afford to lose any more of its drones, so
has told them to head for cover rather than fight.’
‘Yes, so it would seem.’
The Warden was distracted now. That last two-second sequence had been enough for
decoding. ‘Sniper, I have enough. You may withdraw,’ it sent.
‘Withdraw?’ Sniper asked.
‘Yes, that’s what I said. I see no reason to have any more of my SMs destroyed.’
‘Whatever you say,’ said Sniper, shutting off with a crackle of static that sounded
suspiciously like a raspberry. The Warden did not pursue this thought.

‘SM Eleven, initiate and upload to com relay shell,’ it sent to the satellite orbiting
between itself and the planet. Two seconds later the satellite opened and spat yet another
coffin-shape out into atmosphere. The Warden observed it for a moment, before concentrating a
whole quarter of its processing power on the five seconds of coded transmission it now
possessed. There was no point seeking to obtain any more, since if these five seconds couldn’t
be cracked then the rest certainly couldn’t. After two seconds, the Warden ascertained that the
code was based on random number generation from the quantum decay of a mixture of three
rare isotopes. A real bastard, it thought. The Prador had never bothered much with building AIs,
as they considered their own minds to be the pinnacle of excellence. This was unfortunate for
them, as it deprived them of the knowledge that there was no such thing as a ‘random number’.
****

17
Emitting low-frequency screams, the heirodont thrashed about as the giant leech
drove its mouthparts into it. One thrash of its tail had the whelk shell tumbling
over into the abyss, like a disconnected diving bell. The pain for the heirodont was
horrific, as the leech reamed from its body a tonne of flesh and blubber, and even
chunks of the flat black bone that comprised its skeleton. In comparison the rider
prill, which came scuttling in anticipation down the leech’s long slimy body, were
only a minor irritation as they spread out from the predator’s head to slice off for
themselves portions of skin and blubber, then squatted feasting with their little red
eyes zipping constantly around their carapaces.

Vrell shifted uneasily, scraping his back legs on the deck. The adolescent Prador was feeling a
strange sort of tension in his back end, under the ribbed plate that covered his rear stomach. He
was also beginning to entertain thoughts about how unfair it was that he might soon die.
Grinding his mandibles, he shook himself then brought his scope up to one of his eyes. There
was no sign of any ships, but the relayed transmission from one of his father’s remote probes
had already shown that the Convocation fleet had halted ten kilometres away. Vrell glanced at
the relevant screen: all the sails had folded themselves up and there was still no movement
there. The adolescent Prador turned his attention to the blank at the instrument console below
the set of screens
‘Are we still being watched?’ Vrell asked.
The blank reached up and touched one of the screens. Four black dots slid across a white
background, Prador glyphs flickering and changing beside each one.
‘AG signatures still present above us,’ said the blank.
Vrell turned in agitation, his sharp legs further tearing up the already splintered deck.
Speaker, her one hand gripping what remained of the port rail, turned her head towards the
adolescent. ‘Father,’ Vrell said towards her. ‘The Captains have been warned off. This is evident.
They are not within the blast radius. Perhaps we should abort.’

‘You wish to abort, Vrell?’ said Speaker.
‘It is hard, Father. I wish to complete my mission.’
‘Vrell, you will complete your mission. There are twenty ships out there now. When that
figure reaches twenty-one, as I am sure it will, then this ship will go out to join them.’
‘The blast radius will then not include the island,’ said Vrell, flicking a look towards the
Old Captain at the helm. The man was scratching at the back of his neck again. Vrell was very
unsure about this, as he couldn’t remember having seen any of his father’s blanks do that. He did
remember how the Captain had fought when the back of his neck had been opened for the
insertion of the spider thrall, and how still he had become once it had connected. He was not so
still now.
‘Correct,’ said Speaker. ‘Which is why you will go ashore.’
‘Ashore?’ Vrell flicked his attention back to Speaker.
‘Yes, detonation of the device will be initiated by this unit. You will take three other of my
units to the shore with you, and complete your mission there,’ said Speaker.
On the cabin-deck, Drum continued to scratch at the back of his neck. When the Prador
clattered itself around to face the shore, he paused, then really dug in with his fingers. Finally he
managed to get the leverage he wanted, and he had to repress a gasp of relief as the irritant
started to come out like a particularly hideous splinter. When the grey cylinder of the thrall unit
thudded to the deck, waving its legs just like a dislodged spider, Drum shifted his boot to one
side and crushed the thing under one heavy hobnailed sole - then kicked it under the side rail
into the sea. He had turned back into position and wiped his face of expression by the time Vrell
could peer up at him again.
‘When should I set out?’ the Prador adolescent asked Speaker.
‘Vrell, you will leave immediately.’
The three blanks sitting waiting by the forecabin wall abruptly rose to their feet. Vrell
studied them for a long moment before turning his back towards them and squatting. He felt a
weird twisting in his back end as they clambered on to his shell and took a firm hold on the rim.
Speaker snapped her attention up to Drum. ‘Hard to port and full speed,’ she said.
‘I hear and obey,’ said Drum, and spun the helm.
Speaker regarded him intently. Drum still kept his face free of expression as he opened
up the throttle and the ship surged towards the distant Convocation fleet. Speaker turned back to
Vrell. ‘Now, I said.’
Vrell moved to the place where he had torn the rail away while boarding, and launched
himself over the side. He hit the water with a huge splash, and one of the blanks lost his grip,
clawed at slick shell, and fell into the sea. Vrell observed the blank kicking at the water as he
tried to recover a grip. The blank went under, came to the surface again. Grabbing the man with

one claw, Vrell hauled him up and back on to the carapace. The man slid down again, but finally
managed to cling on, but with his legs trailing in the sea. In the water around his legs, there
started frantic movement, but his face registered no expression.
Vrell turned and sculled for the shore, and in doing so experienced a strange surge of
emotion. He felt glad he was no longer on the ship. Twenty metres further away, sudden red fire
flung Vrell’s shadow across the sea. He turned for a moment to see smoke gusting from the
ship’s deck, needled through with bars of laser light. He turned for the shore again and sculled
faster, an exhilarated but guilty feeling shuddering through his body. Perhaps if he didn’t look, he
would have no reason to go back.
****
Something flashed in the sky, and a projector mounted at the prow of the ship began to hum.
Further laser strikes were abruptly shielded from the smouldering deck timbers. Drum tilted his
head slightly and saw lights flickering above, and fast-moving shapes blackly silhouetted against
the sky. That machine on the prow had to be a flat-shield projector. He lowered his gaze and
observed the blank at the console tapping in instructions. The missile turret at the stern of the
ship swivelled and began to cough out missiles from a spinning carousel. White fire lit the sky,
and behind it flashed lines of red incandescence.
Speaker, who had been staring upwards, brought her attention down to Drum again for a
moment, then across to the blank seated at the console. That blank was punching out further
instructions. Speaker turned, as if jerked round, and walked over to the aft hatch. She lifted it and
started to climb down. Drum grinned and pulled back on the throttle. When it didn’t move, he
swore and put on more pressure - but the metal handle snapped off in his hand. He cast the
handle aside, then seized hold of the rest of the control and tore it from its optic cable. The ship
still did not slow.
‘Bugger,’ said Drum.
At this, the blank on the deck below him abruptly turned from the screen and picked up
the weapon propped against the console. Drum swore again, and ducked as purple fire lit the air,
and both the front rail and helm exploded into splinters. Lying on the cabin-deck, by what
remained of the rail, Drum peered over the edge to see the blank stand up and begin moving
back towards him. He had few options: diving over the side, which would lead to a slower and
more painful death than that the weapon would provide - or he’d have to try for said weapon. He
edged back, in readiness to fling himself down on the approaching blank, but then the back
corner of the forecabin exploded and the deck he was on sagged, suddenly sliding him toward
the main deck. He halted himself by bringing his feet down what remained of the helm’s column.
‘A full coring would have been a much more efficient option,’ said the blank, aiming the
weapon casually from his waist. Drum realized that it did not matter how casually the weapon
was aimed, as even an indirect hit would kill him.
‘You really think you can get away from here, Prador!’ Drum yelled. ‘The Warden’ll tear
you apart!’
‘That will not be your concern,’ said the blank.
There were three distinct cracks followed by a low snarl. A steel staple went skittering

across the smouldering deck, then something long and pink, ending in a head full of charcoaled
teeth, swung out from the mast. The blank had time only to look up at a black silhouette against
the burning sky. The sail bit down hard and shook. The blank’s body fell to the deck and the sail
raised itself up and spat the head into the sea.
‘Good job!’ Drum yelled, sliding down the sagging roof and leaping on to the main deck.
The sail blew disgustedly through its lips, as if it didn’t like the taste of what it had just
bitten off. As Drum stepped forward, it glared at him then lunged. Drum dropped down with his
forearms across his face - then gradually parted them when he realized he wasn’t about to lose
his head too. The sail had halted with its snout half a metre from his face. Exposing its charred
teeth, it snarled at him, then tried to speak.
‘Whas my names?’ it hissed, the stub of the tongue Shib had removed waving obscenely
in the back of its mouth.
‘Anything you like,’ said Drum.
‘Goods,’ said the sail. ‘You wisl caulss me Winscasher.’ The sail turned away from him
and sniffed the air. ‘Thiss ships nots neesd me.’
Drum edged past the creature and took up the weapon the blank had dropped. He
inspected the controls then glanced to the aft hatch. He looked then at the turret still spitting out
bursts of missiles, the shield projector swivelling to intercept incoming fire, then he gazed far out
to sea. At this rate, it would not take very long at all to close in on the Convocation fleet.
‘Sorry, old boy,’ he said, and pointed the weapon at the deck.
****
As soon as he reached the beach Vrell shrugged the blanks from his back and inspected the
scrapes made on his carapace by the questing mouths of leeches. None of them had been able
to get through his armour. Vrell then turned his attention to the three blanks. One of them was
lying on the sand.
‘Why is this unit not standing?’ Vrell asked, and received no reply. His father’s attention
had to be concentrated elsewhere at that moment. Vrell tried not to study too closely the surge
of gladness he felt at that. Deliberately not looking out to sea he concentrated his attention on
the fallen blank instead, and soon ascertained the reason for the human’s difficulties: the flesh
had been stripped away from the lower half of his body.
‘Follow,’ said Vrell to the other two and led them into the dingle. Had the Prador
adolescent looked behind just once, he would have seen the flashes of purple fire from the Ahab,
and seen the ship foundering. The blank he left behind still kept trying to stand up under the
instruction of his thrall unit. Instead, his fleshless legs collapsed under him every time.
****
Through the eyes of its four enforcer drones the Warden watched as they tried to get past the
shield projector on the Ahab. The images it received were hazed with smoke, flashbacks, and the
explosions of the missiles that the screen intercepted.

‘APW fire!’ shouted SM7.
‘Not at us, you idiot,’ SM12 replied. ‘Eight and Nine, I want you to go in low over the sea,
from the rear. You may get a window opened near that missile launcher. Use rail-guns to try to
put a hole in the hull.’
‘Moving in,’ replied the two SMs, and soon the Warden had a clear view of them
hammering in over the sea. Something cut a huge shadow above them for a moment.
‘That’s the sail,’ said SM8, tilting in midair. The Warden froze the image it received, and
would have smiled had it the ability. It flicked back to Eight as the SM opened up with its
rail-gun.
For one second the stern of the ship was exploding into splinters, then a flat-shield cut
between, and before this the sea turned white with repelled fire. The two SMs cut up into the
sky.
‘It’s listing!’ shouted Nine happily.
‘That wasn’t you, Nine. See if you can now get underneath the ship,’ said Twelve.
The two drones arced around in the sky, then hit the sea. The Warden received sonar and
ultrasound images of leeches fleeing the area like squid, then an image of the bottom of the ship
like an open lantern. Its timbers were splintered and broken, and fires were burning inside.
‘You may stand down for now,’ said the Warden. ‘If the ship does not go down soon, then
hit it again.’
‘What about the Prador that went ashore?’ asked Twelve.
‘Leave it,’ said the Warden. ‘I don’t think it will be going very far. Also, SM Eleven will be
with you very soon, in the com relay shell, and I want you take make sure it is unharmed.’
With that, the AI cut contact and returned its full attention to those five seconds of Prador
code. Already it had separated thrall code from carrier signal. The thrall code definitely had five
distinct threads, which meant the adult Prador somewhere under the sea was linked to two
blanks still on the ship as well as the three accompanying the adolescent Prador.
‘SM Eleven,’ the Warden sent. ‘Here is the carrier signal. Trace and connect.’
Eleven, still decelerating into atmosphere, opened out its wings and extruded instrument
pods and signal dishes. It was utterly without weaponry, its domain solely being that of
communication and information.
‘Tracing underspace signal. Connected and decoded. Tunnelling link establishing . . .
established,’ said Eleven.
‘Stand ready,’ said the Warden as it applied the full quarter of the processing power it
was using to the carrier signal code alone. The signal separated into two strands almost
immediately: send and return.

‘SM Eleven, here is your decoder program.’ It took a full second for the Warden to
transmit the program. ‘Now, I want you to boost the return signal one hundred per cent. If it looks
to be fading into shut-off, I want you to increase power and maintain at that level.’
‘Initiating,’ said SM11.
****
Ebulan crashed against the wall of his chamber, then over-corrected with AG and slammed
against the ceiling. He sent the shut-off code; the return signal started to fade, but then quickly
reinstated. The signal wouldn’t stop coming in, and was far too powerful: one blank decapitated
yet still broadcasting, one burnt and drowning, and another with the flesh stripped from half his
body. Ebulan had never known such pain. He tried to tear the control interface boxes from his
body, and the stumps where once he’d had legs shifted and quivered. He could do nothing for
himself. In panic, he sent a signal that summoned his ten remaining blanks. He had to get these
boxes off himself now.
The human blanks entered the chamber, moving unsteadily under the impetus of Ebulan’s
erratic control. Under his instruction, two of the blanks came forward bearing shell cutters. He
had one of them set to work on the box that controlled the blank abandoned on the beach, which
was still trying vainly to stand. The shell cutter penetrated too deep and Ebulan jerked forward,
pushing the blank holding it up against the wall and pinching him in half with the scalloped rim
of his shell.
No pain. The return signal, from the blank he had just cut in half, immediately shut off.
Ebulan backed away from the two quivering halves of what had once, centuries ago, been a
human being. It had to be something affecting the return signal from outside, not a fault in the
control boxes. . . . No, no that was impossible: the codes were quite simply unbreakable. Ebulan
dispelled that aberrant thought and concentrated on controlling a second blank. This one
carefully sliced down between control boxes and Ebulan’s shell, severing the filament links into
the Prador’s nervous system. When, at one point, the blank cut deep, Ebulan bore this
comparatively small pain without reaction and began, in his opinion, to think more clearly.
Ebulan stopped the blank when it came to the fifth box, and ground his mandibles as he
bore the continuing pain from that box. All things in their time and place. He concentrated all his
attention through that same box: seared skin in salt water . . . the continuous sensation of
drowning as the body filled with virus fibres adapted to extracting oxygen from water . . . the hits
of leeches coming in through the burn holes in the hull and the hatch . . . Ebulan elicited some
movement from Speaker by having her open her one remaining eye. Too dark. He had her turn
herself in the water-filled hold, sculling with her one remaining arm. It took a nightmare time for
the display lights from the motor to come into view. He had her pull herself towards it, to grab
the cowling and, bracing herself against the side of the ship, tear the cowling away to expose
the blinking detonator. Leaving a delayed instruction in her thrall unit, he withdrew from her,
then had the blank holding the shell cutter remove her control box too. Now to deal with the
source of his pain.
Traitors. There were traitors on board his spaceship. Not the blanks, of course, as they
could no more betray him than could one of the ship’s engines. He turned in midair to observe
the nine remaining blanks, then instructed them to return to their stations. One after another,
they filed from the chamber and the doors slid shut behind them. Through their eyes, he saw that

everything outside appeared to be as it should. Ebulan bubbled and hissed.
At any other time Vrell would have had to be his prime suspect. But Vrell was not here
now, and it would have been foolish for the adolescent to initiate an attack of which he could not
take advantage. And Vrell was not that stupid. In fact, Ebulan had only recently put off killing the
adolescent, for despite his imminent translation into adulthood Vrell had always proved very
efficient and useful. Perhaps, though, the attack had indeed been planned by Vrell - and was
carried out prematurely by the adolescent’s accomplices.
‘Second-children, come to me,’ said Ebulan to the air. Lights flickered in the stone-effect
surface of the wall to tell him his summons had been acknowledged. After noting this, he moved
over to one side of the chamber to study a cluster of hexagonal wall screens, all of them showing
only white haze. He disconnected one of his control boxes to link through. As he did so, two of
the screens lit up displaying scenes across atolls and open sea.
‘War drones,’ he ordered, ‘head for the island. Attack all my enemies. Do not cease till
you destroy them all.’
‘We will kill the old drone,’ one of them promised.
‘As you will, but you will not return.’
A message began coming back, but Ebulan disconnected. The screens began to
white-out, but he kept his attention fixed on them as the chamber’s sliding doors reopened and
numerous hard sharp legs clattered on the flooring. As the doors shut, he slowly turned.
‘Second-children,’ he greeted the four adolescent Prador arrayed on the opposite side of
the room - then he turned slightly towards the doors. There came two loud clumps as their
locking systems engaged.
‘Father, what do you want of us?’ asked one of the second-children, slightly larger than
the rest.
Ebulan’s AG hummed as he tilted and slid forwards rapidly. The four of them scattered,
but he pinioned two of them against the wall. They both let out a siren wail as he rammed his
huge carapace into them. One after the other, their shells collapsed with a dull liquid thud, their
wailing died off in hissing gurgles. Ebulan now levelled and backed off, with pieces of broken
shell and ichor clinging to his scalloped rim. He slowly turned to the other two, who were
scrabbling desperately at the door.
‘There is no escape for traitors,’ he said.
‘We did nothing! It wasn’t us!’ the two screamed together.
Ebulan slid towards them. He’d catch one of them in his mandibles this time. It had been
a while since he had tasted juvenile flesh.
****
The blank with fleshless legs tried standing yet again, and fell over yet again. A shadow passed
over him, but he was oblivious to it as he tried to rise for perhaps the fiftieth time. As the

shadow passed over him a second time, he was jerked into the air with a snapping crunch. This
time he collapsed to the sand minus his head, and did not try to get up again.
After it had crunched a couple of times more and spat out a mess of bone, flesh, and
thrall unit, the sail dropped the Captain on the beach
‘Thanks!’ Drum yelled as the sail’s wings took it booming off over the island. Turning his
attention to the hideously mutilated corpse on the sand, he aimed the weapon he had brought,
and fired at it once. Violet fire flashed with a sucking boom, and Drum staggered back. When his
vision cleared, he found that all that remained of the blank were scattered fragments of burning
flesh, and a quickly dispersing cloud of oily smoke. Thoughtfully he adjusted a slide control on
the side of his weapon then turned to look out to sea.
The Ahab was completely gone. The ship he had sailed on for a hundred and fifty years,
and owned for a hundred of those, was now a wreck at the bottom of the sea, and soon, he knew
from all he’d overheard, it would be less even than that.
‘Payback time,’ he muttered, and, as if in reply to this threat, a giant flashbulb went off
under the sea and the beach shifted.
‘Shit,’ said Drum, as before him the water began to bulge. Then the bulb went off again,
and for a few seconds the sea turned red as far as the horizon. He turned and ran into the dingle.
Their trail ahead was easy to follow, as inevitably the Prador had flattened foliage as it
progressed. Drum leapt a broken tree and kept moving as fast as he could. From behind him now
came a deep rumbling, and he felt further tremors. Leeches fell from the trees and he snatched
them off as he ran on. Ahead of him, the dingle began to thin and he was relieved to see the
ground sloping upwards. The tremors now settled to a deep and continuous vibration. Drum
emerged from under the trees just as an explosive wind struck. It hurled him on his face in
spherule grass, while it blasted leaves and branches and even leeches past him. The force of the
wind even slid him further along the ground.
As it began to ease off, he stood again and ran up the slope, slipping and sliding on the
broken grass. As he reached the brow of the hill, the wave hit.
The flood climbed the beach and flattened the dingle. To one side Drum saw a ship flung
inland that he instantly recognized as the Treader. He wasn’t high enough for safety, yet there
was nowhere to run now but down the other side. A two-metre-deep torrent of seawater caught
him halfway down the far slope and tumbled him the rest of the way. For a moment, he was
tempted to release hold of his weapon and swim for it. Instead, he curled himself in a ball
around it, and let the flood take him.
****
‘What the hell was that?’ said Janer. ‘This a volcanic island?’
Peck managed just a bubbling sound, his broken bones moving about under his skin. The
Captains, Ambel and Ron, both watched as the lights faded from the sky, then Ambel made
another attempt at relocating Ron’s dislocated shoulder. It finally slid into place with a muted
thud.

‘I don’t know,’ replied Ron, wincing and rubbing at his injured joint. ‘But we got problems
enough of our own.’ He went over to his machete and gingerly picked it up. Inspecting its
sprine-coated edge, he nodded with satisfaction.
‘What about you?’ Ambel asked Peck loudly, as if talking to someone hard of hearing.
In his bed of foliage Peck tried to nod in response, then stopped immediately when the
bones in his neck crunched. He sat upright and reached to straighten his jawbone while Janer
tried not to turn the other way. There was something really macabre about watching someone
with so many broken bones still move about. After he’d finished prodding his numerous fractures,
Peck used his shotgun as a crutch to pull himself to his feet. Both his arms and one leg had not
been broken: that was the best that could be said for his injuries.
‘Good lad,’ said Ambel, patting him carefully on the shoulder.
Peck tried nodding again, and pointed back the way they had come.
‘We’ll be back when we’ve seen the bugger dead,’ promised Ambel. ‘I’ll bring you a
souvenir.’
‘We’re going after it?’ asked Janer.
‘Too right,’ said Ron.
‘But it’s been poisoned with sprine,’ said Janer.
‘Didn’t seem in a hurry to die though, did it?’ said Ambel.
Ambel and Ron headed for the entrance to the garden. Janer looked at Peck, who waved
at him to follow them. At the entrance, he glanced back and saw Peck begin his limping progress
back out of the Hoophold. Beyond the garden, Ambel took the lead, and Janer wondered what to
make of that. Did the Old Captain remember something of his own time here?
Shortly, the three came round to the other side of the wall over which the Skinner had
scrambled. From there, its further course was only too obvious. It had ripped right through
another wall into a courtyard, on the other side of which was a high tunnel leading straight into
the thick dingle. By Janer’s estimation, they were now on the opposite side of the Hoophold to
where they had entered. He followed Ambel and Ron through the tunnel to where the Skinner had
opened a path of destruction through the dingle itself.
‘Should be easy enough to follow him now,’ said Ambel.
Ron gave him a look, but reserved comment as they moved on in.
****
Vrell watched the flood subsiding in the dingle, then shifted his attention in the opposite
direction. The island was large but that did not matter. Vrell had all the time he needed to track
down the four of them: Frisk, Balem, Ron and Hoop. No one would be coming to rescue them,
now that the Old Captains were all dead. Vrell began to contemplate his dismal future. If he did
not get killed during this hunt, then he must kill himself so as not to become a danger to his

father. This seemed his only option, though at that moment Vrell was beginning to wonder why
his father could not come and rescue him. Having been separate from the normal domination of
his father’s pheromones for some days, Vrell was even beginning to have thoughts he had never
entertained before, and to brood somewhat more about the fairness of things. He also could not
help thinking about his harem mothers, and that too elicited some strange feelings. On top of
everything else, his back pair of legs felt loose. Perhaps it was these upsets to his equilibrium
that made Vrell less observant.
The blank did not scream. The only sounds made were a huffing expulsion of air and then
an oily cracking as he staggered, burning, back towards the dingle. Vrell crashed away through
foliage to seek cover, and looking back realized that the other blank had not moved. It was clear
that his father had not yet resumed contact, so he himself must give verbal instructions to the
idiot thrall unit.
‘Take cover and return fire,’ Vrell grated.
As the blank turned at last to leap into the dingle, the beam of antiphotons struck him in
the back. The two burning halves of him were all that reached cover.
‘We’re gonna have a barbecue, Prador!’ yelled Drum.
Immediately to Vrell’s left, a peartrunk tree exploded into burning slivers. Using his
manipulatory hands Vrell drew four different weapons simultaneously. As he backed deeper into
the dingle he felt the weirdly pleasurable sensation of one of his back legs breaking off. He
aimed one of the weapons, depressed a trigger, and swept the weapon back and forth.
Explosions tore apart the dingle below, and the sound of needle shrapnel hitting trees became a
drawn-out high-pitched shriek. Trees and branches fell all around. Vrell next opened up with a
heavy QC laser that sent flashes of red shooting through the ruined trees and set fires burning
everywhere.
‘Missed!’ shouted Drum. ‘But I won’t.’
The antiphoton burst struck Vrell’s side and tipped him over. One of his main claws burst
open, spraying steaming flesh all about. He lost two hands and the weapons they held - one of
them the shrapnel rail-gun. Vrell uttered a shrieking gobbling sound and backed away at high
speed from the searing heat. The antiphoton blast had burnt out two of his eyes and cracked his
carapace. At that moment his remaining back leg dropped off and he abruptly made the
transition from adolescent to adult. With this sudden transformation came a new set of
imperatives: the first of them survival.
On his four remaining, though unsteady legs, Vrell turned and ran.
****
Because of the ground’s vibration, Keech had steadied himself against a tree, but wished he
hadn’t when a leech the size of his arm dropped on his head and coiled round his neck. He
reached up and caught hold of its front end just as its questing mouth tried to take his ear off.
Wrenching it away in disgust he hurled the leech to the ground then, knocking down the setting
on his APW, he fired at the foul creature. The leech disappeared as the ground erupted in a
purple blaze that threw up a wall of debris and hurled all three men backwards. The sound of the
explosion echoed through the dingle.

‘It’s stopped,’ observed Keech, flinging a smouldering branch from across his chest, and
standing up.
‘What?’ said Boris, sitting up and gazing about with a slightly stunned expression. After a
moment, he located the SM and rested his hand on it.
‘The shaking, the ground’s stopped shaking,’ explained Keech.
‘Yeah,’ said Roach. ‘And didn’t you say something earlier about that damn gun’s settings
being screwed?’
Keech flashed him a look of annoyance then turned to Boris. ‘You OK?’
Boris pulled a sliver of wood from his shoulder, then nodded. He stooped and picked up
SM13 and carefully brushed ash out of the ribbed pattern of the machine’s casing. At that
moment light flashed in the sky, then the sky darkened. Clouds like bruises swirled overhead,
then were dragged into lines.
‘Some kind of explosion - probably Prador weapons,’ Keech observed as he moved on.
He’d gone perhaps ten paces when the same piglike shriek they had heard earlier came
from ahead of him, accompanied by the sound of something crashing through the dingle.
‘It’s all happenin’ now,’ muttered Roach, as he and Boris came up behind Keech.
Tracking the noisy progress of whatever it was out there, Keech then moved on again.
Shortly they came to the path recently broken through the dingle. Here peartrunk trees
had been pushed aside and discarded branches crushed flat. Keech glanced both ways along it,
then turned to the others.
‘What is that?’ he asked flatly.
Roach just could not prevent himself looking sneaky, while Boris stared at the ground like
a guilty schoolboy.
Keech went on, ‘It’s the Skinner, isn’t it?’
Boris mumbled something.
‘What?’ Keech snapped.
‘The Skinner,’ Boris explained. ‘Reckon it found its body, then someone else found it.’
‘Hoop? . . . They’re killing Hoop?’
‘I reckon.’
Keech glared at the both of them, then turned into the path heading in the direction from
which those squeals had come. Boris plodded after him without comment. Roach looked

rebellious for a moment, then sighed and followed as well. They walked with more caution now,
because of leeches in the crushed foliage, but even more because of what they were following.
Ahead of them, they heard that squealing yet again, and all three of them halted. Keech stared at
the settings on his weapon for a moment. He was just about to continue along the path, when
Roach caught his shoulder.
‘Someone comin’,’ the crewman warned.
Keech gestured off to one side, and the three of them quickly moved into the shade of a
tilted pear-trunk tree. Three other people soon appeared on the track behind them.
‘That you I see sneaking about in there, Roach?’ said Captain Ron.
‘It weren’t my fault,’ said Roach.
Keech stood up and stepped into the open. Janer momentarily followed him with the
raised snout of his laser, then guiltily lowered it.
‘Seen any Skinners hereabouts?’ asked Ron.
Keech looked at him sharply.
‘Can’t miss him,’ continued Ron. ‘Big blue fella even uglier than Roach, and thoroughly
pissed off. He went this way.’
Keech glanced farther up the track they had been following. He gave a grim smile. ‘Let’s
go,’ he said.
****
Sniper scanned the atolls lying far to the right of him, and tried once again to get a signal
through.
‘Hey, Warden! What the hell are you doing?’
This time - the first time in many minutes - the Warden replied. ‘What I am doing, Sniper,
is decoding a Prador thrall-controller-code, and I would be thankful if there were no more
interruptions.’
‘What about us?’ Sniper asked.
‘Head for the island, and take over there from Twelve. This is not yet finished,’ the
Warden replied, then disconnected.
‘You hear that? We’ve got to go and take over from Twelve,’ spat Sniper, who always
started to get a little tetchy when he didn’t have anything convenient to blow up.
‘Wonderful,’ said Two, who was developing a definite sarcastic mien.
‘Right on,’ said One, who was still a bit wobbly since receiving the Prador rail-gun hits.

Six never even got a chance to reply, as an explosion knocked it tumbling off course, then
a second missile blew it into red-hot scrap.
‘Scatter!’
One enforcer drone shot into the sky and two planed out to the left. Sniper went right,
heading for the atolls. On his cleaned-up radar return, he got nothing for a moment, then the two
Prador war drones shot up out of the sea and, ignoring the two enforcers, both came after him.
‘Great,’ Sniper muttered, then sent to them, ‘Why don’t you go play hopscotch on a black
hole?’
The Prador replied with two missiles each.
‘Touchy,’ Sniper sent - abruptly changing direction and leaving a cloud of chaff behind
him. The missiles went through the chaff, swung round, and zeroed in on him again. Sniper shot
up higher and released a cluster of little parachute mines. These mines perfectly intersected the
course of the missiles as they changed direction. Two of the missiles blew and one went
tumbling off course, corrected, then shot back towards the explosion of the others. It, too,
detonated shortly after.
‘Mmm, heat-seeking.’
Sniper arced over and accelerated towards the atolls, with the remaining missile closing
in. He went low to the surface and headed straight in for one of the atolls. The missile
meanwhile drew closer and closer. At the last moment, Sniper shut off his fusion engine and
dropped straight down into the sea. The missile went over him and, with its sensors confused by
the sudden disappearance of the heat source it was pursuing, did not correct in time and
slammed straight into the atoll.
Submerged in the shallow water, close to the atoll’s narrow beach, Sniper raised his
antennae and scanned. The two Prador drones were still heading right for where he had gone in.
‘Right, how you gonna get out of this one, big shot?’ Sniper muttered to himself. Still in
the water he hurriedly altered programs and fed them into his smart missiles. That Prador missile
that had tumbled away had given him a bit of an idea. As the Prador drones drew closer, he shot
up into the air, paused for half a second, then fired off four missiles. One missile hit a screen
and exploded, one exploded under rail-gun fire, the remaining two simply tumbled away - and
the Prador came hammering on in. Sniper accelerated for the atoll, then was knocked sideways
as rail-gun fire was trained on him. He felt his plates buckling and a couple of his legs fell away.
Turning in midair, he opened up with his APW - a short burst only as there was little power left in
the laminar batteries. One of the Prador swerved out of the way, but the other continued in for
the kill.
Sniper accelerated straight towards it. ‘Well, I’ll take you with me, fucker!’ he sent.
The Prador extended its screen in front, but a second after, Sniper’s two missiles - which
had now corrected from their tumble - hit it from behind. It still came on, its armour distorted, its
screen out, and its engine powering intermittently. Sniper hit it with his APW, then swooped over
the top of it as it hurtled towards the sea, a burnt-out shell.

‘You gotta watch that upswing!’ Sniper sent, but had no time to feel satisfaction when
another two missiles swung abruptly up from the sea towards him. Again he changed course,
curving down towards the atolls. The second Prador came hurtling towards him just above the
waves. Sniper aimed himself at one of the atolls, firing off another three missiles. The atoll
erupted in a fountain of broken coral, just prior to him flying straight into it. He shot out of the
other side of this, trailing dust clouds and leaving two explosions behind him, then turned back
towards the approaching Prador. As he fired his APW, violet fire hazed the air between them,
terminating on a disk like a white-hot coin - the Prador’s projected shield. The disk went out, and
the fire extinguished shortly after. Both drones fired missiles and opened up with their rail-guns.
Two of Sniper’s missiles blew in between, but a third took a curve and came at the Prador from
the side. After the explosion, Sniper had the satisfaction of seeing the drone lurch through the
air, with a split opened in its armour - then the missile he had overlooked came up underneath
him and exploded.
‘Oh bollocks,’ groaned the war drone, as he tumbled through the air. His APW was out,
and though he still had missiles to launch, they could not get past the molten metal blocking his
launch tubes - the same mess that had also scrapped his rail-gun. It was all academic really, as
he had little chance of staying airborne for any length of time, with his AG gone as well.
Intermittently he spotted the Prador war drone ahead of him. At least it seemed to be having as
much trouble as he was. One last chance? Sniper fired his fusion engine at a precisely timed
instant, opened out what remained of his legs, and slammed himself into the other drone.
Immediately the Prador accelerated and rolled, trying to shake him off.
‘Y’know,’ said Sniper, ‘when the going gets tough . . .’ And with that he plunged his heavy
claw through the split in the Prador’s armour. Its only reply to him was a thin screaming over the
ether as it fell towards one of the atolls below.
****
‘Sniper . . . Sniper?’ the Warden sent - and didn’t even get back a return signature. ‘SMs One and
Two, what happened?’
There was an equivocal humming over the ether before a response came through.
‘Sniper had a run-in with two Prador war drones. We can’t find him,’ explained Two.
‘Yeah, he sure stuffed ‘em,’ added One.
‘But it seems they stuffed him also,’ Two then pointed out and, so saying, transmitted a
replay of what it had captured and recorded of Sniper’s last moments.
Stubborn to the end, thought the Warden. In such a crisis Sniper could have linked
through and transmitted himself, all of himself. But Sniper had preferred to remain individual,
had not wanted to be subsumed. And so, the Warden thought, he is gone in heroic battle. What a
waste, and what a disappointment - the Warden had been quite attracted to the idea of changing
Sniper.
‘One and Two, join your brother drones off the Skinner’s Island,’ instructed the Warden,
and then linked through to Twelve. ‘Twelve, I want you down in that trench, searching for this
Prador vessel. We still don’t know quite what we are up against.’

‘On my way,’ sent Twelve.
****
There were no probes in the area, so Ebulan dispatched the nearest one of them available. This
same probe - built in the shape of a small Prador, with thrusters shell-welded underneath - burst
from the sargassum where it had been squatting and rocketed up into the sky, then went
hypersonic for twenty seconds before shutting down its thrusters and coasting to the edge of the
tsunami. To Ebulan it returned an image of the fleet of ships riding the swells behind the initial
huge wave, their sails belled to bursting. Maybe one or two of them had been sunk, but no more
- the CTD concealed inside the Ahab had not been close enough to cause any real damage. The
probe then transmitted back the information that objects were now approaching it at hypersonic
speeds. This transmission was abruptly curtailed as the probe became an incandescent cloud of
metal vapour.
Ebulan crashed around his chamber, in increasing anger, and it was some time before he
could think clearly again. Vrell would soon be in the process of making the change, so would be
useless to him now. The pheromones that kept a fully limbed Prador in a state of adolescence
until the father of the family died were not present where the adolescent now was, and because
the ‘change’ had been suppressed in it for so long, Vrell would make the transformation to
adulthood very quickly.
The blanks out there might still be of some use if he dared reconnect their control boxes,
but he did not. He did not want again to risk feeling the pain from their bodies. They never felt it
as, though having nervous systems, they had no brains to understand the signals from them - he
was the one with the brain. Their thrall units were the nearest things they possessed to
intelligence, and those devices merely translated verbal orders to action, or acted as the
interface between the blank’s nervous system and its controlling Prador mind.
No blanks, no Vrell, and no second-children either. Perhaps the war drones, then? Ebulan
spun round and slid up to his array of screens. He used the control box of the blank he had cut in
half earlier to try to link through. The whited-out screens threw up nothing but static. The drones
had to be all dead?
It was painful to Ebulan to admit to himself that he no longer had any control over this
situation, and therefore it might be time to pull out. The thought of doing so left an unpleasant
taste in his mouth - like too-fresh human meat - and was just as upsetting to his digestion. What
other options were there? He considered the armament carried by his ship. A brief flight and a
sweep or two by the particle beams, perhaps a CTD for the island itself, and all who had any
direct knowledge of his involvement in the coring trade would become so much airborne ash. All
the forms of information storage that the humans so valued were as nothing to the Prador. Only
living witnesses counted to them. Ebulan then pondered the consequences of such actions.
The Warden would certainly attack . . . but was that such a problem? The Warden, though
it controlled formidable devices, could not move away from the moon. Its SMs, though they could
destroy Ebulan’s war drones - something Ebulan still could not quite get to grips with, as he’d
assumed there were only enforcer drones here - stood no chance of getting through this war
craft’s armour, nor of surviving assault by its weapons. How formidable exactly were the
weapons the Warden controlled? And would they prove so effective with a planet in between?
Also, though there would still be living witnesses to his proposed actions, all they would truly
witness would be an anonymous attack by a Prador destroyer. No one had yet seen Ebulan

himself, as they had in the old days when he came here each Spatterjay year to collect his cargo
of cored humans.
The more Ebulan thought about it, the more attractive the case for attacking seemed. It
started hormones and juices surging in him that had not flowed for the last thousand years - as
they had once done in that time when he still possessed all his legs and a scattering of arms.
That Prador medical science had long established such feelings as the first signs of senility, he
did not even stop to consider.
****

18
Managing to turn itself far enough round to get hold of the leech with its
mandibles, the heirodont brought mounds of slimy flesh up to its mouth and bit
down. This, though, was still not enough to prevent the leech feeding. The prill
now fleeing from the body of the heirodont, signified that the leech was about to
detach, which it did, leaving in its victim’s side a huge round hole that might have
been neat but for the broken bone and ballooning out of ripped organs. Too weak
now to maintain its own hold on the leech, the heirodont released it, and dropped
into the depths, trailing a new cloud of ichor and chyme. Down it went, its body
compressing, and the outflow of vital fluids slowly decreasing, but not sufficiently
to prevent a drop in pressure in its brain. Recovering consciousness only when it hit
the bottom, it found itself surrounded by a mob of the giant whelks upon which it
normally fed, they having come to investigate the emptied shell of one of their
comrades. Its low-frequency screams then echoed through the depths as this mob
squared away what they felt were certain . . . inequities.

Erlin was wondering how much longer she, and Anne, had to live. Shortly Frisk and her pet
Batians would start to consider them a hindrance rather than useful hostages. As soon as that
time came there would be no hesitation to kill them. The Batians would do it with workmanlike
precision. It was what they were employed for, after all. Frisk, however, would do it with great
enjoyment, and probably as slowly and painfully as possible. Erlin had enough judgement of
people to recognize a raving psychopath.
‘Halt here,’ ordered Svan.
As she and Anne stopped in the centre of the courtyard, Erlin could see the crew-woman
working her wrists against the cable-cuffs securing her hands behind her back. She thought to
warn her of the futility of trying to break woven ceraplast, but changed her mind - she did not
know, after all, how old Anne was - and instead looked away to survey her surroundings.
It was impossible for Erlin not to think about what had once happened here: the horror of
it all. A thousand years ago, Jay Hoop and his crew of pirates had landed on this island to
establish a permanent cache of arms and loot. At one time or another, all of them had been
bitten by the leeches and to their surprise subsequently discovered that they did not grow old
and die, but while growing older, were becoming stronger and more resistant to injury. With the

confidence this imparted, for centuries they had terrorized the quadrant, using this planet named Spatterjay, after Jay Hoop’s nickname - as their base. Then had come the Prador, and the
war, and . . .
A distant horrid shrieking distracted Erlin from her rumination. She looked around and saw
Frisk move over to one side of the courtyard, and then pace along it.
‘We’ll go this way,’ she gestured to a door in the wall. ‘I’ll lead.’ She pointed at Erlin and
Anne, ‘You two follow me.’
The two captives crossed the courtyard and began to trail Frisk through the warren of
dank corridors, past rooms scattered with such objects as could survive seven centuries of rot
and decay. On the floors lay items of ceramal and glass, silicon and artificial gemstone.
Remaining from personal units, comps, and the many other devices carried by the citizens of the
Polity seven hundred years ago, were the practically indestructible chips - the metals and plastic
long having corroded and decayed to dust. There were also ornaments and storage crystals,
visors from soldier’s helmets, diverse items of ceramal armour. Erlin was thoroughly aware that
these objects were things once carried by Hoop’s captives - things that during the war became of
least value to Hoop and his crew. They had wanted the persons who wore them.
Frisk led them further through the Hold till they reached a high tunnel on the other side.
Beyond the tunnel mouth, the dingle was crushed and flattened.
‘Svan, go and check for tracks,’ called Frisk.
Svan trotted past them, sped through the tunnel, and began to examine the soft ground
beyond. Frisk looked back at her two prisoners and grinned.
What figure had Keech once quoted? Ten million. Ten million humans cored here during
the Prador-Human war. And this woman had been one of the murderers. Erlin now knew what
Keech had meant when he had predicted Frisk would no longer have the face by which he had
known her. The thought of it sickened her.
‘They did come through here, but there’s some sort of animal footprint as well,’ called out
Svan.
With a smirk Frisk followed her into the tunnel. Anne and Erlin remained where they were,
until Shib barked at them to get moving too. Through the tunnel and out into the dingle, Svan
walked ahead and Frisk shifted to one side. Erlin reflected about how she herself had come here
to learn from Ambel how to live - but now it seemed she had in fact come here to die. She turned
suddenly when she heard a horrible high-pitched scream behind her.
The mercenary, Shib, had made the mistake of brushing against a tree. He was now
wearing a leech like a feather boa, and seemed unable to overcome his disgust enough to grab it
and throw it away. The creature flowed round his neck, and drove its mouth in against his cheek.
Even now the mercenary could not react.
Svan ran past Erlin and grabbed at the leech. With a yank, she tore it from his face and
flung it to the ground. Shib still stood there, keening, a circle of flesh missing from his cheek, his
teeth now exposed underneath. Svan backhanded him across the other side of his face, once,
twice, knocking him to the ground. The keening suddenly stopped.

‘Get up.’
Shib slowly rose to his feet: shame, fear and madness fighting for predominance in his
expression.
‘Keep moving you two,’ said Svan, heading back to lead the way. Erlin thought her insane
to leave this humiliated man at her back. When Shib drew his hand laser she assumed he was
going to burn a hole through Svan’s back. Instead, he incinerated the leech, and reholstered the
laser.
‘Get a move on,’ he snarled at her.
****
SM12’s cockle-shell body was of an extremely rugged construction: its outer shells formed of
centimetre-thick foamed steel, and its internal components braced in a ceramal-composite
lattice, but even so it knew that the pressure a kilometre down would collapse it as easily as a
snail in a vice, if it did not prepare. Floating on the surface, Twelve folded away its single laser,
then using an internal system pumped crash foam at high pressure into all its internal cavities.
Next with its shells slightly open, it turned off its AG and sank like the lump of metal it was.
Five hundred metres down Twelve observed with interest one of the herbivorous
deep-water heirodonts cruising past, the leeches on its body turned to strands by the pressure.
The creature resembled a truncated whale, its face, however, just a wall of feeding sieves; its
body short and roped with muscle, studded with round fins, and terminating in a wide vertically
presented tail. It suddenly dived when it was past the SM and, as it went rapidly down, the
leeches clinging to its skin began to break away. A little relief it would find in the depths, before
having to return upwards to feed and be fed upon.
Twelve followed it down, the drone’s crash foam collapsing into a thick hard layer around
its internal components. The substance offered some protection, but the SM knew that some
parts of itself would inevitably get damaged. Essential components, however, would be fine,
being constructed on the whole of hard silicon composites and foamed ceramal.
Seven hundred metres down, and the SM’s self-diagnostic program told it that a reflective
cylinder in its laser had cracked. Twelve had expected this to happen, as there was no way of
injecting crash foam, or even admitting seawater, into the cavity within the cylinder - and to do
so would have screwed the optical perfection of the system anyway. The rate of its descent was
also slowing in proportion as the density of the water increased. The drone dared not reverse its
AG to pull itself down faster, as that would be too easily detected. Shortly it passed the
heirodont, which was now thinner than it had been above, the water having compressed it too.
The creature’s eyes glimmered from their pits as it turned and sculled hesitantly towards Twelve,
but the drone was well past it before it could decide if this strange-looking object was animal or
vegetable.
Now it was getting colder, and dark enough to necessitate Twelve switching from visual
to low-intensity sonar, changing the emitted signal at random so that nothing constant could be
detected. The Prador vessel lurking down here somewhere would be sure to have some kind of
detection equipment out. A thousand metres down, and the lip of the trench finally came into
sight. But Twelve did not bother to alter its course as it hit solid rock and, in a spray of silt,

bounced over the edge. Using water jets, it corrected its tumble and studied the cliff face it was
falling past. Down here, in weedy crevices, were whelks as big as houses riding on spreads of
flat white tentacles; odd, diamond-shaped jellyfish adhered to clear surfaces, giving some
expanses of rock the appearance of one great scaled beast; and long blue glisters hunting
bulbous boxies that might easily be mistaken for soap bubbles. All very interesting, but all
recorded and on file up on Coram. Twelve focused its attention downward, as the bottom of the
trench floated up to meet it. It bounced in a cloud of silt and razor-thin shell fragments, then with
great care extended the range of its sonic scans.
Nothing - nothing within range at least - but there was still plenty of the trench to search
for it was many kilometres long. Twelve chose one direction at random, and with a blast of water
propelled itself that way. Even before it properly got going, it noticed that one very regularly
shaped boulder to its right was returning an odd signal. It risked a change in frequency and got
an immediate result: the boulder was hollow. It had found the Prador ship already! But, no, that
couldn’t be right; this object was much too small to contain an adult Prador. With care, Twelve
moved in closer and closer to it then settled to rest on the bottom. A feeling almost like
frustration came over it when it realized that nearly half of its scanning signals were now coming
back to it with the same odd reverberation as had come from the unknown object. With chagrin,
it admitted to itself that the pressure must have damaged its sonar. Unless . . .
In its cortex, SM12 mapped the shape of the boulder and compared it to images of Prador
ships it had kept stored in a history file. This object was a flattened ovoid with one end
seemingly sheared off. It therefore did not match the shape of any of the ships in Twelve’s file.
However, it did match part of one. Twelve shot up from the bottom as it realized what it had
found was a weapons turret, and that what it had just been resting on was not the bottom of the
trench. Jetting higher, it scanned right across what it had landed upon.
‘Fuck,’ said SM12, who - unlike Thirteen and Sniper - was not normally given to profanity.
****
The flood had turned the ground into a soft morass, and made it easy to dig himself in. Vrell
remained utterly motionless as the mad human yelled and stomped about.
‘Come out, come out wherever you are!’ Drum yelled.
Antiphoton fire suddenly incinerated a tree only a few metres to Vrell’s right, dropping
burning cinders on the ground all around the eye he had folded upwards from his visual turret.
He slowly turned that eye and observed the human drawing closer, as he inspected the muddy
ground.
‘Fucking Prador,’ growled Drum.
Vrell assumed this anger must be directed at him personally because he had been the
one who had installed the thrall unit in this particular human. Didn’t this Drum understand that
Vrell was only obeying orders? Vrell watched the human’s antics some more, while slowly
sinking his eye deeper into the concealing mud. Soon the human would be right on top of him.
What would he do then? A few hours ago, he would have leapt out of this muddy hide and
blasted away with his weapons, but now . . . what if he missed? The human could kill him. Vrell
felt terrified. Deep inside himself, he felt a certainty that violence was meant for others. His own
task now involved frequent use of the complicated organ exposed by the shedding of his two

back legs - the organ he now squatted protectively over.
The human came forward, till he stood right at the edge of the morass. He first tested it
with his foot then put weight on that foot. Vrell remained utterly motionless as the foot trod
down on his carapace. He observed Drum scratching his head, then slowly revolved his muddy
eye as Drum walked right across the Prador’s back and off on to the boggy ground beyond. Once
the Captain was out of sight Vrell shifted slightly, and again considered making his escape. On
the other hand, Drum had not detected him here. Vrell decided to stay buried for a while longer.
****
Captain Sprage stood on the main deck of the Vengeance s his thumbs tucked into his thick
leather belt and his pipe tucked into the corner of his mouth. He seemed oblivious to the bucking
of his ship as it rode the swell, but stood there firmly, almost as if his feet were nailed to the
deck. He observed that the waves were decreasing now, and the main danger was past.
Surprisingly, there had not been that much danger. Yes, that first immense wave had sunk the
Bogus and the Rull, but captains Jester and Orlando had survived their dunking in the sea, along
with all of their two crews. The irony was that the undersea explosion causing the wave had also
affected just about every sea creature in the area. Sprage pulled his pipe from his mouth and
studied the leeches and glisters floating on the surface. He had counted fifteen different
varieties of whelk, and noted that the underwater shock had broken open prill and that many
were floating dead on the surface. He even noted some forms of life he’d never seen before:
deep-bottom dwellers that had swollen into grotesque giant shapes on ascending to the surface.
None of these creatures showed signs of recovering.
‘How come none of ‘em are reviving?’ he asked generally.
Windcheater lifted his head from the deck and peered over the side. Sprage took a furtive
glance at the creature’s metal aug and wondered if that was the reason for the sail’s need to
interfere with the status quo. On the other hand it had probably been bolshy long before, else
why would it have acquired an aug in the first place? After a long hard look overboard,
Windcheater swung his head round and up to the deck.
‘The hyper-shock has caused major cellular disruption. The EM burst killed between
eighty to ninety-five per cent of the viral fibres. The combination of these two has taken each
life-system beyond chance of recovery,’ said the sail with extremely uncharacteristic precision.
‘What about us, then?’ asked Sprage, scratching at his sideburns.
From where she was leaning on the rail, Tay turned and glanced towards the sail as
Windcheater’s eyes crossed. Tay said, ‘You ran that last one through a weapons-site learning
program. I suggest you try the Warden for your next answer.’
Windcheater uncrossed his eyes, tilted his head for a moment, and then parroted, ‘The
hyper-shock only affected creatures in the water, and the EM burst was considerably damped by
the dense wood of your ship’s hulls. The Warden estimates that any of the EM burst that did get
through will have killed less than ten per cent of the viral fibres in your bodies.’
‘Beneficial, then,’ said Sprage, putting his pipe back in his mouth with a solid click.
‘Signal from the Pumice!’ yelled Lember from the nest.

Sprage took the small metal cylinder that Tay had given him, out of his pocket, and held it
above the tobacco packed into his pipe. After a couple of flickers of red light, the tobacco began
glowing again, and Sprage thankfully sucked in a good lungful of smoke. As he let it trail back out
of his nostrils, he decided he had a lot to thank Polity technology for, not least being able to light
up his pipe on a windy deck.
‘Relayed signal!’ shouted Lember. ‘They want to know if it’s time to go in!’
Sprage extracted his pipe. ‘Tell ‘em yes. We’ll moor for the night and land in the morning.
No point blundering about in the dark on Skinner’s Island. That’d be unhealthy.’
****
When Twelve shot screaming from the sea, the Warden picked up the gist of what it was saying,
and reacted immediately. A high-speed analysis of its files provided some basis on which to
make its suppositions. The AI was now eighty-seven per cent certain that the Prador aboard the
war craft was the old Prador called Ebulan. Ebulan had been Hoop’s main Prador contact during
the war, and at the forefront of some of its more risky campaigns. Confirmation then: Ebulan was
here to cover his tracks. Any other Prador would have remained in the safety of the Kingdoms,
and sent agents here instead to accomplish its ends. That Ebulan had come here himself was
indicative of - to put it succinctly - which way he might now jump. Maybe Ebulan would not go so
far as to directly involve his own ship but, that ship being a Prador light destroyer, the Warden
was taking no chances.
‘Priority message: Gate for all incoming visitors is now closed. More instructions to
follow.’
The Warden observed the effect of this announcement in the main concourse and in the
arrivals lounges. People immediately began consulting their personal comps. In the first minute,
the Warden counted two hundred enquiries directed through the consoles on Coram base. It
fielded these with the same message, then directed its attention towards the code-breaker
programmes it was running. No closer to cracking it yet, and that code was the easiest way
through the skin of the Prador vessel should it eventually show itself. The Warden gave yet
another command.
In the lounges and concourses, humans and altered humans observed - through the
chainglass panoramic windows - weapons turrets cracking through the ice and sulphurous crusts,
and rising into view. These turrets were black and grey and vaguely resembled the feeding heads
of giant water worms. Some people nodded their heads and related to newcomers how this was
the second time this had happened since they had been here. Children pointed out the various
protrusions from the turrets, and identified them as anti-photon cannons, particle-beam
projectors, racks of smart missiles, near-c rail-guns, and so on. Concerned parents remarked that
there must be a deal of meteor activity occurring in this system and wondered why they had not
been warned.
EXIT GATE IS NOW OPEN-PORT TO LOCAL SYSTEMS.
As soon as this message came up on the board, a silence descended in the base. Those
very few ancients who were old enough to remember the Prador war, or even more recent
conflicts, immediately headed for the runcible gate to get through before a panic started. Many

of them remembered open-port evacuations of stations and moons near space battles. A few of
them remembered what had subsequently happened to some of those stations and moons.
The Warden let things ride for a while as, after its first message, the exit gate had begun
working to full capacity. It directed its attention planet-ward, to its submind on the Polity base.
‘Full lock down and defences,’ it instructed the submind.
‘Shit about to hit?’ asked the mind.
‘Most likely,’ conceded the Warden.
All around the Polity base, shield projectors began rising out of the sea. Huge automatic
clamps closed over the three shuttles grounded there, and the platforms they were located on
began to sink into the sea. Aircabs took off en masse from the jetties, as the base slowly drew in
those jetties like a starfish pulling in its arms. The aircabs went at full tilt to the Domes on the
nearby island, dropping in through the tops of them, then the Dome hatches irised shut. At the
same time as these were closing, Polity citizens were rushing back into the Domes from the
Hooper towns they had been visiting outside. Not all of them made it unfortunately, as the
armoured doors rolled shut and left many terrified citizens outside with the bemused Hoopers.
These Hoopers became even more bemused when turrets, much like those recently exposed on
Coram, started rising out of the earth of their own island.
‘Attention all Polity citizens,’ the Warden announced. ‘A Prador light destroyer has been
detected in-system with hostile intent. Proceed in an orderly manner to the gate.’
After this announcement, the Warden allowed information access to the hundreds of
enquiries pouring in. Polity citizens learnt that ‘open-port’ meant they’d be thrown out through
the gate as fast as was possible, to be fielded by those runcibles anywhere else that could
handle the load. So they’d all arrive. . . somewhere. The Warden noted, with a small but
pleasurable surprise, that there was no obvious panic. Its pleasure was tempered when it
counted how many questions coming through concerned the Prador, and how many Polity citizens
were learning for the first time about a war that had ended more than seven centuries ago.
****
The terrain became increasingly rocky as they laboured up the slope, and the vegetation had
changed to accommodate this. Here the peartrunk trees were squat and gnarled and tangled
with the same vine-like growths that coated the boulders and slabs of rock jutting up through the
soil. Janer walked a couple of paces behind Keech, the carbine resting across his shoulder. In the
half-light, he noticed Keech grimace and probe his wrist, then clench his hand into a fist, then
open it again.
Also studying Keech, a pace or two to one side of Janer, Captain Ron asked, ‘When you
went after her ship, what happened?’
‘I hit some powerful defences, which nearly brought me down.’ Keech gestured with his
thumb towards Boris and Roach. ‘On the way out I saw your ship burning and picked up these
two on my way back.’
Ron stared at Roach.

‘It wasn’t my fault,’ protested Roach.
‘I know that,’ said Ron, since he and Ambel had already had a long talk with Boris and
ascertained most of the facts. He gestured to the probe Boris still carried and said to Keech,
‘What I’d like to know is what’s happening now.’
‘The Warden will be, let’s say, playing close attention to events down here,’ explained
Keech. ‘Spatterjay might be officially Out-Polity, but it still comes under Polity protection. There
was that much agreement between you lot and the Polity at least.’
‘What’s out there, then?’ asked Ambel, pointing seawards.
Keech gave Ambel a long look, then said, ‘Where there’s Prador adolescents there’s a
Prador adult around too. In the absence of an adult, one of their adolescents becomes one very
quickly. Prador adults are pretty careful about their own safety, so if there’s one anywhere here
it’ll be heavily armed.’
‘Spzzckt light destroyer,’ SM13 chipped in.
They all stared at the drone Boris was carrying.
Keech continued, ‘A ship like that in hiding somewhere and Prador agents running around
all over the place - that isn’t something the Warden would tolerate.’
‘But is it something the Warden can do anything about?’ asked Ambel.
Keech gazed at him again, and it was obvious to Janer the kind of thoughts that were
going through the monitor’s mind.
‘I don’t know,’ replied Keech.
They trudged on a little further, until Ron suddenly halted, staring at the ground.
‘I reckon it’s circling back on itself. But if we go on any further in this light, we’ll lose the
trail,’ he warned.
Janer sighed and slipped his backpack from his shoulders. Ambel gestured to a protected
spot below a single huge slab jutting up diagonally from the ground. The six of them made their
way over and sat in its dark shadow. Shortly, Ambel opened his bag and passed around dried
strips of rhinoworm. Janer chewed on a length of it while pulling what remained of his heat sheet
out of his pack. Roach began tugging lengths of dead vine from a nearby rock, and made a pile of
them, then Boris ignited the heap with a quick burst from the laser he carried. He then looked to
Captain Ron and tossed the laser over to him. The Captain caught it and pocketed it in one swift
motion.
‘There’ll have to be payment for Goss,’ said Ron.
Boris nodded as he squatted by the campfire, and began poking it with a stick.
****

Drum stumbled on through darkness, aware that he needed rest but knowing that, if he stopped
for it, there would be no one to watch his back and that he’d wake up to find the leeches sucking
on his face. He was tired, but most of all he was hungry. The injuries he had received from both
Frisk and the Prador were well healed now, but they had drained his resources to the limit. He
needed food to top up his strength, but particularly he needed Dome food to prevent him from
going ‘native’. He considered stopping to light a fire, but decided against this. Warmth would
only make him sleepy and would do nothing to keep the leeches away.
As he proceeded, Drum could hear the sounds of heirodonts feeding nearby, and their
wails as leeches fed on them. This caught his attention for a while, but soon his head began to
slump and he walked an increasingly wavering path through the endless dingle. Some
unconscious instinct still kept him away from the trunks of trees, a touch on which could bring
leeches raining down on his head. That same instinct did not however prevent his walking
slap-bang into a metal post.
He stepped back and swore, then reached out and ran his hand over the corroded metal
facing him. Slave post. Immediately he knew where he was and gained new hope of finding a
place free of any concentration of leeches - a place where he could rest. He moved further
through the remaining dingle as it gradually thinned and the light of Coram could reach the
ground.
‘Who’s that bugger?’ spoke a voice to one side of him.
‘Whoisss? Wooisss?’ said a voice not entirely human.
‘That you Peck?’ asked Drum of one of the shapes visible nearby.
‘Tis.’
‘Who’s that with you?’
‘Forlam,’ said Peck. ‘He’s a bit buggered,’ he explained.
****
When it was fully dark, Vrell finally summoned the nerve to pull himself from his muddy
hideaway. This at first proved difficult because the mud had meanwhile dried into a hard crust
over the top of him. When he eventually broke free, much of this crust still stuck to his carapace;
a weight more difficult to carry now he was reduced to being quadrupedal.
With his extra burden, Vrell moved slowly down towards shore, anxious to make as little
noise as possible. Even this proved difficult, since Prador were not by nature adapted for
travelling through thick dingle; their home world consisted of shallow seas, wide and level tidal
areas, and extensive saltpans. However carefully he moved, Vrell kept knocking over trees as he
progressed, thus getting so many leeches swarming on him that every so often he had to stop to
tip them off. The worst of it was that he was no longer invulnerable to the creatures. The
sensitive burned flesh of his burst claw was open to their attack, as was the raw area on his side
where his shell had been charred to powder. Every time he wrenched an eager leech from his
wounds, he hissed like a steam kettle and cursed all humans.

Half the night, it took Vrell to reach the shore, and finally squatting on the beach there,
he gazed out at the glowing lanterns of the ships moored in the cove. For a while he felt
confusion, then he understood and lowered himself dejectedly to the sand. Of course: Drum.
Somehow the Captain had foiled his father’s plan, which meant that he, Vrell, had also failed.
Father would depart now and find some other means to accomplish his ends.
Vrell unfolded one of his remaining arms and gazed at the device held in his complex
hand comprised of fingers and hooks. With the blanks all around him directly linked to his father,
there had been, up till now, no need for this. But he had brought it along anyway, in the
eventuality of all the blanks being killed. It was a communicator that linked him with his father’s
destroyer. He could call now and speak. He could call now and ask his father for instructions.
With a sinking depression, he lowered the communicator. He already knew what those
instructions would be: something along the lines of, ‘Return inland, kill and die.’ This was not
what Vrell wanted to hear. Instead of using the communicator, he slid himself down the beach
into the sea to soak off the weight of mud on his back.
With the cool water soothing his wounds and the mud slewing from him, Vrell carefully
studied his surroundings, noticing all the dead sea creatures floating on the surface. Seeing such
a preponderance of dead leeches raised his spirits a little, till he began to think more positively.
He had done all he could, and only failed because the odds were insurmountable. Perhaps his
father would make the small diversion necessary to pick him up, before quitting the planet.
Perhaps Vrell could get out to the destroyer and be taken aboard?
He again checked his communicator, switching to one of its many facilities. The beacon
setting sent his location out to the destroyer, just as it revealed the location of the destroyer to
him. It was still sitting out there at the bottom of its trench. Vrell heaved himself ashore and
pulled the medpack from his underside. A few shell patches should be enough to keep any more
leeches out of his wounds if he were forced to swim the huge expanse of intervening sea. He
fervently hoped that would not be necessary.
As Vrell softened his shell patches and spread them with glue, he was aware that he was
only delaying things. But then, the better he made himself feel, the more persuasive he could be
with his father. He took his time affixing the patches, drying them afterwards with the blower
from the medpack. When he had finished, and neatly stowed away the medpack, he noticed with
some surprise that the sky was getting lighter. It suddenly occurred to him how visible he would
soon become to the ships out in the cove. He backed up the beach into the cover of dingle, and
again took out his communicator.
‘Father?’
There was a long pause before he received a reply.
‘Vrell, my son, you are an adult now,’ said Ebulan. ‘Have you completed your mission
upon the island?’
‘I... I encountered more resistance than expected,’ said Vrell. As a Prador very new to
adulthood, it did not yet occur to him to lie openly - only to bend the truth a little.
‘You failed, then,’ said Ebulan.
‘The fault is not entirely mine. Captain Drum came ashore—’

‘No matter,’ Ebulan interrupted. ‘I will be taking care of this matter myself, now.’
‘You’ll be coming here?’ Vrell asked, with renewed hope.
‘I will come.’
‘And you will pick me up?’
The grating, bubbling sound that issued from the communicator was the Prador
equivalent of a laugh - something Vrell had rarely heard. He held the communicator away from
his body, and gave it the full attention of all his remaining eyes.
‘Vrell, you are now an adult male, and as such you are no longer of any use to me. You
are more of a hindrance and a threat. So when I reach your location and shower it with CTDs to
kill off the Old Captains, your death will be an added bonus.’
‘But, Father—’
Ebulan cut off, and Vrell stared at the communicator for a long moment before his
survival instinct belatedly kicked in. He stood up and made ready to charge down the beach to
the sea. But the sight of twenty rowing boats heading for the shore had him drop back on to his
belly like a falling dinner plate. He watched the men step ashore, as he slowly backed through
the dingle, wondering if the ground back there was still soft enough somewhere to dig.
****
Using his heavy claw and few remaining legs, Sniper crawled over to the Prador war drone,
clambered up on to it, and peered into the wide crack through which he had gutted it. The
drone’s central core was now a mash of Prador brain tissue, insulation material, and optic nerve
linkages. In the bottom of its armoured shell lay pooled the amniot in which the brain had been
flash-frozen. The drone was undoubtedly dead, but, Sniper noted with interest, many of its
systems were not too badly damaged. Reaching inside with his precision claw, Sniper took hold
of one of the optic linkages and pulled it up for closer inspection. The interface was a
straightforward electrochemical job he had come across many times during the long-distant war.
Often damaged himself, while far from a Polity facility, he had scavenged Prador technology to
repair himself. Circumstances were not quite the same this time, but he didn’t want to just sit
here stranded on this atoll, waiting for one of the Warden’s SMs to find him eventually.
Sniper pushed back from the Prador’s shell and, with an internal order, dropped his lower
head plate. The plate stuck part way, buckled and partially welded in place by spatters of molten
metal from his missing legs, so he grasped it with his heavy claw, and tore it away to expose his
solid-state insides. Reaching inside the Prador shell again, he pulled out a mass of optic
linkages, and one at a time plugged them into an interface he’d had installed inside himself
seven centuries ago. After ten minutes of swapping optic cables, and sorting the machine code
return signals, a high-pitched whine was emitted from inside the Prador shell, and it lifted itself
a few centimetres from the atoll before clunking back down again.
‘Bollocks,’ said Sniper, and this time relayed the internal order that opened the lower
plates of his body, to expose the densely packed machinery of his life.

Later, a recessed nozzle on the side of the Prador shell briefly spat a fusion flame that
nearly rolled the shell itself over on top of the old war drone. With his head now nearly inside his
dead enemy, Sniper hardly noticed, as he worked away, discarding pieces of twisted metal and
burnt components, and replacing them with pieces removed from himself.
****
‘Wake up,’ said the mercenary, Shib.
Erlin sat up quickly, half expecting a boot in her side. Anne was already up, squatting
impassively by the ashes of the fire, wrists still twisting against her cuffs, eyes fixed on the
weapons the Batians carried.
‘I need to urinate,’ said Erlin firmly.
Shib looked down at her. ‘Well then do so.’ The mercenary’s voice sounded watery and
distorted by the hole in his cheek and the dressing covering one side of his face. Of them all,
thought Erlin, he seemed to be coming off the worst. At some point, he’d lost a couple of fingers
as well, she had noticed. She stood and looked about for something to squat behind: a tree or a
rock. As she started towards the nearest tree, Shib jammed his weapon in her stomach.
‘I said “do so”. I didn’t say you could go anywhere,’ he said.
Erlin stared at him, then turned away. It was obvious that he was frightened and that his
fear was making him vicious. She’d have to hold it. She’d be damned if she’d pee with him
watching.
‘Come on, get them moving!’ yelled Frisk, trotting back into the campsite.
Shib jabbed both the prisoners in the back in turn, and they started to follow Frisk through
a stand of peartrunk trees. Luckily no leeches fell. Beyond the trees, Svan waited with her
weapon on her shoulder.
‘It looks easier further up,’ observed the female mercenary. ‘Fewer trees and less crap on
the ground. Once we get up there, we should get a clear view all around.’
‘Let’s go, then,’ said Frisk, with a slightly crazy expression.
So Svan led the way, Frisk immediately following her, while Shib did his jabbing trick with
the barrel of his weapon. Erlin thought gloomily that it was enough they were going to die - was
it necessary to continually humiliate them as well?
They emerged out of thick dingle into a different terrain that was rocky and netted with
vines. The peartrunks and other strange varieties of tree had the looser concentration here of a
deciduous woodland. Leeches lying across their branches had the same hue and colour as their
cousins nearer the shore. Putrephallus weeds grew singly, and the occasional lung bird spooked
into flight was smaller and coloured like mouldy bread. As she walked Erlin brooded, and decided
not to suffer any further indignity. She had come here seeking reasons to continue living - to
discover how Ambel had achieved it. She had come here understanding that life on its own was
not enough. She’d be damned if she’d give up everything else just for life itself. Anyway, she had
an intimation that this increasingly frightened mercenary could be manipulated. She stopped

abruptly and glared at Shib.
‘I’m going over there - to urinate behind those rocks.’ She indicated a cluster of
vine-covered boulders. ‘You can kill me if you must. I leave that up to you.’
She turned on her heel and strode towards the boulders. She had expected to feel fear,
but felt only a curious freedom. Shib himself said nothing, and Erlin was aware that the others
had halted to stare at her.
Once out of view, Erlin struggled to loosen the catch on the side of her trousers. It would
be too embarrassing to call for assistance. Stretching round until she felt she was going to sprain
her shoulder, her cuffed hands finally managed to locate the catch. After blissful relief,
struggling to get her trousers back up again she found she now could not fasten the catch.
Dammit, she’d just go back and ask Anne to do it.
As Erlin walked from behind the boulders, she noticed the group had closed up, with Anne
on her knees and the others standing over her. Erlin approached and stood before them waiting
for some reprimand. Frisk just stared at her for a long while, then slowly drew the laser from her
belt. Erlin noted a look exchanged by the two mercenaries.
‘You’re Hooper,’ Frisk said, ‘you have the virus.’
Erlin nodded.
Frisk went on: ‘I’ve decided I need only one hostage now. What I’m going to do next is
laser you from the feet up. It’ll take a couple of hours, but I’ll enjoy every minute.’
Just then, everything happened at once. Anne shot to her feet, crashing right into Frisk,
knocking the laser from her hand but throwing them both off balance. A huge shadow fell across
Erlin and the two mercenaries stepped back - Svan looking wary but prepared, Shib with blank
horror on his mutilated face. Something nearby let out a hissing snarl, in a vast exhalation.
Recovering her own balance Frisk tripped Anne, then kicked her hard in the side of the
head when she tried to rise again. Then Frisk looked up.
‘Jay, darling,’ she cooed.
Erlin wondered just how hollow had been her sense of ennui with life. Here she was with
her hands tied behind her back; the people in front of her wanted to kill her - and she had a
damned good idea of what was standing behind her. She had never before felt so vulnerable and
so mortal. Then she heard a friendly, familiar voice.
‘Erlin, get down!’ Ambel bellowed at her.
Erlin flew face-down on the earth just as Ambel’s blunderbuss boomed.
****

19

The tonne of fresh heirodont flesh had contained sufficient protein to initiate
certain changes in the leech’s body, for its huge size was such that prey from
which it could extract such massive plugs were now rare. An organ that had been
growing inside it for some time, now ruptured the membrane connecting it to the
creature’s stomach, and began producing a different bile. Thus, this leech began
to transform into one that could feed upon whole animals rather than parts
thereof. Now cruising along the surface it felt the urge to take on an entire prey.
Unfortunately it came upon a suitable candidate - the molly carp gorged on
turbul-inflated glister - before the transformation inside itself was complete. Its
mouthparts opened out wider and wider as it instinctively swallowed its victim
whole. The carp, suddenly finding itself inside a creature it often preyed on,
though reluctantly, began to gnaw its way out - the leech’s bile not yet having
developed sufficient sprine to kill.

Janer saved the charge in his laser carbine for more opportune shots. Ambel’s barrel full of
stones and rusty nails sent the Skinner stumbling, and Ron’s measured shots were burning the
skin from its face. But the weapon the Batian was using on the monster was the most effective
of all. The screaming man kept backing away from it in terror, the explosive shells he fired
repeatedly taking lumps out of the Skinner’s diseased-looking body.
‘Back it up. Back it up,’ yelled Keech, the snout of his APW flicking from the Skinner to
Frisk, then back again. Janer knew that with the setting randomized, as Keech had explained
earlier, the monitor could not risk taking a shot with Erlin and Anne so close to his targets.
Abruptly the male mercenary turned and ran. The other one, the woman, stayed by Frisk’s
side, abruptly opening up on the slab behind which Ambel and Ron were crouching. Shells
exploded against the rock, flaking off large chunks of it and showering them both with hot
splinters.
Janer drew a bead on the Batian woman and let the autosight pick her up. He pulled the
trigger and saw her flung back, her crabskin armour flaming and smoking. She rolled away and,
still clutching her weapon, scrabbled for cover.
Frisk snatched up the laser she had dropped earlier, pointed it straight at Anne’s head,
and pulled the trigger, then pulled it again and again, raging as nothing happened. Janer swung
his carbine towards her, but the auto-sight kept tracking back to the fallen mercenary. So he fired
on manual and set a tree behind Frisk to smoking. Frisk threw her useless weapon on the ground,
then turned and ran. Janer let the sight slip back to the female mercenary, but she had now made
it to cover.
‘Clear shot,’ said Keech distinctly.
Janer assumed he meant on Frisk. He did not.
A purple flash lit the air as the Skinner was knocked flat. It howled in fury.
Just then, Ron leapt from behind the rock slab with his machete raised.

‘We’ll finish it!’ he bawled, charging towards the fallen monster. Janer tried another shot
at Frisk as she dodged through the trees, missed, then swore and looked around. Boris and
Roach had vanished, though he hadn’t seen them go. Keech suddenly rose and leapt out of
hiding. The monitor fired once into the woods and a muted purple flash showered burning leaves
some distance behind the escaping Frisk. Then he turned and looked over towards the Skinner.
Ambel came running to stand at his side.
‘You’ll kill it,’ he said flatly. As Ambel nodded, Keech went on, ‘Then Frisk is mine.’
The monitor set off at a trot down the slope taken by Frisk.
Ambel went after Ron, who had nearly reached the fallen Skinner. Janer followed.
****
It had all become just too much. The work offered by Svan had seemed attractive enough at the
time: a month at most spent on a low-tech world where apparently Sable Keech had arrived,
without backup. It had been described to him as a job combining protection of the client, who
would meet them there, with the burning of a few natives, and which would culminate with the
hit on Keech, for which they would receive a bonus on top of their usual daily rate. However,
from that first moment of incredible luck, stepping out in the shuttle and seeing Keech right
before them, it had all started to go terribly wrong.
First Nolan being blown away by a dead man, then a rhinoworm trying to bite their dinghy
in half and deposit them in a leech-infested sea, then that screwup on Tay’s island, then the
journey in the Prador spacecraft with those monstrous stinking creatures all around, then - after
finding a suitable ship - the swim through the sea with leeches grating at his armour and other
things trying to drag him down. He hadn’t believed the stories about Hoopers, until he’d seen
how hard they really were to kill, until he’d seen what happened to the hardest and most
professional of his comrades, until he’d seen Dime the . . . There had been no relief after that.
He’d relaxed his guard for just a moment and lost two fingers to a thing out of an ancient
cartoon. Then the prill . . . Tors screaming . . .
Shib ran blindly. He didn’t know where he was going. He just wanted to be anywhere that
thing back there wasn’t. The sails, the prill and the frog whelks were bad, and the leeches worse
still. His insides folded with shame at how he’d reacted, but there had been nothing else. He’d
just been unable to move. Even the pain of that leech grinding into his face hadn’t unlocked his
paralysis of fear. Now . . . now that thing . . .
When it had stepped out of the trees behind the black woman, Shib had questioned his
own sanity. There were horrible things on many worlds, and he had seen several of them, but
this thing was beyond all that. It was something out of fairy tales and hell. It was evil. He had
felt that instantly. With this thing there could only be pain and horror. Yet it had once been a
man. He’d waited desperately for the order to fire on it, waited for Svan herself to open up on it,
longed to see it obliterated.
‘Jay, darling.’
That had been enough and Shib had cracked. No way. Just no way. I’m gonna kill the
bogeyman. Only it didn’t die. The shells he fired made holes in its diseased-looking body, but it
just howled and looked even more pissed off. He felt shame again that he was running. But at

least that thing was behind him now.
And, as he ran, Shib slowly began to regain control of his fear. As he slowed down and
glanced back, he heard the sounds of a firefight. Perhaps if he circled round and attacked those
newcomers from behind . . . No. Svan wouldn’t be convinced. She knew he had run and would kill
him for it. There was no give in her when it came to things like that. Gasping, Shib came to a
halt. There had to be some other way off this island - off this planet. Perhaps if he directly
contacted the Warden, he might get picked up, turn over evidence and testimony . . .
Movement to the right. In one motion, Shib dropped, turned and fired. His shot cut
between the trees and the shell exploded out of sight. He backed up, realized with sudden horror
that he was standing underneath a leech-infested peartrunk, then he turned and ran on.
Again: sounds. He was sure he heard running feet, human feet. Was it Svan come to
deliver the Batian punishment for his desertion? Perhaps it was one of those others and he could
cut a deal. Maybe there was an easier way out of here?
‘Shib, isn’t it?’ spoke a voice to his right. Shib stopped, dropped to one knee and brought
his weapon up. This time, if anyone showed, he wouldn’t miss. But no sign - no sign of anyone.
‘You know, Shib,’ said the voice, this time further to one side. ‘Goss was three hundred
and twenty-two years old, and she sure knew how to make a man happy.’
‘I reckon he ain’t interested in that,’ said another voice behind Shib. Shib turned and fired,
then ducked and ran, expecting fire to be returned. He released one other shot in the direction of
the first voice, abruptly changed course, saw perfect cover between two boulders and ducked
into it.
‘He’s a nervy one, ain’t he, Boris?’ said the damnable second voice. It was close now.
‘Sprzzte phobe,’ said something else.
Shib glanced to either side. He could feel fear rising in him again. He shouldn’t have
stopped here. He should have kept on running. Hoopers. Hoopers everywhere.
‘You all right down there?’ asked Roach, leaning over the rock.
Shib fired at him, but he was already gone.
‘Over here.’
Shib glanced to one side, where a Hooper with a long walrus moustache had now stepped
into view. He was unarmed, but oddly held the burnt-out SM that Shib distinctly remembered
throwing into the sea. Then the mercenary recognized this Hooper - and also the one he had
seen just before. This one had gone into the sea, and the other they had left tied to the mast of a
burning ship. They had survived, but not for much longer. Shib swung the snout of his weapon
round as the Hooper tossed the SM towards him.
‘Here, catch,’ the Hooper said.
‘Sprzzzt,’ said the SM, and abruptly accelerated. It slammed into Shib’s stomach, and his

shot went wild and blew a crater in the ground before him. He tried to bring his weapon to bear
again, couldn’t get his breath. Then the other Hooper was beside him and he had time only to
see the man’s grin before a fist like a lump of rock came speeding towards his face.
****
Ron reached the Skinner just as Keech disappeared at speed into the dingle. The monster had
been struck repeatedly: there were burns all over it, cavities where the male mercenary’s shells
had hit, and yellow blotchy patches that had festered. From it arose a stench as from an abattoir
drain. Its right leg had turned entirely yellow, and seemed almost falling apart. That must be due
to the sprine, Janer reckoned. Yet, injured and dying as it was, the monster managed to heave
itself upright as Ron hammered towards it. The Old Captain yelled and swung his machete. A
hand like a huge spider spun free, hit the ground, then hopped along for a couple of metres
before flipping on to its back with its fingers wriggling in the air. The stump of the Skinner’s wrist
hit Ron in the chest, then came on like a hydraulic ram and slammed him flat on his back. The
machete cartwheeled through the air and stabbed into the ground a couple of metres away.
Janer fired and a sheet of skin slid smoking from the Skinner’s back. Hissing loudly, it
grabbed Ron with its other hand, lifted him and bit down on him, as if he were a sandwich. Ron
bellowed. Janer started firing at the monster’s legs, then ceased when Ambel got in his way going to retrieve the machete. The Skinner spun round, discarding Ron like a fast food meal not
to its taste, and now Ambel and the creature confronted each other: Gosk Balem and his old
master, Hoop.
The Skinner hissed at Ambel, and crouched. Ambel advanced with the machete gripped
two-handed and inclined to one side. Perhaps something of survival instinct kicked in then,
because the monster backed off. Abruptly it turned and, with long unsteady strides, it ran. Ambel
reached Ron just ahead of Janer.
Captain Ron lay with one side crushed and ripped open. As Ambel crouched by him, he
reached up and caught hold of his fellow captain’s hand. Hearing movement behind, Janer
glanced round to see Erlin and Anne approaching, leaning against each other for support.
‘Get these off me,’ said Erlin, holding out her wrists. ‘I can help him.’
Janer looked at the braided cuffs, and then inspected the charge meter on his carbine. He
gave an apologetic shake of his head before returning his attention to the two captains.
‘It has to die,’ Ron insisted. ‘It has to die finally and completely.’
‘It will,’ promised Ambel. He glanced round at Erlin, then, freeing himself from Ron’s grip,
he stood and stepped up to her. Almost casually, he clasped the material of the cuffs between
her wrists and pulled. There was a hollow thud as they broke and he moved on to free Anne next.
Erlin immediately went to Ron and inspected his torn side.
‘Nothing much wrong,’ muttered Ron, then, looking up at Ambel, ‘What are you waiting
for?’
Ambel turned to Anne. ‘Get everyone to cover. Boris and Roach should be back soon.
When they arrive, go and find Peck and Forlam. Wherever they are, wait there with them,’ he
said. Then he turned to Janer and indicated the laser carbine. ‘You come with me.’

Janer gave a terse nod, then followed the Captain into the dingle.
****
Svan halted at the edge of a wide clearing, resting her weapon on the ground, then quickly
unclipped the section of hot armour on her side. Underneath, her clothing was charred and it
crumbled when she touched it. However, the burn on her skin wasn’t as bad as she had
expected. She took a spray from the medpack on her belt to deaden the pain, coating it with
synthiskin. The armour section felt hard and brittle, but she clipped it back into place anyway.
What now, she wondered; what the hell do I do now?
She stood and took a drink from her water bottle, before moving on through the dingle.
Her satlink position finder rendered her the information that she was located on one of the Segre
Islands, and showed her as a little dot near the centre of that island. Beyond telling her that, it
was useless to her and she had little clue as to where she was and where she must go next.
She’d lost sight of Frisk almost immediately, and cursed herself for letting the woman continue to
carry a laser with its power pack disconnected. Frisk had been their only chance to get away, and
now she was on the run, unarmed, with a half-crazed monitor with an APW in pursuit. Svan did
not rate Frisk’s chances very highly. So what must she now do? She had no idea which direction
the madwoman had taken, just as she had no idea where Shib had gone. Though, in his case, she
did not really want to know: if she ever saw him again he was dead.
Svan decided to keep moving, her best option seeming to head downhill towards the
coast. Her first priority was to get off this island, and then off this damned planet with all its
weird people and weirder animals. She moved fast, aware of sounds in the dingle around her,
and determined to survive. After an hour, she heard the first screams, and recognized them as
Shib’s. She would not have bothered changing direction to help him, but the screams came from
straight ahead of her, where the dingle thickened.
Svan was heading into deeper shade, where the trees were tall and debris lay thick on the
ground heaped in thick drifts spotted with orange fungi. She noticed the tracks of some kind of
large animal and some of the tall stalk-trunks had clearly been gnawed on. Animals didn’t worry
her, but the cause of those screams did. Eventually, Svan saw a white shape hanging in a
peartrunk tree ahead of her, and immediately knew what it was.
Shib had stopped screaming by the time she reached him, though he was groaning and
gasping, occasionally weeping. Someone had suspended him naked by his feet from the
branches of a peartrunk tree. Runnels of blood crisscrossed his body, and below him crawled the
sated leeches that had fed and dropped away. Attached to him there were four still feeding. His
feet had been totally stripped, but from his ankles downward the bloody holes cut into him grew
increasingly disperse. He’d lost so much blood and flesh, yet he still remained conscious. Svan
wondered if those who had done this to him had known that suspending someone upside-down
prevented them from fainting and that, with his strength, Shib would probably lose half his flesh
before he died. She watched as a leech fell from him, setting him into a slow turn. He looked at
her with his remaining eye.
‘Svan,’ he whispered.
There was such pleading in the single word that Svan aimed her weapon at his head for a
long moment, then slowly swung it away. Another leech was already making its questing way

down his leg, and Shib started gasping again. She knew, from long experience in such matters,
that in a moment he would start screaming again. If she intervened and stopped his screams,
that would forewarn anyone ahead of her presence, so, without further acknowledgement, she
walked away.
Shib’s renewed torment soon echoed through the dingle. Svan paused for just a moment
before moving determinedly on. The next scream sent her into a trot, then a run, convinced that
she wasn’t running from him and what was happening to him: she had to move fast, just get out
of here. Suddenly, ahead of her, she spotted three figures. They turned as she approached, one
of them raising Shib’s weapon.
In one smooth motion, Svan dropped to her knees and aimed.
‘Drop it! Now!’ she shouted.
The one called Roach tossed the weapon to the ground while Svan stared at him in
disbelief, trying to comprehend how the hell he’d got here. Keeping all three of them in her
sights, she stood and slowly advanced. The other one, with the moustache, she also recognized
from the ship Frisk had torched. The third one, who was leaning on a stick and didn’t look so
good, she did not recognize.
‘You,’ she gestured at him. ‘Who are you?’
‘Bugger you,’ was his only reply.
Svan considered wasting him right there, but she desperately needed to get off this
island, and for that she needed help. She moved closer. Suddenly the ground erupted in front of
her in a purple flash. As the blast flung her back, she felt her grip on consciousness slipping, and
fought it. Burning debris rained down while she rolled and tried to stand. The flat of a hand
slapped her back to the ground and her weapon was tugged from her grasp as easily as from a
child. After a moment she was hauled to her feet and suspended in front of the bulky shape of
Drum.
‘Where is she?’ demanded Drum, then flung her to the ground again. In her struggle to sit
upright, Svan backed into someone else. Hearing a hiss, she turned and gaped in horror at the
man right behind her.
‘Giss a kiss, girlsy,’ said Forlam, waving his leech tongue at her.
****
Frisk was just ahead of him, yet managing to stay frustratingly out of reach. Keech tried firing his
APW, but it dropped into cutting mode and spat out a purple bar only a metre from its snout. As
she dodged behind a stand of putrephallus, his second shot went on full power and blew up a
wall of burning vegetation. Lung birds dropped squawking and burning from the sky.
‘Frisk!’ bellowed Keech as he ran on after the swiftly retreating silhouette. Glancing down
at the displays on his APW he saw that the remaining charge was very low, but couldn’t even be
sure if that reading was accurate. Best to save his shots, so he ran even harder. It felt good. It
felt good to run and to feel anger. With surprise he realized he hadn’t enjoyed himself so much
for . . . seven hundred years.

Ahead, the ground began to drop away again. Keech realized he had passed the highest
point of the island and that from now on, on the way down, the dingle would begin to thicken
again. He couldn’t afford to let her get there. He just could not let her get away. The prospect of
chasing her around this entire sector for the next couple of centuries filled him with total dismay.
It had to end now! Today.
Suddenly he spotted her clear ahead of him, and couldn’t resist firing. The APW emitted a
stuttering pulse, a sure sign of it reaching the end of its charge. But he dared not stop to change
canisters now. He might lose her. He could lose her at any moment. He saw her glance back. She
must be well aware what that disperse emission from an APW signified.
‘You’ll have to do better than that, Keech!’ she shouted.
He fired yet again, damning himself as he did so, but unable to do otherwise. This time
there was light, but no fire, no damage.
Suddenly Frisk was running towards him, screaming, her face twisted with hate. He
continued to aim his APW at her, its trigger depressed. Spurts of fire started her clothing
smouldering, but the weapon put out nothing effective. He dropped it to pull out his pulse-gun.
His first shot slammed into her left bicep, gouging a chunk of muscle and spraying fragments
behind. His second shot caved in her stomach and bowed her almost double, but did not slow
her. There was no third shot, for by then she had slammed into him like a collapsing wall.
Keech went down with Frisk on top of him, the pulse-gun spinning away. She hammered a
fist into his face - once, twice. He felt his cheekbone break, and aug contacts discharge under his
skin. Then she was off him, and hauling him to his feet. She was strong, strong as an Old
Captain. Keech found himself airborne, then lost all his breath as he slammed into a tree trunk.
Leeches started falling about him.
‘This body,’ croaked Frisk, ‘is all old Hooper.’ She pressed down on the mess he had made
of her arm, then made a horrible groaning sound. As she slowly paced towards him, Keech was
struggling to recover his breath and to beat away leeches that were oozing towards him. He’d
need a lot more than his slowly returning heavy-worlder strength to defeat her.
‘I should have done this myself long ago. I should never have left it to hired killers,’ she
sneered. ‘First I think I’ll tear your arms off.’
Keech began breathing slowly and evenly. He recalled she had always been a talker, had
always loved going into detail about how she was going to kill her victim. Anticipation was a
large part of the pleasure for her. She came to loom over him, then bent and grabbed the front of
his overall to haul him to his feet. In one quick motion, he brought both his hands to her throat
and, as he closed them with all his strength, she laughed in his face.
‘I know it’s not enough,’ he said. ‘You may kill me now, but the machine that is me will
keep working after I am dead. So go ahead and tear my arms off.’
Slow realization dawned on her as he initiated the cybermotors in his fingers and
completely relinquished his mental control of them.
His fingers began to close on her hard Hooper neck.

****
Even with its wavering unbalanced gait, the Skinner easily stayed ahead of them. They only
gained on it when it fell, or when it needed to shove its way through thickening dingle, but
wherever there was open ground it quickly pulled ahead again. Ambel just kept going at the
same dogged pace, though Janer was beginning to find the chase exhausting. He had reached
the stage where he felt he must soon quit, when the Skinner began to stumble and show signs of
slowing.
‘Now we have you, my lad,’ growled Ambel.
The Skinner suddenly fell forwards in a rocky open space, sprawled out like something
dead washed up by the tide. They quickly moved in and, with grim purpose, Ambel approached it
holding his machete to his side. Janer stood back and watched with morbid fascination as the
machete whistled down.
Thunk. A diseased leg jerked away. On the backstroke, he took off the Skinner’s
remaining hand. Janer stared at the head: the hate-filled black eyes and gaping mouth. There
was no sign on it of the yellow that denoted sprine poisoning, and it had nearly detached itself
from the body.
‘Ambel!’ he yelled in warning, then began firing.
Ambel turned and hurled his machete. It struck rocks with a ringing clash that sent sparks
skittering into the air. Janer set those same rocks smoking as he pressed the trigger down and
kept on firing. Thumping between the rocks like a pig escaping the slaughterman, the head
moved quickly into cover. They ran to the spot where it had disappeared, and stared down at a
dark hole cut deep into the ground. Janer crouched forward, pushed the snout of his carbine into
the cavity, and pulled back on the trigger. Nothing at all happened. He stepped away and peered
at the carbine’s display. Empty.
‘Bugger,’ said Ambel.
They continued to gaze into the hole, and Janer even thought he caught the glint of eyes
looking back out.
‘We could bury it in there,’ Janer suggested.
Ambel shook his head. ‘It’d only dig its way out again. Just one thing for it.’ With the
power of a machine he stooped, gripped rock, and broke it away from the edge of the hole, then
reached down for more. There was a tenacity in the Captain Janer found a little difficult to
comprehend.
‘Why wasn’t the sprine killing the head too?’ he asked.
‘Had never fully connected itself. I wounded the body,’ said Ambel, still relentlessly
pulling away rock. Janer watched him a while longer, then removed his own backpack, extracting
from it the hexagonal box. He couldn’t help feeling a certain inevitability about this moment.
‘I have a way we can kill it,’ he said. ‘All I need is a crystal of sprine.’

‘At last,’ breathed the Hive mind.
****
Ebulan reached out with rigid control, and Pilot touched and manipulated the various complex
controls to start AG and warm the thrusters. Through another blank, the Prador put the weapons
console online and checked the loads. All readings were optimum. The rear nacelles contained a
hundred and forty-four missiles fitted with CTDs, as well as cluster and planar explosives. There
were four defence lasers and two giga-joule particle beams. Even the old rail-guns were in
perfect order, and had carousels full of ceramo-carbide missiles that could be fired at half the
speed of light.
Meanwhile other blanks were running on the slave programs loaded into their thrall units,
maintaining the ship, or standing ready to replace Pilot or the blank seated at the weapons
console, all ready and equipped with hull patches and fire retardants, should the ship be hit.
The Prador destroyer rose out of the trench spilling an accumulation of silt and broken
shell from its upper surfaces. It rose past heirodonts pausing in the depths for one brief respite
in their painful lives, till finally it came up underneath an island of sargassum. As it rose it
hauled up tonnes of seaweed with it, so that leeches and prill cascaded about it in organic rain.
For a short while the hull matched the colour and texture of the floating mass of seaweed, then a
line of fire traversed the ship, from its sensor arrays to its rear thrusters. Weed exploded from
the armoured hull and fell flaming into the sea. Clouds of superheated steam were blasted away,
then recondensed in an expanding cloud as the destroyer began to move. As it tilted, the sea
below it flattened, then three evenly spaced thrusters blasted ribbed blue flames, and with a
crash the destroyer accelerated into the sky.
Pilot moved a hand across the weapons console and slapped in a launch-and-seek
program. A rear nacelle opened and three lines of fire sped away. Ebulan viewed them for just a
moment then turned his attention to the detectors ranged before his own eyes and the eyes of
his blanks. It hardly mattered if those departing missiles found their target; they were merely
diversionary.
****
The Warden observed the path of the three missiles for a microsecond then sent a warning to
the Dome.
‘Acknowledged,’ said the submind there, with a heavy emphasis. The Warden probed a
little and discovered that the submind had been on to the missiles from the moment they were
launched so had already been tracking them for at least a whole second. It ignored the mind’s
sarcasm and, with that part of itself not tied up in trying to crack Prador code, it turned its
attention elsewhere.
‘Twelve, take the SMs out from the island, to attack the Prador ship,’ it sent.
‘Yeah, let’s kick us some ass!’ returned one of them.
Two observed, ‘I note you say “attack” not “destroy”. You realize we’ll be lucky even to
slow it down?’

‘If you can realize that then the Warden certainly can,’ said Twelve patiently.
The Warden watched the seven drones accelerate out from the island and fall into an
arrow formation. It prepared itself to upload all the subminds, should - at the moment of their
physical destruction - they even have time to transmit themselves. Through their eyes it watched
the Prador destroyer come into view and with a little further probing, learnt that the enforcer
drones were ready and willing for the fight, and that SM12, though ready to do what it could, felt
certain it was about to become a metallic smear on the ocean surface.
‘We go in like this,’ explained Twelve, sending them details of an attack formation
selected from its library. One, Two and Seven slid to the fore and spread to the three points of a
triangle. The remaining drones spread to the corners of a square. Both shapes began revolving.
‘And the purpose of this?’ enquired Two.
‘We’ll present a dispersed and more difficult target,’ said Twelve. ‘We also have a better
chance of firing past shield projectors, and intercepting lasers and rail-gun fusillades.’
‘In your arse,’ said a voice.
‘Who the . . .?’ began Twelve, but by then they were already on the Prador ship.
The drone formation slid over the destroyer like a tube. Lasers heated their casings on
this pass, and they only managed half a second of fire. Their missiles needled down at the
golden armour, most of them blasting against projected fields so that for half a second the
destroyer was surrounded by coins of fire. Some missiles did get through to blow concentric
ripples of flame around the hull of the ship. But where they struck, they left only glowing spots
on its armour, and those spots quickly faded.
‘Loop round,’ said Twelve. ‘We’ll go in from the side this time.’
‘Yeah, and with that you’ll achieve what?’
‘Prador war drone approaching from the east!’ yelled Seven.
‘It was a Prador war drone, but now it’s me.’
‘Sniper, is that you?’ asked Twelve.
‘Isn’t that what I just said?’ replied Sniper.
The old war drone had now become an amalgam of dented Prador drone with a headless
aluminium crayfish attached to its surface and linked to the inside, through the split, via a
fountain of optic cables.
Sniper went on, ‘Dispersed and more difficult target, my arse. That Prador is playing with
you. While it appears that you might be doing some damage, it knows there’s less chance of
anything else being sent against it. Otherwise you’d all be scrap by now.’
‘What would you suggest?’ asked Twelve.

‘I don’t suggest. I’m telling you that a dispersed attack is going to do nothing to affect
that armour. You need to go in randomly and concentrate on just one point. Go for something
vulnerable: a sensor array or a thruster. Now do it!’
Twelve bowed to Sniper’s experience, and the formation broke as it hurtled back in
towards the ship, the drones weaving all over the sky as lasers tried to pick up on them almost
with a casual indifference.
‘Seven to Ten, concentrate everything you have on that port thruster,’ sent Sniper. ‘One
and Two, once they hit it, you hit the port laser with your rail-guns. Twelve, you’ve only got a
geological laser - so why the hell are you here?’
‘As a distraction?’ Twelve suggested.
‘Yeah, if you like,’ said Sniper.
‘Where are you going?’ Twelve asked, noticing that Sniper was receding into the sky.
‘Don’t worry about me. I’ll be back before you know it. Or, rather, back before our friend
in that ship knows it.’
The SMs shot in over the destroyer and their missiles spread like a cloud of gnats around
it. Everything seemed random until the cloud suddenly closed on the rear of the destroyer. A
constant stuttering explosion bloomed, and the casing of a thruster went incandescent. The
destroyer tilted as if a giant hand had slapped its back end - but then it quickly corrected. Shortly
after that, there was a flash of purple fire, and an extrusion on the front of the Prador ship
suddenly blackened and cracked open. Directly on top of that a luminous green line stabbed up
from the destroyer and something danced before it, flickered, and became just a line of dust in
the sky.
‘There went Seven,’ said Two.
‘Particle beam,’ observed Nine - then, ‘EM shells!’
Twelve flew over the top of the ship, through a wall of fire. It could do nothing: its little
geological laser, had it even been working, could not have touched this Prador armour. As it
passed through the fire, Twelve closed its cockle-shells and tumbled through the air, as the EM
pulse knocked its AG controls out of sync. Correcting at the last moment, it noted the crash foam
inside itself melting, and that the casing on its micro-pile was developing hairline cracks.
‘Warden, take me,’ it said, accelerating towards the nearest weapons blister. The particle
beam flashed out so all that struck the ship was a metallic cloud of vapour.
‘Sniper, what now?’ asked Two, as it swerved away and watched Nine, caught in the
intersecting beams of three or more lasers, trying to get away, but distorting and melting in
midair.
‘Keep hitting it,’ instructed Sniper, his signal now echoey with distance.
With machine-gun sonic cracks, the surviving SMs turned and resumed attack.

‘Where are you?’ asked Two, as it emptied its rail-gun magazines, ahead of the last of its
missiles.
There came no reply from the ancient war drone.
****
With a fragment of its mind, the Warden watched the battle. Much of its attention was
channelled through SM11, who it had hovering geostationary over the island. Through this
drone’s sensors it observed Sniper taking the Prador drone shell up and out of atmosphere and,
knowing just how effective Sniper’s ballistics programs were, it knew what the drone had in
mind. From the Polity base, it observed shield projectors slam two of the missiles fired at it down
into the sea. Those two missiles vanished in two explosions that were discs of fire: straight
planar explosive - a diversion. The third missile bounced off a shield, went up, and came back
down. A smart missile, released some time before and sent on patrol, made the decision to go
get it. The two missiles collided high above the base. The ensuing explosions continued all the
way down to the shields, which heated under the load. Cluster missile, the Warden observed
dispassionately.
With the rest of its resources, the Warden was concentrating on its code breakers.
Momentary breakthrough there . . . but the sequence folded after half a second. Through Eleven,
it had some feedback from the blank called Pilot, so now it knew it was on the right track.
Secondary automatic systems absorbed transmitted subminds, as one after another the
enforcer shells were destroyed by the Prador ship. It would handle these later, the Warden
decided, as it shunted them into storage.
All that evinced any apparent emotion in the AI was when the Prador code finally started
to come apart.
****
The island was now in sight and in range, but firing the CTDs was as yet out of the question, as
they’d be intercepted long before they reached their targets. Particle beams could not be
intercepted, though. Ebulan set his blank to firing on the island and through his own viewer had
the satisfaction of seeing great swathes of dingle exploding into fire, with even rock melting
wherever the beams touched it. He gave a mental instruction for Pilot to move them in low over
the Old Captain’s ships, so a CTD could be used on them. When nothing happened, he probed
down the link - and just found nil response. Pilot must have been destroyed. There must have
been a hit Ebulan was unaware of. He looked through another blank’s eyes in the control area
but saw no sign of any damage. Pilot simply stepped away from his console and walked from the
area. Ebulan knew horror then: someone else was controlling his blank. He instructed yet another
blank to draw her weapon and go after Pilot. But Pilot acted first. He activated the emergency
door between the control area and central corridor, then drew his weapon, put it on high
discharge, and with a single blast he fused the door to its frame.
Ebulan focused on the blank seated at the weapons console, and the two still here with
him. He soon sent them up and running for the central corridor. The blanks inside the control
area he quickly got firing on the door. But the female blank he’d made draw her weapon first,
abruptly stopped firing at the door, turned to her two companions, and cut them down - before

putting the snout of her weapon in her mouth and blowing her own head off.
In panic Ebulan did an emergency reinstall of the random code. But this made no
difference to Pilot; while Ebulan was effecting the reinstall, the blank caught hold of the first of
his companions to come in after him, slammed that one’s head repeatedly against the wall, then
tore out the back of his neck. Along with the flesh and bone came the spinal section of the
Prador thrall unit, and the corpse slumped. Without further instruction from Ebulan, the other two
blanks stood unmoving while this happened.
Suddenly the ship lurched sideways under multiple concussions. Ebulan made one of the
two blanks draw his weapon and shoot Pilot through the chest. In panic, he sent the other blank
back to the weapons console. There he checked the readings and saw that the attacking SMs had
finally managed to blow a thruster.
An abrupt feeling of pain. Shut off. Ebulan lost contact with the blank that had just shot
Pilot. He now sent the one over at the weapons console to go and look, and meanwhile
transferred direct control to himself. Now he had full views outside, tracking on the attacking
SMs, and could also see through his remaining blank’s eyes. He fired off the defensive lasers,
shifted shields and strafed the sky with particle beams.
Pilot wasn’t dead - just a hole through his chest. Old Hooper. Ebulan’s blank drew his
weapon, but his arm, and the hand holding the weapon, thudded to the deck.
Another attack from the SMs. Ebulan released five missiles on random trajectories to pull
them off.
What? The last blank went too, collapsing into pieces. Pilot held a shell cutter, and was
coming this way. What? Armoured doors were opening and closing back there. How? Something
above, but now control codes were going haywire, and external vision was fading. Behind
Ebulan, the shell cutter screamed as it bit into the armoured door. He spun around and stared at
the door in horror, blind now to everything outside his ship.
****
Sniper gazed down at the planet through the Prador drone’s eye pits, and all he got was an image
in shades of grey. Well, he thought, if that was how they saw the universe, it was no wonder
they were so unfriendly. Switching back to his remaining palp-eye he got the same image in
panoramic colour, before turning that eye to the stars. Might be the last time he saw them, he
thought, then berated himself for getting all slushy. Then reversing AG on his cobbled-together
vehicle, he plummeted for the planet below.
‘Hey, Warden, what’s the SP?’ he asked.
‘Sniper, I see that underestimation of you has been somewhat of a fault in your enemies.
Do you think you’ll manage to stay on target?’
‘Yeah, but I might not get there all in one piece.’
‘Then,’ said the Warden, ‘you’ll be glad to know that I’ve just broken the Prador control
code, and the master of that ship is not having a very good time.’

‘Well, if you’ve broken the code, that means you’ve got some capacity spare to receive
me,’ replied the war drone.
‘You’re prepared for subsumption then?’ asked the Warden.
‘Not really,’ said Sniper, ‘but it beats actually dying.’ As he said this, he felt the
underspace link with the Warden open and consolidate. This was strictly his option, and it
seemed like an open pit-trap to him. ‘You know,’ he went on, ‘a guy once called me ugly inside
and out.’
‘And what was your response to that?’ asked the Warden.
‘Cut his head off,’ Sniper replied, and so saying began to hum a tune over the ether. Then
the old war drone grated out the words to a song:
‘There once was an ugly duckling, its feathers all tatty and brown.’
The armoured shell exceeded fifteen thousand kilometres per hour through the
stratosphere. Sniper fed all power not already being sucked away by the reverse AG into the
Prador shield, and by distorting its focus managed to cone it out in front. This gave him another
couple of thousand kph, even with increasing air resistance. Now he also fed pure water into the
fusion boosters and accelerated.
‘All the other birds, in so many words, said—’
From the Prador ship, precisely in the predicted position below him, no weapons were
fired, and no shields swung into place. In this last second Sniper managed to broadcast his final
words, before transmitting himself.
‘Quack, get out of town.’
****
The explosion blew plasma through the central corridor. The dead blanks lying there were picked
up in the blast and turned to oily flame. The wave of fire hit the weakened door into the control
area and folded it back. Instrument panels and dead blanks alike were pasted against the inner
hull by the blast, and feedback knocked out generator after generator. AG motors shut off; others
came on and were instantly fused by power surges. The thrusters went out, and Ebulan’s ship
dropped from the sky like a brick. Now direct-linked into the controls, Ebulan gave off bubbling
screams as those links fed power back to him, and set two of his control boxes on fire. He
slammed against the wall of his chamber, and his own AG went out. He had just regained
enough control to get the shields out underneath the ship to absorb most of the shock. But
projectors burnt out as the ship hurtled towards the sea, then slammed into the waves. Seawater
exploded out from under the destroyer as it settled, almost gracefully at the last.
Then the water washed back. And the ship sank.
I’m alive, Ebulan thought. I can survive this. Just then, the door behind him gave way and
Pilot reeled into the chamber wielding the shell cutter, ready to carry through the last
instructions the Warden had programmed into him.

Ebulan’s bubbling screams continued until water came flooding into the ship through the
hole Sniper had punched through its hull.
But even that did not stop the ancient blank. Pilot continued to hack away at his Prador
master until there was nothing left to see in the soupy water - and the power pack of the cutter
was totally drained.
****
As Sniper arrived, the Warden felt an almost excited anticipation of the coming subsumption.
There would be so much to upload from the ancient drone: the memories and experiences; the
direct recordings of events Sniper had seen with his own palp eyes; ancient battles and scenes
from worlds now metres deep in radioactive ash. Then would come the long overdue - and
pleasurable - task of reprogramming that infectively abrasive personality and making Sniper into
somebody a little more tolerable. The Warden put online the overlay personality programs, and
the necessary search-and-destroy programs. However, its excitement began to turn to dismay
when the drone’s mind just kept on arriving . . . and arriving.
****

20
The giant leech surfaced and rolled as the molly carp tore out through its side,
then dived, and with its flat tentacles dragged itself with all speed back to its atoll.
The huge wound the leech had received would not have been enough to kill it, had
not its bile duct continued pumping bile with increasing levels of sprine into the
injury. So the leech died by poisoning itself, and as it died it sank. For some while,
nothing came to feed upon the corpse, as the sprine diffusing into the sea deterred
them. Once the poison had diluted enough, first to come were the boxies. In huge
shoals they quickly snatched what they could, while they could. A small flock of
frog whelks came next from a nearby islet, eager to feed on both boxies and
leech. Then came hammer whelks sneaking up on their kin, shattering their shells
with an enthusiastic racket that of course attracted turbul. . . then glisters. . . It
was unfortunate that all this was still happening near the edge of the oceanic
trench. Dinner-plate eyes observed the descending debris and tiny brains
wondered what had attracted their fellow residents up there - so ascended to find
out. And as an organic cloud again spread across the seabed, siphons, noses,
antennae, and organs not easily described twitched and shivered, and nightmare
mouths opened in anticipation.

Janer sat up, brushing embers from his hair. A black and red rain was falling about them, and
smoke was belching up from the burning dingle below. He glanced across at Ambel who was still
squatting by the Skinner’s hideaway, rubbing at his eyes.
‘What the hell was that?’ Janer asked.
The sounds of explosions had carried across the water, and they’d gaped up at the

enormous ship hurtling towards them like a floating arcology, surrounded by energy displays,
fast-moving objects and actinic explosions. Then: blinding greenish light, and fires and smoke all
across the island, followed by an explosion that blew a cone of fire out of the bottom of the ship.
The destroyer had then slid sideways and, trailing fire, slammed into the sea: a hot coal boiling
into the depths.
‘Prador,’ muttered Ambel, blinking to clear the spots from his vision. ‘Don’t know what the
Warden hit it with, but it was damned effective, I know that, lad.’
Janer took a shuddering breath, then raised his hand and opened it. Revealed was a
single red crystal on a piece of cloth. Lucky he hadn’t lost it when he’d dived for cover. He looked
round for the hexagonal box, took it up from where he had dropped it, and moved over to join
Ambel. Setting the box on a nearby rock, he pressed a touch-plate on its side and a small door
irised open at one end of it.
‘You know what this means?’ he asked the Captain.
‘I think I do,’ said Ambel, ‘perhaps more than you. Do you think for one moment that the
Warden doesn’t know about this?’
‘Then why would the Warden allow it? Why allow the Hive here at all?’ Janer asked.
‘Balance,’ said Ambel. ‘The Warden has the overview, and knows that a balance needs to
be struck here. You can’t have people as durable as Hoopers running around the galaxy without
at least one Achilles heel.’ Ambel grimaced at the unintended pun. ‘They’d end up either
destroying or being destroyed. Power must be tempered.’
Janer said, ‘Erlin says it’s rumoured that the Polity is scared of you people, so that’s why
it prevents further development of this place. But she says she doesn’t believe that.’
‘Erlin likes to believe in goodness,’ observed Ambel.
‘And you?’
‘I prefer to believe in what’s true.’
‘You get to know what’s true out on your ship, do you?’ asked Janer, with a grimace. He
manoeuvred his hand so the sprine crystal slid down the cloth that was channelled between his
fingers, and into the opening in the box. The hornet waiting there grabbed the crystal and pulled
it inside. Ten million shillings, brooded Janer. What the hell.
‘Thinking is something you find you do with increasing clarity as the years pass, and after
a time you find there is very little you have not thought deeply about. Truth and clarity are one,’
said Ambel, seeming calm as he said this.
‘I guess that makes sense.’ The opening promptly irised shut. Janer stared at it for a
moment then looked up at Ambel. ‘I wonder what your truth will be.’
The Captain had no reply for this.
Janer studied him for a moment, then nodded in response to an internal monologue. ‘The

mind tells me everything is primed,’ he said. ‘It’ll only take a minute.’
****
The Skinner had little of human thought left to it. It now hated with the intensity of a human and
it hungered like a leech. It had also come to understand fear, but knew it was safe here in the
darkness.
Memory was a strange thing to it. Pictures and concepts occasionally connected in its
hard fibrous brain, but it did not understand those connections. Its imperative was simply to eat
and to grow, yet it had recognized some of those creatures out there.
‘Jay, darling.’’
Those two words were somewhere deep inside it, and caused in it something that was
like - yet unlike - hunger. The creature that had attacked it at the last, had aroused a deep fear
and loathing somehow connected to another darkness and a time of long hunger. That creature
had fed it, yet it had also hurt it, long before. It now wanted that creature, as it wanted all
creatures. It wanted to feed on that creature, but it wanted it to be a long feeding: a long
dismantling and a slow feast. But it was not strong enough just now. Its other part was dead,
killed by that same creature. It must get away, go deep and feed on the things there, then return
strong and ready for . . . more feeding.
In the darkness the Skinner shifted on its spatulate legs, and licked its black tongue over
its teeth. Can’t get me here, it thought in its disconnected way, but I’ll get you. I’ll pull off your
skin and chew on your bones. I’ll have you wriggling in my mouth, and I’ll have you scream like a
unit for coring . . . Unit for coring? The Skinner was puzzled for a moment. It didn’t quite
understand those . . . words. Where had they come from?
‘Hey, Spatterjay Hoop! We’ve got a present for you!’
It was the creature accompanying the pain giver: the one that had burnt the Skinner with
red sunlight. The Skinner concentrated its black glare on the circle of light far above it. The circle
was blotted out for a moment, and then there came a sound. It was a buzzing humming vibration.
Again the Skinner was puzzled, until it found a connection, deep, so deep. From that connection
rose an atavistic fear, and it backed deeper into the crevice in which it had wedged itself, again
licking its tongue over its teeth. Something hard landed on its tongue, and it lifted that
something up before its eyes and tried to focus on it with what little light was available. It could
just make out something many-legged, a thorax, and a body like a severed thumb, painted with
lines in luminous paint.
Then came the pain.
The Skinner tried to howl - but the rudimentary lungs it had grown did not yet have the
capacity. It snapped its tongue back into its mouth and tried to worm even deeper into its
crevice. The second sting was on its snout. It shot out of the protective crevice, and ran towards
the light. The buzzing again. Another sting on its wing-ear. It could feel the dying pain spreading
from all those areas. Its tongue felt flaccid, with a putrid taste. It scrabbled to get closer to the
light, points of agony spreading out all over it.
It was in the light! The creature—

****
Ambel stepped back, pulled from his belt the cloth he had earlier loaned to Janer, and wiped
clean the blade of his machete. The Skinner’s head lay on the ground in two neat halves. Those
halves moved still, but they were dying from the sprine injected by a hornet’s sting. The queen
hornet flew out of the hole in the ground, circled for a moment, then landed on Janer’s shoulder.
Janer turned his head to look at it, and suddenly felt a terrible tightness in his stomach. Good
grief, what have I done?
****
For a moment Keech thought he had gone blind but, after a time, vision began to return. He
gazed up from where he lay on his side, and saw that a trench had been burnt into the slope
above him and that the lips of that trench were of glowing magma.
Coherent thought did not return to him until minutes after his vision returned. And his
first thought was: I hurt. His second thought was: Why am I alive? He’d closed his hands on her
neck and she’d reached for his neck. Her grip had closed like a shear and he’d known she was
going to tear his head off. Then had come that light as bright as the sun, and the explosions, and
the fire. Particle beam - almost certainly from the Prador ship. The ship had to be gone now, or
else this entire island would be nothing but magma.
Keech sat up and surveyed his surroundings. Frisk lay on the ground before him, her neck
twisted and crushed, her windpipe torn out. He gazed down at his hands: they were locked into
fists, and there were fragments of flesh caught between his fingers. He sent an instruction to the
cybermotors in his ringers, and slowly his hands opened and, as they did so, he wished he’d kept
them closed. For they felt as if they been worked over with a hammer.
‘Near tore her head off, you did.’
Keech slowly turned, feeling as if someone had hit him in his face with a spade. And as
for his neck . . . An Old Captain he did not recognize sat on a nearby rock. On a lesser rock sat
Boris, with the seahorse SM upright next to him, poised on its tail and with topaz light
intermittently returning to its burnt-out eye. Roach and Peck were perched on two other rocks.
Keech studied this tableau for a moment, before dropping his gaze to Forlam rested against the
rock below them, his arms and legs firmly bound. The crewman had his lips sucked in, as if
fighting to keep his mouth closed, and a particularly demented expression. Keech managed to
raise a quizzical eyebrow.
‘He’s getting a bit dangerous,’ the Captain explained. ‘We need to get Dome food into
him quickly, before he picks up too many nasty feeding habits. Need some of it meself, too.’
Yes, thought Keech, the Captain was gaunt, and had the same definite bluish tinge and
slightly crazy look as he had previously seen in Olian Tay - though obviously his condition was
nowhere near as advanced as Forlam’s. He wondered what had happened here. Forlam, he
noticed, was now staring guiltily down at his feet, but his leech tongue was darting in and out of
his mouth regardless. Keech stopped himself from shrugging - it would hurt too much - and just
let it go. He didn’t really want to know about Forlam’s feeding habits; he was not sure how much
more knowledge of Hoopers he could stand. He reached up, felt at the vertebrae of his neck, and
hoped none of them was broken. Then he wondered how much it mattered anyway, as he himself

was a Hooper now. He’d gone from someone dead to being someone so determinedly alive that
a broken neck was probably something quite minor to him. And, so thinking, he stared across at
Rebecca Frisk. He realized that the two shots he had managed to hit her with had probably been
enough to save his own life. With her torn arm, she could not have been able to get a proper grip
on his neck.
The Captain stood and walked over to him. He reached out a hand and helped Keech to
stand.
‘I’m Drum,’ he said. ‘I just wanted you to see her.’
Keech looked at him questioningly.
Drum gestured to Frisk, and Keech returned his attention there. Now he could see that her
eyes were open, and her mouth was moving slowly. How long, he wondered, would it take her
body to repair itself. How long until she stood again and killed again - and spread horror again.
‘She’s got a Hooper body,’ said Drum. ‘And we don’t want any more Skinners running
around.’ Keech watched him as he put his weapon up to his shoulder. The monitor recognized it
as being of Prador design, but designed for humans - for their blanks.
‘I know you can’t speak at the moment, Rebecca,’ said Drum. ‘I also know just how badly
this is going to hurt you. I’ll try to be quick, though . . . well, actually that’s a lie. I’m going to do
this as slowly as possible.’
Drum dropped the setting on his APW, and took aim at Rebecca Frisk.
‘No, don’t!’ someone yelled.
Keech watched the Old Captain lower the APW, then look about himself in bewilderment.
‘What’s that?’ asked Boris, pointing.
Keech glanced up at the small metallic object hovering above them. He was about to
explain to them that it was a holocorder, when Olian Tay and Captain Sprage stepped into view.
Tay was holding a screen in her hand, and had an avid look on her face.
‘You seem remarkably well,’ she said to Keech.
‘I’ve felt better,’ said Keech, ignoring the irony. But, even as he said it, he knew that was
wrong. Despite how much he hurt, he felt wonderful - never better. Tay now turned to Drum. ‘I
don’t want you to destroy her, Drum. She’s too valuable to be destroyed,’ she insisted.
Drum stared at her with a mulish expression and raised his weapon again.
‘You know, Drum,’ said Sprage, nodding to Frisk. ‘She’s caused a lot people a lot of hurt.
Maybe it’d be a good idea if she had some time to think about that.’
Drum’s expression did not change, until Sprage pointed with the stem of his pipe back
down the slope.

Now coming into view were two crewmen carrying a metallic coffin suspended from
poles. Drum looked momentarily puzzled, then a slow grin spread across his face.
‘How much time?’ he asked, still grinning.
‘About as long as Grenant, I should think,’ said Sprage, glancing at Olian Tay for
confirmation.
Tay said, ‘A few thousand years of waking in those coffins, before they’ve no mind left to
speak of. I want them both to last a little while.’
While Drum laughed, Keech just looked on in confusion, until Olian Tay’s plans were
explained to him. He then watched with grim satisfaction as the coffin was opened and the now
slowly recovering Rebecca Frisk was laid inside. At one time he had felt that no amount of
suffering could be enough punishment for one of the Eight. Now he was not quite so sure.
****
Captain Ron was on his feet by the time they returned, and he held up his fist in a victory salute
when he saw what Ambel was carrying.
‘Grendel is dead,’ said Ambel briefly.
Ron, the only one of them who understood the obscure reference, said, ‘Do you think
there’s a mother as well, then?’
‘I hope you’ll explain that,’ said Erlin in mock anger.
Janer started paying attention then. He’d missed the earlier exchange, so deep was he in
conversation with the Hive mind: making arrangements for his ten million shillings. He watched
Ambel walk up to Captain Ron. Ambel was carrying the two halves of the Skinner’s head tied with
the same length of string, and hung over his shoulder like a pair of huge grotesque shoes. He
made to give them to Ron.
‘Best you keep it with you. It’ll look good,’ said Ron, then he pointed down the slope, past
the scarred rock and burning vegetation, to where the dingle had escaped being flattened. As
Janer gazed in that direction too, he saw figures emerging from under the trees. There were
many of them, and all clearly Hoopers.
‘The Convocation,’ said Ambel, looking very directly at Erlin. He unhooked the sprine
parcel from his belt and tossed it to her. ‘Remember what I said,’ he reminded her.
Janer wondered at that. Surely there would be no problems for Ambel now. Surely he had
proven himself beyond doubt? He raised his image intensifier and focused it downwards at those
approaching. Keech was walking with Captain Drum and another Captain who was smoking a
pipe - something Janer had never before seen in his life. Others walked there as well, and Janer
could easily tell which ones were the Old Captains. There was an assurance about them, a
certainty.
Sprage, as Janer later learnt him to be called, was the first to test the crust on the cooling
magma and cross over, so was consequently the first to reach them.

‘You got his parole?’ Sprage asked Ron.
‘Yes,’ said Ron.
Sprage nodded and drew on his pipe. With fascination, Janer watched the smoke trickling
out of his nose.
‘We’ll decide it here then,’ said Sprage, then pointed at the two halves of the Skinner’s
head. ‘But first we’ll have us a fire and be well rid of him.’ Only after he had said these things
did he look Ambel directly in the eye.
‘You named me Ambel, so you must have known,’ Ambel said.
‘I knew who you were,’ agreed Sprage.
‘You did?’ Ambel asked.
‘Oh yes, I did - as I do now. You’re the same Gosk Balem we threw in the sea, the same
one who burned Hoopers,’ replied Sprage.
****
With the last intermittent faults ironed out of its AG unit, Thirteen rose into the air and surveyed
its surroundings. There were nearly two hundred people gathered on the face of the hill.
Twenty-three of them were Old Captains - including Drum, Ron and Ambel. All of them worked
together to drag together fallen trees and build a suitably dramatic pyre on which to hurl the
remains of the Skinner. It did not take much discussion for them to decide who would enjoy this
moment, and it was Keech, using the laser he had retrieved from Janer, who ignited the pyre. As
afternoon slid into evening, all stood in contemplative silence and watched the Skinner finally
shrivel and burn away. There were no unexpected movements, no sudden resurrections, and
there would be none. In its memory, Thirteen drew a line underneath this moment, then tried for
the nth time to get a signal somewhere, to someone.
‘Warden? Warden? Twelve, do you hear me? What’s going on out there? Sniper? Sniper?’
Again there came nothing over the ether but an empty hiss. Something catastrophic must
have happened, for even the Coram server was dragging its heels, and Thirteen could get little of
relevance out of it.
The SM at the planetary base was the only one with anything to offer. ‘The Boss broke
contact when that ship blew. He was fooling with Prador control codes, so maybe he got some
feedback.’
Thirteen acknowledged this possibility, but doubted it very much. Deciding it could do
nothing else until contacted, the little drone decided to continue observing and recording the
events here. Seeing Sprage and Ambel standing somewhat apart from the rest, as the fire burnt
lower, the drone dropped into the trees behind them and moved in close. The two Captains were
silent for a long while until, after filling his pipe and getting it going, Sprage said, ‘Decision goes
against you, and it’ll be the fire. No one’ll want you coming back again.’

‘Then I must be convincing,’ said Ambel. ‘Why did you say I am Gosk Balem? I have no
memory of him. There’s nothing of him left.’
Sprage said, ‘The house may be gutted, even its inner walls and floors and ceilings torn
out - but the house still stands.’
‘Very wise, and I’ll burn for that,’ said Ambel bitterly.
‘That’s something to be decided,’ said a voice out of the twilight. Captain Ron walked up
to stand to one side of Ambel, then continued, ‘Time for you to tell it all again.’
Thirteen watched as the Captains and crews converged out of the twilight, their flickering
shadows cast about by the flames. There was no formality here, and no requirement for it. Most
of the Captains were gathered together, so this constituted a Convocation. Anything decided by
these Captains, while they were together, would be written in stone. Thirteen rose higher and
swung out to get a better view of proceedings, and immediately found that it was being
accompanied through the air. That Olian Tay’s holocorder dogged its flight should have come as
no surprise at all.
****
Janer sat on a log with the queen hornet on one shoulder, and with interest watched the
gathering. He liked Ambel and certainly didn’t want to see him burned alive, but if the decision
went against the Captain, what could Janer do? He glanced at Erlin, who was watching events
with something approaching terror in her expression. Janer noted that she had acquired one of
the Batians’ weapons, and he wondered if she intended anything rash. If she did, he felt he must
intervene - though he was not sure to what end. He turned to Boris and Roach, sitting on the log
beside him.
‘What happened to the two mercenaries?’ he whispered.
‘They both got eaten by leeches . . . sort of,’ Boris whispered back.
Behind them a crewman, who could have been Goss’s twin, shushed them to silence.
Ambel had begun telling his tale in a flat emotionless voice. Janer knew how effective that
telling could be, but he’d heard it before and was getting bored now.
‘Where will you establish the first nest?’ he whispered.
‘The hole into which the Skinner fled seems a viable proposition,’ replied the mind.
‘You don’t sound wholly convinced.’
‘Until two hours ago I was. I have since spoken with an augmented sail called
Windcheater, who has offered me a place on the rock where the sails roost. Windcheater has an
agenda, I believe,’ said the mind.
‘World domination? Humans go home?’
‘No, Windcheater wants humans and everyone in here. He wants the Polity in. He wants
the Hive minds in. He would like the Prador here, if he could get them. He has augmented his

innate intelligence and is absorbing knowledge at an astonishing rate. I well understand this, as
he has been starved of these things for many thousands of years.’
‘Thousands?’
‘A tentative estimate. The sails themselves don’t really know. They don’t die very often.’
‘One moment,’ said Janer. He turned to Boris, ‘What happened to that adolescent
Prador?’
‘Still looking for it. Reckon it went into the sea,’ Boris replied, and was again shushed
from behind. Janer noted that Ambel had not quite reached the end of his story, so returned to
his conversation with the mind.
‘Still no answers to the question, why does he particularly want your nests on his rock?’
Janer probed.
‘Windcheater wants us all here because, the more Polity entities there are here, the more
opportunities there’ll be for him and his kind. Specifically, I think he wants us on his rock so he
can charge rent.’
‘And what form would the rent take?’ asked Janer.
‘Quite simply money - with which he can buy augmentations for all of his kind. AI linkups,
high-tech tooling ... all the trappings of technology. As Windcheater so appositely put it to me,
“Spend a thousand years sitting on a rock having conversations that consist mainly of comments
on how windy it is, and you’ll have a true appreciation of library computers, walls and solar
heating. “ I somehow suspect that in the near future Hoopers will have to learn to handle fabric
sails and rigging themselves on their ships.’
‘Forgetting that, are you prepared to pay the rent? You could just as easily establish a
nest here.’
‘The rock has its attractions. For one it is not easily accessible to Hoopers.’
‘You consider them a danger?’
‘I cannot say. How will they react when they discover that creatures with stings that inject
sprine are about to colonize here?’
‘I guess it’d be worth your while to take a few precautions,’ agreed Janer.
Ambel had just finished his story, and now the Captains were asking him questions. What
did he remember? Did he now consider himself free of guilt? Did he think there should be a
statute of limitations on multiple murder? Would he be prepared to undergo an AI-directed mind
probe? Ambel seemed to give the right answers to all these questions, then at the last, a
question was flung at Captain Sprage.
‘Why did you insist he is the same Gosk Balem we flung in the sea?’ asked Captain Ron.
Sprage stood up and drew deeply on his pipe. The tobacco’s glow was reflected in his

eyes so they glimmered like embers.
‘He’s the man. Memories are gone but the framework is still there. He has the morals, the
understanding and the empathy that were Gosk Balem’s. Put in the same position as he was put
a thousand years ago, and likely he would do exactly the same things again,’ said Sprage.
‘You’re saying he’d still throw Hoopers in the furnace?’ a Captain asked, eyeing Sprage
doubtfully.
‘He threw just the brains and spinal columns of Hoopers into the furnace. The rest of the
bodies were sold to the Prador, like empty cups to be filled with metal and Prador thoughts.’
‘Very poetic, Sprage. We all know about coring,’ growled someone in the darkness.
Sprage went on, ‘Gosk Balem was an ECS soldier who was captured by Hoop and his
crew. They brought him here to be cored like the rest of their captives, but as he was ECS, and so
obviously horrified by what they were doing here, Hoop decided to keep him alive in order to
extend his suffering. They forced a slave collar on him, then put him to work at the furnace,
burning the physical remains of coring. He had no idea then that those remains were still living
and, even had he known, would he have chosen not to burn them? Would any of you?’
Silence met this question, so Sprage continued: ‘The Hoopers that were cored were too
recently infected with the virus to have survived long in that ganglionic form. Those that weren’t
eaten by leeches would have died or slowly transformed into leeches themselves. He never
burned anything that still had a chance at life. He worked for Hoop because he made the choice
of survival.’
‘Yeah,’ said Boris. ‘But he didn’t have the slave collar on all the time.’
‘Survival again,’ said Sprage. ‘Hoop removed his collar so as to further extend his torment.
He could try to flee into the wilds, but it was unlikely he would have succeeded. Hoop really
wanted him to try. Instead, he stayed and he continued feeding remains into the furnaces. And
do you know why? Because while he was there, he might find the chance to act against Hoop.’
‘How do you know all this, Sprage?’ asked Ron.
Sprage took a short penknife from his pocket and scraped round in the bowl of his pipe.
After knocking out the pipe’s dottle on the palm of his hand, he immediately began to refill it.
‘I know because I saw him doing something then that I only came to understand a few
years after we caught him and threw him in the sea. The furnaces were powered by an old fusion
reactor Hoop had removed from one of his landing craft. I still had my collar on then, while the
virus established itself in me. I was three weeks, a month perhaps, from being cored. It was at
that time I saw him carry a piece of reactor shielding and drop it in the moat.’
Abruptly Keech was on his feet, having been squatting by the flames. ‘He what?’ said the
monitor.
‘The war was ending and the Prador retreating,’ said Sprage, ignoring Keech. ‘There’d
been little chance of rescue during the war, but as it ended there was hope.’ He turned to
address Keech. ‘You came here then. It was you who broke the program controlling the slave

collars, and helped free those who remained. But how did you know where to come?’
Keech stared at Ambel, who was looking increasingly puzzled.
‘We knew from which part of the sector the coring trade was operating, but we didn’t
know which sun or which planet. We swept that area searching for some kind of trace, some sign
of spacecraft, orbital stations, field tech - we used all available methods to pick on high-tech
usage.’
‘What finally brought you here, then?’ asked Sprage.
‘The distinctive signal from a fusion reactor. Normally you will never pick up on it, but this
reactor was completely unshielded,’ said Keech.
‘Bugger,’ said Boris, still sitting beside Janer. He was not alone in his exclamation. There
was a sudden surge of talk, till Sprage held up his hands.
‘I called him Ambel when I found him. I’d recognized him right away. I didn’t throw him
back and I didn’t tell anyone because they might have voted to throw him back. I let him find his
own life, and always hoped no one would ever know. He’s Gosk Balem all right. He’s the one
who, over a period of years, stripped the inner casing from the fusion reactor so it would act as a
beacon for ECS. He’s the reason every one of us old slaves is still alive. We shouldn’t have
thrown him to the leeches in the first place. We had too much hate back then and we did wrong.
Let’s not compound that error now.’
With a click, Sprage placed his pipe back in his mouth and then relit it. A roar of talk
erupted again, while Keech walked up to Ambel and stood before him. A silence descended and
the Hoopers watched. They knew how for centuries this monitor had hunted down and killed off
members of Hoop’s former crew.
Keech held out his hand to Ambel, and Ambel solemnly shook it. Boris stood and walked
over to his Captain. Other members of Ambel’s crew then emerged out of the darkness. Then Old
Captains, and other crews. Hoopers were shaking Ambel’s hand, pounding him on his back. They
were shaking each other’s hands and pounding each other’s backs.
Janer looked over at Erlin and saw that she was crying. The Convocation had clearly made
its decision about Ambel.
‘Touching,’ said the Hive mind. Janer glared at the queen hornet on his shoulder, then
stood and himself went to shake Ambel’s hand. Feeling a slight lump in his throat, he didn’t
really want to listen to the mind’s cold analysis. Ambel was grinning as Janer approached. His
usual calm had been fractured by . . . happiness.
‘Congratulations, Captain,’ said Janer.
He took Janer’s hand and shook it.
‘What now, lad? You’ll stay around a while?’ asked Ambel, still shaking Janer’s hand.
‘I think so,’ said Janer.

‘Good lad,’ said Ambel, slapping him on the shoulder with his free hand. The Captain then
turned to Erlin and carefully took her in his arms.
Janer kept the grin on his face as he backed out of the crowd of jubilant Hoopers and
went back to sit on his log. He tried to figure out if what Ambel had just done was deliberate. He
glanced down at his shoulder and the mess on it that had once been the mind’s colonizing
queen. From the Hive link came a buzzing scream, as of a circular saw going into hardwood.
Janer grimaced and pulled the link out of his ear, to drop it into his pocket. The transfer had
already been made and he now had ten million shillings in a private account. The future looked
good.
****
Thirteen decided that nothing more of any moment was going to happen near the fire, so it rose
up over the trees and floated down the slope of the island to the beach. Here it settled to scan
something else, so that its record of events here might be more complete. An accurate
description might be ‘for morbid curiosity’, but Thirteen did not allow itself to think like that. The
coffin had been placed in one of the rowing boats beached here, ready to be returned to Sprage’s
ship. Thirteen hovered above it, and tapped the palm lock with its tail, but to no effect. The drone
then projected a complex lasered image at the lock, then tapped it again, thus opening the
viewing window. These particular actions it would edit from its final record, before allowing that
record to go out on general release. It wouldn’t do for the Warden to know that one of its SMs
had had been buying and uploading black software normally employed by the less salubrious
members of society.
Through the window, the drone observed Rebecca Frisk thrashing her head from side to
side and rolling her eyes. Every time her mouth passed underneath the panel, her breath frosted
the chainglass. Touching the surface of the coffin with its tail to detect the vibrations, Thirteen
surmised that the woman was screaming. Amazing how much energy she had. The drone tapped
once on the glass with its tail, and Frisk stopped her thrashing to stare at it bug-eyed. She
started to shout, to beg, her eyes filled with tears. The drone linked to the Coram server, trying to
find a lip-reading program, but had no time to download the sluggish spurts of information
before huge movement in the dingle at the head of the beach distracted it.
Thirteen shot high into the air, watching as the Prador came out on to the beach and,
after counting legs, made an understandable mistake. It was the adult! Somehow, the Prador in
the spacecraft had survived and come ashore!
‘Warden! Warden! The Prador is here!’ the drone screamed over the ether.
This time there was an immediate response. ‘Lemme see,’ someone said, and a huge
threatening presence linked through Thirteen, and gazed through the little drone’s eyes.
****
The humans were all still up the hill now involved in some sort of celebration. Earlier, parties of
them had come down to fetch barrels of alcohol and various seafoods, but at last all movement
was confined to the hill. Even the ships had been abandoned on this night of celebration and had
he wanted to the Prador could easily have taken one. These primitive wooden ships were not
what he was aiming for, though.

As Vrell held his communicator up before his eyes, he bubbled with satisfaction. The
beacon was now operating and, even with the distortion through the water, he saw that his
father’s ship was less than a kilometre away from the island. All he had to do was swim out to it
and get inside. No problem there. He knew all the access codes, just as he knew that the ship
carried spare AG units and generators. It would take him a long time to make repairs, possibly
years, but he could always get himself some help if the surgical facility was still operational. He
knew that Ebulan had always carried a stock of spare thrall units.
Vrell moved on to where the rowing boats were beached, and in one of them detected
movement. Strapped to the woodwork of one of these boats was a large metallic container, and
through its luminous window Vrell saw that inside it was Ebulan’s tool, Rebecca Frisk. For a
moment, he considered taking her with him, and installing a thrall unit, but quickly rejected that
idea. He did not want to leave any clue that he was still alive. He edged on past the boat and
into the sea, and began swimming.
Ten metres from the shore he submerged to pass underneath the ships. Leeches, coming
from the other side of the island to repopulate the irradiated water, grated at his armour and fell
away. A glister attacked him, but he cut it in half with his working claw. Ten metres beyond the
ships, he surfaced and kept going, occasionally emitting bubbling coughs of pleasure. He would
repair the ship and take it out of this human-infested system so fast the Warden would not even
have time to react. Once back home, he would assume Ebulan’s position, and then perhaps
concentrate his attention on some of the females Ebulan had kept at his undersea residence. The
future looked good. Nothing could stop Vrell now.
Behind Vrell, the oil-dark waters swirled as they were cloven by a steep head that left a
deep trough behind. The molly carp had gorged on dead leeches, but its recent upsets and that
odd intestinal complaint had left it feeling a void in its stomach - one that it just had to fill. Also,
the tickling stinging sensation that had started in its head only minutes earlier only ceased as it
turned in this direction - but it was glad to have been led here. The creature ahead of it left a
very intriguing taste in the water; something like that of a glister but without the slightly rancid
tang.
With its stomach rumbling the molly carp decided to investigate.
****
On Coram, all the humans were now gone, and only maintenance robots independent of the
Warden continued with their tasks. Outside the base the weapons turrets had sunk back out of
sight, and the cracked crust of sulphur and ice had dropped back into place to begin the healing
of scars. Deep in the centre of the complex, the physical container of what was essentially the
Warden appeared no different from how it had always appeared. However, inside, things were
very different indeed.
‘An easy mistake to make, but that’s not the one called Ebulan, not the one from the ship.
It’s only just become an adult, and it won’t live long enough to enjoy the experience,’ Sniper
informed Thirteen. ‘That molly carp’s jaws even dented my armour so they should have no
trouble with Prador shell.’
‘Where is the Warden?’ asked Thirteen, from the planet below.
‘Dunno,’ said Sniper, withdrawing.

Finding his position in a recently vacated silicon vastness the mind of the war drone
asked of his surroundings, ‘Is this subsumption, then? I don’t feel any different.’
From behind a wall of paradox and short circuits in that vastness, the Warden replied,
‘You know, Sniper, underestimation has been somewhat of a fault in your friends as well.’
‘Waddaya mean by that?’
‘I mean that, no, this is not subsumption, Sniper . . . for I had no wish to be subsumed by
you.’
Sniper connected to the many links now available to him and inspected his vast
surroundings through a thousand eyes, and he grinned . . . somehow.
****

