Zack knows he’s
not a normal kid.
He’s really an alien
agent-in-training,
brought to Earth to help guide the planet
into the Galactic Union.
Zack has learned that there are good
aliens (like the lady with the white hair)
and bad aliens (like the bald guys who
keep following him).
Hair and no hair, these aliens follow
him to a ritzy summer camp, where he’s
hooked up with Vraj. She’s not hard to
find, being a huge, dinosaur-like creature
on her first-ever assignment
for the Union. Their mission: To get
back a bunch of alien Duthwi eggs that, if
hatched, can harm Earth. Their problem:
Lots of eggs, too little time, and those
bald guys are still after them.

So what’s a young alien to do?

Camp
alien

[

Book #

he
2 of t

t
ALien Agen

i e s
r
e
s

t

]

e

ic
v
r
e
S
.
F
a
L
e
m
Pa
illustrated by

MiKE GORMAN

w York
eapolis • Ne
n
in
M
s
k
o
Bo
Carolrhoda

Text copyright © 2009 by Pamela F. Service
Illustrations copyright © 2009 by Lerner Publishing Group, Inc.
All rights reserved. International copyright secured. No part of this book may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the prior written
permission of Lerner Publishing Group, Inc., except for the inclusion of brief quotations in
an acknowledged review.
Carolrhoda Books
A division of Lerner Publishing Group, Inc.
241 First Avenue North
Minneapolis, MN 55401 U.S.A.
Website address: www.lernerbooks.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Service, Pamela F.
		 Camp alien / by Pamela F. Service ; illustrated by Mike Gorman.
			 p. cm. — (Alien agent)
		 Summary: Young alien agent Zack, surly Galactic Patrol Cadet Vraj, and shy human
camper Opal team up to find some Duthwi eggs before they hatch and cause a planetwide
disaster, while the Gnairt who were smuggling the eggs try to retrieve them.
		 ISBN 978–0–8225–8656–2 (trade hard cover : alk. paper)
		 [1. Extraterrestrial beings—Fiction. 2. Camps—Fiction. 3. Smuggling—Fiction.
4. Science fiction. 5. Humorous stories.] I. Gorman, Mike, ill. II. Title.
	 PZ7.S4885Cam 2009
	 [Fic]—dc22	
2008020555
Manufactured in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6—BP—14 13 12 11 10 09

eISBN-13: 978-0-7613-5032-3

]

t
n
e
g
A
n
ALie r i e s

[

s e

#1
#2

My Cousin, the ALien
Camp aLien

For all my White Meadows camp counselors—
though you never had campers like these.
—P.S.
To Mom and Dad, who paid for my education
and allowed me to pursue a career that really
didn’t make much sense on paper. Thank you!
—M.G.

Ag

1258

211
ent#

ai
35/G

ther

e
u
g
o
l
o
r
P

Agent Sorn walked to a
table in the Galactic Union
headquarters cafeteria and
plunked down her plate. The

cafeteria’s gurlg worms were never as crispy
as her brood mother used to make them,
but they would do. She’d just picked up
an eating prong when she felt a buzzing
vibration on her wrist that signaled an incoming call on her communicator band.
She flipped up the two-way video screen
and Chief Agent Zythis’s face appeared in
a fine haze of static. Even with the bad

reception she could see he wasn’t happy. All of his many eyes were frowning at
several reports being held by different tentacles. She could see an info cube in yet
another tentacle. This couldn’t be good.
“Agent Sorn responding, sir,” she spoke
into the tiny communicator speaker.
As he looked up from the report, Chief
Agent Zythis’s multiple eyes zeroed in on
her. “Agent Sorn,” he said gravely. “You
have a urgent new assignment.”
Still tired from her recent assignment in
Kwithtuth IV, she tried not to sigh. “Where
to this time, sir?”
“A brief trip back to planet Earth. A crisis has arisen that our planted agent there
needs to deal with.”
“But, the boy’s not ready yet!” she protested. “He only just learned of his alien
origins—far earlier than we’d planned—
and already he was nearly killed by Gnairt
assassins.”
Zythis sighed through his several
mouths. “I know, but until the Galactic

Union invites Earth to join, he’s the only
near-native agent we have there, and you
are his contact.”
The tentacle holding the info cube came
into focus. “I’ve already made you an appointment in the Physical Alteration Lab. I
know you hate to change your lovely purple
skin for the boring shades that Earth humans seem to go in for, but at least you can
keep your white hair. This info cube will
be waiting for you when you get there—it
will tell you everything you need to know.
Don’t worry. It’s a simple assignment. He’ll
be in no danger. We’re counting on you,
Sorn, don’t let us down. Over and out.”
His image faded from the screen, and
Sorn angrily snapped the communicator
band shut and started to prong some more
gurlg worms. But she had lost her appetite.
“A simple assignment,” she muttered. “Ha!
So far nothing about planet Earth has been
simple.”

p

Cha

e

on
r
e
t

The summer wasn’t even half through, and
I thought it couldn’t possibly get any weirder.
How wrong could I be?
I’d begun the summer by learning that I,
Zackary Gaither, wasn’t even human. I’m really an alien agent, planted on Earth to carry
out a big-time mission. It seems that there’s
something called the Galactic Union. It’s an
organization of planets, like a really big United
Nations. Earth isn’t part of the Union yet. I
was placed here to grow up “human” and learn
the planet’s ways. Eventually, I’m to act as a
go-between when the Galactic Union contacts
Earth and offers to let the planet join. Sort of
like an interplanetary ambassador.

camp alien 15
This whole thing was news to me. I first
found out about it when a couple of creepy
alien guys tried to wipe me out. They were enemies of the Union, and they didn’t want Earth
joining up. So I had to be told about my mission way earlier than the Union planned. Talk
about mind-blowing!
I was numb for a few weeks after learning
it all, but it’s odd how quickly you can get used
to things. My family and friends still think I
am human. My parents have always thought
they’d adopted a regular human kid. And frankly, being a human kid was all I’d ever known.
So after a while, I stopped feeling weird about
it and slipped back into my ordinary summer
life. I did a week of theater class at the Arts
Center and started looking forward to a session
of horseback riding at Camp Trailblazer.
That’s when things started getting weird
again.
A few days before I was scheduled to go
to camp, I came back from an afternoon
playing video games with my friend Ken.

16 Alien Agent
I headed directly for the kitchen, but before I
even placed a hand on the refrigerator, my mom
came in from the dining room and waved a letter in front of me—a letter on Camp Trailblazer
stationery.
“Change of plans, Zack. It seems that they
signed up too many campers and are now randomly assigning some to other camps.”
“Meaning me?” I asked, sinking into a kitchen chair. It wasn’t just the riding I’d been
looking forward to. Ken and some of my other
friends were going to Camp Trailblazer too.
“Yes, but it looks like the camp they chose
for you is a great substitute. Camp Takhamasak
is a lot more expensive than we could usually
afford, but they’re making up the difference.
And it’s way off in the mountains.”
She handed me a brochure. Dully I looked
at it. Mountains, trees, a lake, and no horses. Probably the biggest animals around would
be mosquitoes. The camp had three units
with majorly geeky names—Arts Angels, Nature
Nuts, and Sports Sprites. I’d been signed

Camp alien 17
up for Nature Nuts. Nice of them to give me
a choice.
That evening my folks could see I was in a
major funk, so they took me along with them
to the county fair. Lots of fun if you like looking at pigs and visiting booths about fertilizer
and tractor companies. I don’t.
Mom and Dad had a shift volunteering at the
Humane Society booth, so I just wandered. I
consoled myself by guzzling greasy funnel
cakes, pork barbecue, and root beer while I
drifted through the various boring exhibit
buildings.
Turning a corner in one, I almost collided
with Melanie Steeples and a gaggle of her giggling friends. Melanie had played the part of
Snow White in the production we did at the
end of my summer theater class. She would
have been better cast as the Wicked Queen.
She was the queen of annoying, self-centered
airheads. I’d played the Woodsman and had
often been tempted to finish her off early
with my ax.

18 Alien Agent
“Look, it’s the Woodsman,” she exclaimed,
setting off a round of giggles. “Sorry, I can’t
remember your real name.”
“Zack,” I growled.
“Right, Zack.” Dramatically Melanie pointed
at a bulletin board, jangling a wrist-full of bangles. “Come look at these pictures of the Fair
Queen Candidates and tell us your choice.”
Dutifully I looked at the ten photographs of
beaming girls, most of whom looked like older clones of Melanie—bouncy blond hair, fake
smiles, heavy makeup. I deliberately pointed
to the least attractive of them.
“You’re hopeless!”
More giggles from
Melanie’s fan club. “When I’m old enough, I’m
definitely going to be Fair Queen. It’s an important career step.”
At theater class, we’d heard endlessly about
her career plan which, through various unlikely moves, ended with her as a big Hollywood
star.
As she and her friends went back to jabbering, I glowered at the queen candidates. They

Camp alien 19
might all have career plans as unrealistic as
Melanie’s, but at least they had some choices. I apparently had no more choice in careers
than I had in summer camps. What do you
want to be when you grow up, Zack? An alien
agent? Right.
Now totally ignored by Melanie’s gang, I
slipped away from the exhibit buildings and
drifted toward the amusement park. I figured the carnival music, swirling lights, and
smell of cotton candy ought to cheer me
up. They didn’t much, but I had enough
money for maybe one ride. After my greasy
meal, my stomach didn’t feel up to anything
fast. But the Ferris wheel was really tall,
and I remembered you could get a great
view from the top.
As I got in line, Melanie and her gang giggled past me, loudly saying something about
skipping the “baby rides.” Well, at least I had
enough choices left in life to choose a cool
view rather than throwing up.
When I reached the head of the line, I would

20 Alien Agent
have been willing to share a car, but the
smoochy couple ahead of me didn’t look like
they wanted company. The fat lady and kid
behind me wouldn’t have had room, so I got
into the swinging seat by myself. The attendant was just lowering the bar when a whitehaired woman bustled up and cried, “Zack,
dear! What a wonderful chance to talk with
my favorite nephew. We’ll share!”
I was too startled to object. She sat beside
me, the bar clanked down, and we jerked forward and off the ground. I stared at my companion. I do have a pushy aunt. But this wasn’t
her. This was Sorn, the white-haired alien lady
who’d helped save me from the creepy aliens a
couple months ago.
“Sorry to butt in, Zack, but I need to talk
with you alone. An unexpected crisis has
come up on this planet, and the Galactic
Union simply doesn’t have enough operatives
around to handle it. Even though you’re not
trained yet, you’re our only agent on Earth.
I’m afraid we’ll have to call on you for help.”

Camp alien 21
My stomach felt like I’d gone on one of those
really fast rides after all.
“What kind of crisis?” I managed to say.
“The Gnairt again.” I felt even sicker, remembering the fat, bald, human-looking guys
who had tried to kill me. They’d found out
I was the planted Galactic Union agent and
didn’t want me to mess up their own plans for
the planet. “Not the same ones, of course,” she
said quickly. “We dealt with them. These are
Duthwi-egg smugglers. And they could cause
a planetwide disaster.”
I stared at her. White hair or not, nothing
about Sorn looked soft and grandmotherly.
“Egg smuggling? Doesn’t sound too disastrous
to me.”
She fixed me with her very intense, almost
purple gaze. “These Gnairt were smuggling a
valuable shipload of Duthwi eggs across this
sector when a Galactic Patrol ship gave chase.
They ducked into your solar system, dumping
their cargo on Earth so they wouldn’t be caught
with the evidence.”

22 Alien Agent
“So, what’s the problem. The smugglers got
away?”
“For the time being. But the real problem
is that we can’t have Duthwi eggs hatching on
Earth. Not only could they create an environmental disaster, but they look very alien and
that could freak your natives out. We don’t
want that kind of negative attitude toward
aliens a few years before the Galactic Union establishes contact with Earth.”
“So why don’t you just go and pick up these
eggs?”
“We would if we had the manpower. But I
need to be elsewhere, and we’ve only been able
to assign one Galactic Patrol Cadet to the job.
She’ll need someone familiar with native culture to help her.”
I glanced away, realizing vaguely that the
Ferris wheel had already gone around once
without me noticing the view. “But this is crazy! Kids on Earth can’t just take off on secret
missions without adults asking questions and
probably saying no.”

24 Alien Agent
“We’ve taken care of that. You’ll be leaving shortly for a site near where we believe
the Duthwi eggs were dumped, somewhere just
east of Lake Takhamasak. Our Cadet will meet
you there with further details.”
Suddenly I felt like I’d been dumped out of
the Ferris wheel. “Wait a minute! You had me
turned down by Camp Trailblazer and sent to
Camp Takhamasak instead!”
“Rather clever, I thought, for such short
notice.”
“But it’s not fair! I didn’t choose to . . . ”
She fixed me again with those amethyst eyes.
“Zack, few of us of whatever species have complete free choice over our lives. You can choose
not to help, if you want, but I imagine that after
living on this planet all your life, you might care
enough about it to choose saving it from harm.”
I swallowed like I was fighting motion sickness. She had me there. Maybe I was an alien,
but I didn’t feel like one. Earth was my home,
and if I could keep some nasty aliens from
messing it up, I guess I had to try.

Camp alien 25
“Right,” I muttered. “So how do I recognize
this Galactic Patrol Cadet, and what do Duthwi
eggs look like anyway, and what do I do with
them if I find them?”
She smiled. “Our Cadet will explain everything. Her name is Itl Vraj Boynyo Tg. I’d
help if I could, but tomorrow I’m supposed to
be light-years from here. I have faith in you
though, Zack. I wish things hadn’t started for
you so early. We really had hoped to give you
more time just to grow up. But this is your job.
You’ll be good at it.”
With a swing and a bump, our chair reached
the bottom and stopped. The bar lifted, and I
stepped off, dazed. Sorn patted my arm and
disappeared into the crowd.
I blinked. I’d gone on an entire Ferris wheel
ride and hadn’t seen a thing. But just the
same, my world had been turned totally upside
down.

o

tw
r
e
t

p

Cha

I didn’t have long to get used to this secret mission thing. James Bond from outer
space. None of it seemed like me. But two
days later, I was standing in front of the school
where a bus would be picking up kids for Camp
Takhamasak.
Those two days, though, had been long
enough for me to decide that if I was going to
give up an ordinary summer for this crazy job,
I might as well do it right. I’d look for their
stupid lost eggs and hope that after that these
Galactic Union people or whatever would leave
me alone for a few years.
And hey, I told myself as I hauled my bulging pack from my mom’s car, how hard could

camp alien 27
this be? I’d had years of experience looking
for Easter eggs. Around our house, the Easter
Bunny, otherwise known as my dad, was fiendishly clever at hiding them. Besides, there’d
be this alien Cadet with the unpronounceable
name to help.
So who was this person? “She,” Sorn had
said. I looked around at the other kids gathered at the curb. Some had parents hovering
embarrassingly around, but most, like my Mom,
were waiting properly in their cars. I didn’t
recognize most of the kids, but at the end of
the crowd, dribbling a basketball, was Scott
Turner, that jock jerk from my school. True to
form, he had swarms of girls hanging around
him. I groaned. One of them was Melanie the
airhead. Well, she certainly wouldn’t be the
Galactic Cadet in disguise.
I felt a tug on my jacket. “Hello, Woodsman.
Remember me?” I looked down at a girl a couple years younger than me, short and plump
with stringy brown hair and very wide eyes.
“I’m Bashful.”

28 Alien Agent
I remembered, and she certainly was—having been typecast as Bashful the Dwarf in our
Snow White play. Why any parents would send
someone that shy to an acting class, I couldn’t
imagine. Whenever she got up in front of people, her words totally dried up. Now, though,
she was chattering nervously. “My real name’s
Opal, and I remember that you’re Zack. I didn’t
really want to go to this camp. I get awfully
homesick, but here I am. You’re the only person
I know here except for Snow White over there.
I bet you’re signed up for the Arts Angels unit.
You’re such a good actor.”
“Actually, I’m in Nature Nuts,” I managed to
slip in.
Her eyes practically shone. “So am I!”
Just then a big yellow bus rumbled up. In
the jostling crowd, I tried to edge away from
my young admirer. It didn’t work. I’d no sooner found a seat than Opal plunked down beside
me. After tearfully waving to someone outside
the window, she began to chatter about her
hamster and her seashell collection. I grunted

Camp alien 29
a few times in reply and sank into my own
thoughts.
Not generally pleasant thoughts.
These Galactic Union aliens really couldn’t
have much of a clue about Earth. They seemed
to think that sending me somewhere near
those eggs would be enough. But at a summer camp for human kids, you can’t just wander off looking for things whenever you want.
There are schedules, and adults are watching
you. If you do something really dumb, they
call your parents and send you home. I guess
that’s one reason they needed me. I’d certainly have some major briefing to do for their secret agent.
But first I’d have to find her. I scanned the
girls on the bus, and then with a start I looked
down at Opal. She was going on about her science experiments in school.
“Do you know anything about Duthwi eggs?”
I asked innocently.
The blank look she gave was either real or
better acting than she’d done during the whole

30 Alien Agent
theater class. “No, but I used duck eggs in one
experiment.” As she chattered on about that,
I realized that the alien Cadet probably wasn’t
a camper but might be a counselor. So I gave
up searching and just stared out the window,
watching the trees change from the round lollipop types that little kids like to draw to ones
more like Christmas trees without lights. And
then I dozed.
Hours later, the bus left the highway for a
dirt road that jolted upward through miles of
dark woods. The trees were crammed close together, and the dim space under them was filled
with bushes and fallen logs. How could anyone
find eggs scattered through country like this?
Finally we rumbled up to some wooden buildings, and I peered through the bus’s dusty window at the people waiting for us. No one was
acting like “It’s me, I’m the alien.” Maybe I
should be carrying a sign like people do when
they are meeting someone they don’t know at an
airport. “Secret Alien Agent” or something.

Camp alien 31
Once off the bus, we were all trooped to the
smelly latrines, then to a big meeting with all
the campers. Everyone sat on their luggage in
a big open space around a tall flagpole. The
counselors told us the camp rules and schedule
and gave out cabin assignments. I was sure
glad Opal was a girl and would finally have to
let go of me. But she didn’t seem too happy
when she learned who her cabinmates were—
Melanie and blond twins, Bessy and Jessy, who
looked and acted like cheerleaders. I couldn’t
really blame her.
My own assignment wasn’t great. A couple
of brothers from another school, Ramon and
Carlos, seemed OK. But then there was Scott,
the All-American Sports Hero. Oh well, I reminded myself, I wasn’t here to have a good
time but to do a job.
Like all the others, our cabin was a rustic log
box that looked like Abe Lincoln could have lived
there. At least I managed to snag a top bunk.
The brothers fought over who got the other top
bunk, but Scott in his usual take-charge way

32 Alien Agent
settled the matter by grabbing it himself. And
the brothers seemed to love him for it. They suffered from major hero-worship. Good thing all
three of my cabinmates were in Sports Sprites so
I wouldn’t have to deal with them much.
The only furniture besides the beds were four
small cupboards for storing our stuff. We’d just
started unpacking when the lunch gong sounded. Before joining the flow to the dining hall, I
headed up the pinecone-lined path to the nearest latrine. It was dark inside the little wooden building and eye-wateringly smelly. Trying
to hold my breath, I stepped in. I’d no sooner shut the door than I heard a scratching on
the walls—the outside of the walls, fortunately,
but it became louder. Bears? Could bears break
through wooden planks?
Then came a harsh whisper. “Follow the path
up the hill and meet me at the lone tree.”
I let out my breath. Not bears. The Cadet.
“When?” I asked.
“Whenever you can break away from the
group.”

Camp alien 33
As soon as I’d finished in the latrine, I ran
behind the building but couldn’t see anything.
At least I’d made contact. I would try to slip
away after lunch.
The dining hall was a big open-sided shed,
like a huge picnic shelter with heavy log
pillars holding up the roof. Long tables and
benches were lined up on a concrete slab.
After filing through the serving line, we
sat down to eat tomato soup and greasy
grilled cheese sandwiches. Then the counselors had us play get-acquainted games and
sing songs.
My mind wasn’t on any of it. I kept looking
around at the counselors, the cooks, and even
the janitors, wondering who the alien was.
A female with a harsh voice was all I knew.
After lunch, I saw Opal outside the dining
hall, shyly standing alone. Before I could slip
away, she latched onto me and began complaining about her cabinmates. “All they
do is talk about cheerleading and becoming
movie stars or dancers. I’m a klutz at all that.

Camp alien 35
They don’t talk about animals or rocks or anything outdoorsy. I wish you were a girl so I
could be your cabinmate.”
I silently thanked heaven that I wasn’t,
said something dippy about how she’d probably get to like them once she knew them better, then slipped off in the direction of the
boys’ cabins. What I’d just told her was probably good advice that I should try to apply to
myself and my own cabinmates. But frankly, making friends wasn’t what I needed to
be focusing on now. I had an assignment to
get through.
Once most people had returned to their
cabins for what was billed as “rest time,”
I strolled instead toward the latrine, then
passed by its stinky island, and continued up
the hill. After a while, a faint path left the
trees and continued through a stretch of dry
grass to an ancient, gnarled pine tree. There
was no one around. I sat at the base of the
tree, wishing I could remember the Cadet’s
name so I could call her.

36 Alien Agent
The sun was warm. Leaning against the
rough trunk, I looked sleepily around at the
rocks poking through the thin soil. On one,
a lizard sat sunning himself, unmoving except
for the tiny rise and fall of his jeweled sides.
Insects whirred and birds chirped.
With a start I opened my eyes, realizing I’d
fallen asleep. It couldn’t have been for long.
The lizard was still there.
I gasped. No way was that the same lizard!
It was bigger, much bigger. I jumped up and
stared. It looked like something from a dinosaur movie. A velociraptor!
It was six feet away, and I was staring right
into its eyes. Yellow, beady eyes.
“Zackary Gaither,” it hissed. “Galactic Agents
do not sleep on duty!”

e

e

re
h
t
r

pt
Cha

Camp alien 37

I stared at the Hollywood horror in front of
me. My legs tensed, but I forced myself to stay.
This was my partner!
Swallowing, I croaked, “Fine, but I’m just
the local help. You’re . . . what was your name
again?”
“Itl Vraj Boynyo Tg.” The creature’s toothy
mouth twitched in an unmistakable sneer.
“Obviously that’s beyond you. Use Vraj.”
“Right. I’m Zack.” I tried not to stare at
those teeth and claws. I knew I shouldn’t be
surprised that some aliens would look . . . really alien. It’s just that most of those I’d met

38 Alien Agent
before, including me, looked human. No wonder this one needed some help. She certainly
couldn’t pass as a native.
“So what do we do now?” I said, trying to
sound like I talked to velociraptor look-alikes
every day.
“What I’ve been doing for two days—looking
for Duthwi eggs. And I could finish this job by
myself if it weren’t for the time factor.”
“The time factor?”
With a gargling growl, she flung up her
short arms. “Put in this translator. Speaking
your language hurts worse than having
teeth pulled.”
She reached into a shoulder bag and held up
a little black thing that looked like a metal spider. Then she jammed it into my ear. I stumbled
back against the tree. Talk about pain! It felt
like someone had attacked my ear with a heavyduty staple gun. But before I could scream, the
pain had dropped to a low throb. Hesitantly, I
poked a finger into my ear. I couldn’t feel any
bump. Had the thing gone right inside?

Camp alien 39
She was talking again. “The more light that
Duthwi eggs are exposed to, the sooner they
hatch.” Now I could hear growly sounds underlying echoey English. I tried to concentrate
on the words instead of my sore ear.
“But we don’t know when this batch was
laid,” she said, “so we don’t know how long
we have.”
“Where do we look?” I asked and was suddenly unsure what language I’d said that in.
My throat hurt like I’d swallowed a cactus.
Was I actually speaking her language? Cool.
This gizmo in my ear could be a big help in my
Spanish class.
In any case, she’d clearly understood me.
“The smugglers dumped them in a rocky ravine
on the other side of this hill.” She jabbed a
clawed finger toward the north. At least that
sounded close.
“So they should be pretty easy to collect,”
I suggested. She snorted, and I half expected
to see smoke billow from her nostrils. “You
haven’t seen a Duthwi egg, have you?”

40 Alien Agent
She reached into a large bag and thrust
something round into my hand. It was shaped
like a large potato with a rough, gray-brown
surface. Basically it looked like a rock, but it
felt a lot lighter than a rock that size should
feel.
“What’s worse,” she said, “is that no two
are exactly alike. I have a device that detects
them, but it only works when I’m already close.
In two days, I’ve only found seven.”
“How many were there to start with?”
“One hundred.”
Ninety-three rocklike things to find in a
­ravine full of rocks. I groaned. “What’s so
special about these things that anyone would
bother smuggling them anyway?”
Her sneer exposed an alarming number of
teeth. I hoped Cadets weren’t allowed to eat
their partners. “You certainly are ignorant.
Duthwi are among the most prized hunting
prey in the galaxy. They are fast and challenging to hit. And they are absolutely delicious
to eat.”

Camp alien 41
She grinned. Don’t look at her teeth, I told
myself. Look at her . . . skin. A pebbly, yellowgreen, it looked slick and hard as china—not
that anyone would want a china figurine anything like Vraj.
Snatching the egg back, she continued.
“They’re an endangered species because so
many other species hunt them. Those Gnairt
were taking them to an illegal hunting reserve
somewhere in this sector. Once we round up
the eggs, the Patrol will send a ship to return
them to their home world. They’re too dangerous to leave here.”
How dangerous? I added that to the list of
questions I didn’t have time to ask. I needed
to get back. “OK, I’ll help you tonight. It’s
hard for me to get away during the day, and
you shouldn’t risk being out in the daylight in
case anyone sees you.”
She growled. “Yes. A young native saw me
yesterday and made an unimaginable fuss.”
I could imagine. Good thing kids from that
last session had already left. Luckily, no one

42 Alien Agent
would believe a kid saying they’d seen a dinosaur anyway. “I’ll meet you by this tree once
everyone’s asleep.”
“Don’t dawdle. Your schedule is slowing my
mission enough.”
What a charmer, I thought as I headed back
to the cabin. Was this one a particular jerk, or
was her whole species like her? I sighed. At
the rate Vraj had been collecting eggs, it would
take every night this session to find them all.
Lots of sleep was obviously not in my future.
As I trudged past the outhouse, something
leapt at me. I stifled a yelp. “Opal! What are
you doing here?”
“And what are you doing chatting with monsters? What was that thing?”
Trouble. I’d been warned that one of my
main duties was to keep the existence of aliens
an absolute secret. I had to think fast.
“What do you think it was?”
“Well, it looked like a dinosaur, but I’m not
that stupid.”
“Oh, but it is a dinosaur.” I looked around

Camp alien 43
theatrically. “This is a really big secret. You
can’t tell anyone.”
Her eyes were enormous. “I promise. A real
dinosaur? But how . . . ”
“My dad’s a scientist. He learned that not all
dinosaurs became extinct. Some evolved into
intelligent creatures, but they hide from humans so that we don’t put them in zoos. This
one needs our help, that’s all.”
“Cool! Can I help too?”
I tried not to groan. A lot of good it would
do to say no. She’d just tag along anyway.
“OK. I’ll meet you here after lights-out. If we
think we can trust you, you can help.”
“Oh yes, you can trust me!”
I looked her in the eye. “I hope so, because
even evolved dinosaurs aren’t always friendly—especially ones with big teeth.”
Opal went pale as a marshmallow but quavered, “Got it. Absolute secret.”
“Good. Now let’s get back before we’re both
in trouble.”
I caught some trouble anyway when I entered

44 Alien Agent
my cabin. “Didn’t you hear the rules?” Scott
snapped. “At rest time we’re supposed to be in
our cabins.”
“Well, I am now,” I said, climbing to my
bunk. “I had to cheer up a younger camper
who was majorly homesick.” The other three
made snide comments but went back to reading their sports magazines. I laid on my bunk,
worrying about a supposedly simple assignment that had turned out to be full of camouflaged eggs, an alien dinosaur, and a really
inconvenient witness. Finally, a gong called us
all to our units.
Nature Nuts House was a small log building
next to an open-sided shelter like a smaller
version of the dining hall. A half-dozen tables
and benches filled the open space. I sat at one
randomly then glanced up to see Opal sliding
onto the bench across from me, looking like
she would burst with our secret. She’d never
make a spy.
Muskrat, the chief Nature Nuts counselor, began talking about the wonders of nature we’d

Camp alien 45
discover: animals, trees, insects, birds, wildflowers, and weather. And we’d all do an individual project.
I wasn’t paying much attention until Opal
leaned forward and whispered loudly, “I’ll do
my project on dinosaurs!”
“A lovely idea,” Muskrat said, overhearing,
“but let’s confine our projects to parts of nature we can actually see.”
At that Opal giggled and kicked me under
the table. I glowered menacingly at her, wishing I had Vraj’s teeth to back it up.
The afternoon was spent in a meadow south
of camp looking at wildflowers. Thrilling, I’m
sure, but I kept my eyes open for Duthwi eggs.
All of the rocks I picked up were heavy like
real rocks. Muskrat noticed my rock fixation.
“Maybe you’d like your special project to be
about rocks, Zack,” she said brightly.
I nodded glumly. I had enough special projects already.
The rest of the day went by in a blur. More

46 Alien Agent
nature stuff, dinner, a campfire with songs and
marshmallows. Mostly my mind was on how to
make my non-extinct dinosaur story more convincing for Opal while not ticking off Vraj that
I’d involved a clueless native.
Back in our cabin, Ramon, Carlos, and Scott
all started chattering about the endurance
course they were going to run. I slipped under my covers, hoping nobody noticed I was
fully dressed, and pretended to fall asleep.
Eventually the others did for real, and I lay
there thinking about how to get down from my
bunk without shaking the creaky bed and waking someone up.
I could always say I had to go to the latrine,
but if I did that every night they might get
suspicious. But suspicious of what? That I
was a recovering bed wetter? That I was really a vampire who slipped out at night to suck
blood? No, a vampire could just turn into a bat
and fly off without creaking anything. OK, so
not a vampire. An alien.
I smiled a little at that. There were those

Camp alien 47
alien powers I’d discovered earlier. Since then
I’d tried not to think about them, because
they freaked me out. Actually the climbing
hadn’t been too scary, but what freaked me out
was that it didn’t scare me. It came perfectly
naturally. Not for the first time, I wondered
what my real species was like. I shrugged the
thought away. Basically I was human—with
just a few odd additions.
Quietly, I slipped to the foot of my bunk
where it butted against a wall. Trying to keep
my mind blank, I grabbed the rough logs and
scrambled down like Lizardman.
I left the cabin with everyone still asleep,
then hurried toward the latrine. Smell hung
around the place like a cloud, but Opal wasn’t
there yet. I hoped maybe she’d forgotten,
but soon I heard her crunching up the path.
Definitely not spy material.
She jumped when I stepped out of the shadows, but she recovered quickly and said, “OK,
Zack, tell me what your friend needs help
with.”

48 Alien Agent
I had my story ready. “Like I said, these
evolved dinosaurs stay away from humans, except for people they trust, like my dad and me.
This one was in charge of moving a nursery
of dinosaur eggs away from where people were
building new houses. But there was an accident, and the eggs spilled over a mountainside
near here. So my friend needs help collecting
them.
“Wow!” Opal was silent a moment. “You can
talk with her?”
I nodded. My ear still hurt from the translator. “Dad taught me their language. I’ll have
to translate for you.” At least Opal wouldn’t
be able to hear what that nasty-tempered alien
was really saying.
“Come on,” I said as I headed off through the
dark and rather spooky forest. Shadows moved
jaggedly in the wind, and the only sounds were
creaking branches and hissing pine needles.
“Maybe she’s there already,” I said, trying to
hurry Opal along. “Dinosaurs are short tempered. They don’t like to be kept waiting.”

Camp alien 49
The same could be said for grouchy aliens, but
I kept that to myself.
But Vraj wasn’t there. We were alone on
the open hillside except for the big tree, rustling night creatures, and a whole lot of stars
overhead.
“Look, there’s Andromeda!” Opal said.
My head swiveled around. Not another camper! Then I noticed Opal was pointing into the
sky.
“You hardly ever get to see her in a city. Too
much light. And there’s Pegasus above her,
that big square.”
Constellations. Actually, I kind of wished
I knew something about them, since I apparently came from out there somewhere. Maybe
Opal could . . .
My thoughts were snapped back to earth by
a cracking twig. Vraj bounded up to us, scales
glinting in the starlight. Opal shrank back
against me.
“What’s this?” the alien growled in her
language.

Camp alien 51
“Opal saw you, Vraj,” I said in English, using
what I hoped was a calm, soothing voice. “And
she wants to help. I explained how you are an
evolved dinosaur hiding from humans and that
you lost a bunch of dinosaur eggs and need
help finding them.”
Vraj’s face crinkled into an expression I was
glad I couldn’t read. “This infant thinks I’m an
extinct primitive reptile?” Her snarl was untranslatable. “Well, what’s done is done. But
she’d better keep quiet about this.”
“Opal’s promised not to say a word,” I said
loudly.
“Right,” Opal quavered timidly from behind
me. I was glad she was only getting my end of
the conversation. “I can keep secrets.”
Vraj growled at me. “She’d better. Remember,
neither of us can afford to have this mission
fail.”
Though I still didn’t know exactly what
the danger was, Sorn had made it clear these
Duthwi were a threat to Earth. Was Vraj so
uptight about the mission because she was a

52 Alien Agent
Cadet trying to prove herself? Maybe this was
her first mission. If she was just a kid, I’d hate
to meet her parents.
Vraj held out an egg. “All right. This is what
we’re looking for. Not easy on a rocky hillside
in the dark.”
I looked at the egg clutched in her claw.
“But it helps that it glows.”
“Glows?” Vraj growled.
Mistake. I could see the glow, but apparently
Vraj’s kind of alien couldn’t. I didn’t want Opal
to catch on that I had special alien powers.
“Eh . . . maybe it’s just reflecting starlight.”
“No, it’s glowing all right,” Opal chirped.
“These should be as easy to find as giant
glowworms.”
I relaxed. It seemed that humans and
my own species could both see the glow, but
Vraj’s  beady  yellow eyes couldn’t. The Cadet
grunted with  annoyance and turned to go
­uphill. She moved ahead in quick jerky steps,
her tail sweeping back and forth. I guess, all
told, I was lucky to get this sort of alien for a

Camp alien 53
partner. Something that looked like a badly
animated movie dinosaur was still easier to
­explain to Opal than some green alien with
three heads.
Through the misty starlight, Vraj led us over
the crest of a ridge and onto a steep hillside
bare of everything but rocks. Zillions of rocks.
Glow or not, it wasn’t going to be easy to find
those eggs. And if we didn’t find them soon,
two mismatched alien kids—and maybe this
whole planet—could be in big trouble.

ur
o
f
er

pt

Cha

It was the weirdest egg hunt I’d ever been
on. After long hours of scrabbling in the dark,
we were tired and cold, and our eyes ached.
All we had to show for it were nine more eggs.
Nine plus Vraj’s seven left eighty-four more
eggs to find.
The sky was paling to gray when Opal and
I slipped back into our cabins. It seemed like
the wake-up gong sounded only seconds after
I’d crawled into bed. But by then it was fully
light, and everyone was bustling around, excited about the first full day of camp. As for
me, I almost fell asleep at breakfast and nearly
drowned in my pancake syrup.

camp alien 55
After breakfast, I blearily noticed that
Melanie had cornered Opal between the dining
hall and the nurse’s cabin and was apparently
making her cry. I told myself to ignore it, but
nobody deserves to be bullied, not even little
pests like Opal. And with Opal holding that big
secret, I figured I’d better check things out.
“So who’s your boyfriend?” Melanie was saying as I walked closer. “Tell me, or I’ll tell the
counselors I saw you sneak out last night to
meet a boy.”
“I didn’t,” Opal sobbed. “I don’t have a
boyfriend.”
Melanie had backed Opal against a tree and
was smirking down at her. Angrily, I stepped
up to them. “Hey, leave the kid alone,” I said.
“Don’t you have some artsy showing off to do?”
Melanie spluttered. Then suddenly a nasty
glint came into her eye. “It was you, wasn’t it?
The guy was tall and dark haired. I saw that
when they came back.”
Opal started to protest, but I jumped in.
“Melanie, who would have guessed you have

56 Alien Agent
such a dirty mind? If you must know, we’re
planning our Nature Nuts project. We want to
lead a nighttime hike, but we need to figure
out where to go.”
Opal, eyes big and teary, nodded earnestly.
Melanie sneered. “You expect me to believe
that?”
I shrugged. “Who cares what you believe?
But when we get the hike planned, Arts Farts
and Sports Dorks will not be invited.”
As we split up, Opal gave me the thumbs up,
followed by what looked like dinosaur claws.
When it came to keeping a secret, that kid was
a time bomb.
Still, when we got to Nature Nuts that morning, I had an idea churning. As Opal and I settled onto a bench, I tried it on Muskrat. “Opal
and I have a great project idea, and it could
involve other people’s projects too. A nighttime hike. Chelsea could do her bird-call project with owls, and Opal could point out constellations and tell their stories.”

Camp alien 57
I talked right over Opal’s squeaking protest.
“And I could do a thing about rocks. My dad
says there’s a special type of rock on a hillside near here. They sort of glow in the dark,
so searching for them would be perfect for a
nighttime hike.”
Suddenly catching on, Opal stifled a giggle.
Muskrat beamed. “Wonderful. We counselors were thinking of a nighttime hike, but we
never knew about the rocks. Nothing’s scheduled for tomorrow night. How about holding
it then?”
“But I can’t talk in front of people about
constellations,” Opal whispered after Muskrat
had gone.
“Of course you can. You know your stuff,
and this will make good our excuse to Melanie.
Plus it will give us an army to look for Vraj’s
eggs.”
Nature Nuts spent the afternoon looking for
animal tracks on the muddy edge of a swamp.
Mostly that meant dodging mosquitoes and

58 Alien Agent
water snakes. Beyond the reeds, we could hear
the Sports Sprites having fun canoeing on Lake
Takhamasak. I had to keep telling myself I was
not at this camp to have fun. Still, canoeing
appealed a bit more to me than tracking toads
in a swamp.
That night I convinced Opal to stay in her cabin so Melanie wouldn’t get all suspicious again.
I sneaked out to the lone pine to tell Vraj our
plans. The scaly alien guilt-tripped me into
looking for eggs for a few hours, bringing our
total number of eggs needed down to eightyone. Hopefully reinforcements would help.
At breakfast the next day, the nature counselors announced that our group would go on
an overnight nature hike that evening. We
spent much of that day planning for the excursion. After dinner, the Nature Nuts shouldered
packs and sleeping bags and headed for the hill
with the lone pine, the place that Opal and I
had suggested. Not much of a trek from a hiking point of view, but it nicely fit the counselors’ idea of experiencing nature at night.

Camp alien 59
Chelsea did her owl talk, and a real owl
even answered her feeble imitations. A kid
named Walt talked about nighttime animals
like raccoons, possums, and skunks. There
were lots of skunk jokes after that, but I was
more worried about seeing dinosaurs at night.
I had warned Vraj to stay out of sight, but she
didn’t seem to take orders well from a near
native.
Next was Opal’s turn. Muskrat practically had
to drag her from behind the pine tree to get her
to stand in front of the group. Mechanically
Opal began pointing out constellations and
mumbling the names that are attached to each
group of stars. But when someone asked her
about the names, Opal started telling the Greek
myths about each constellation. By the time
she got to the story of Andromeda, she was really into it, and her shyness evaporated.
“This one’s got a really cool myth,” she said enthusiastically. “This queen, named Cassiopeia,
brags that her daughter, Andromeda, is prettier
than the sea god Neptune’s daughters. Neptune

60 Alien Agent
gets mad and sends Draco the Sea Monster to
destroy the town. Well, Andromeda’s dad, King
Cepheus, chains Andromeda to a rock so Draco
will eat her instead. (Thanks, Dad.)” The kids
laughed at that, and Opal beamed.
“So meanwhile,” she continued, “somewhere
else in Greece, a hero named Perseus has just
killed the Gorgon, a lady with snakes for hair
who is so ugly that people turn to stone just
looking at her. He flies by on his winged horse,
Pegasus, turns Draco to stone with the Gorgon’s
head, and then flies off with Andromeda to live
happily ever after.”
All those characters were supposed to be seen
in the constellations. Those ancient Greeks
must have had pretty good imaginations to
connect a bunch of scattered stars into those
pictures. I wondered suddenly if people on the
planet I came from connected stars into different constellations. I had to drop that train
of thought as Opal finished her talk. Everyone applauded, and she blushed a bright,
happy red.

62 Alien Agent
It was my turn next, but the campers were
getting pretty restless, so I raised my voice and
threw my arms around like I was on stage.
“Listen up, Nature Nuts! Now comes the exciting Magic Stone Quest. Duthwite is a rare
rock that can only be found near here. We’re
going out and looking for it!”
“Looking for rocks at night?” some kid called.
“Give us a break!”
“Ah, that’s the best time to find Duthwite.
By day, it looks like this.” I held up one egg
Vraj had lent me and shone my flashlight on it.
It looked like a dirty potato.
“So it’s a rock. Big deal,” that kid said.
“But at night, it looks like this!” I switched
off my flashlight. The “rock” glowed a spooky
blue-green.
“Oooo,” everyone said.
“Now, we’re going to look for them. The person who finds the most wins this huge bag of
candy!”
I held up the bag my mom had given me
to share with my cabinmates. My particular

Camp alien 63
cabinmates hadn’t inspired me to share much,
but this was a good cause.
We all trooped over the ridge into the rocky
valley, twenty-five kids and three counselors.
This army of Nature Nuts spread over the hillside and soon began finding “Duthwite.” Even
the counselors were having too much fun to
call it quits. But after a couple of hours, the
finds became fewer and the younger kids were
tiring, so we trooped back to our hillside camp.
After the counselors checked each kid’s take,
the prize went to a shy kid named Ted who
suddenly had a lot of friends.
Once the campfire was going, the others
roasted marshmallows and sang songs while
I counted the eggs and stuffed them into sacks.
Eighty exactly. We’d only missed one! Vraj
could find that one on her own. As for me, it
was Mission Accomplished.
After everyone had quieted down and crawled
into their sleeping bags, I looked up at the
countless stars spangling overhead. A shooting star streaked silently across the others,

64 camp alien
disappearing behind the trees. Out there, some
people were wondering if a couple of alien
agents down here were doing their job. And we
had! Vraj would get the eggs out of here, the
mysterious danger they posed to Earth would
be gone, and aliens would leave me alone for a
while. Maybe I could even start enjoying this
camp, horses or not.
Which goes to show that when things seem
too good to be true, they usually are.

p

Cha

ve

fi
r
e
t

Back at camp the next morning, I stored the
sacks of “Duthwite” in a closet at Nature Nuts
House, and that night I reported briefly to Vraj.
She planned to search that night for the last
egg, collect the others, and leave Earth.
So the following morning, when Muskrat reported anxiously that someone had stolen my
Duthwite, I was hardly surprised, though the
way the closet door had been smashed in just
confirmed that Vraj was an inconsiderate, or at
least impatient, jerk. But anyway, all that was

66 Alien Agent
behind me now, so I was determined to focus
on actually being at camp.
Our activity that morning had us sitting at
the tables by the Nature Nuts House and making baskets from reeds we’d collected in the
swamp. Mine looked like a nest that birds had
rejected. Opal was actually sitting with other
friends she’d been making. I was happy to be
sitting by myself at a table by the edge of the
woods.
When I came back to the table from getting
more reeds, another kid had joined me. His
basket looked pretty good, but I couldn’t see
his face under his pulled down hat. His thin
fingers were weaving reeds like lightning. Thin
fingers with long claws.
“Vraj?” I whispered, peering under the hat.
“I thought you’d be gone by now!” She grimaced with all her teeth. The shirt fit oddly
and her tail must have been tucked into the
baggy pants.
Sticking her mouth frighteningly close, she
hissed. “The Gnairt are back. They stole all

Camp alien 67
the eggs you found from your Nature Nuts closet and hauled them somewhere. Now, I’ve got
to find them again! If I need your help, I’ll tap
at your window tonight. Those thieving Gnairt
probably won’t leave without the eggs I found
earlier, and mine are well hidden.”
I would have been annoyed at that jab if I
hadn’t been so freaked at the idea of creepy
Gnairt being around.
“So how come your Galactic Patrol didn’t
keep the Gnairt away?”
She snorted. “Patrol ships are spread thin
just now. Looks like we’re on our own here.”
If the translator got it right, she sounded a
little scared.
“Alert that Opal person too,” she continued. “Much as I hate to say it, we may need
her help. Things are getting tricky, even for a
trained professional like me.”
Trained indeed. She was just a kid getting
training on the job. Like me.
Vraj completed her basket and examined it
from several angles. Tucking it under her little

68 Alien Agent
arm, she disappeared into the woods. The
counselors never noticed the brief appearance
of a new camper, though I wondered which kid
would soon be reporting missing clothes.
At lunch I told Opal about the mysterious
basket maker, and she was delighted about
maybe having another adventure with her dinosaur friend. I wasn’t. I’d had enough adventures with aliens for one year. But that night,
I lulled myself to sleep with the thought that
“experienced professional Vraj” could probably
handle this herself, and I’d seen the last of her.
Dream on.
A tapping noise—it sounded like a branch
blowing against the glass—pulled me from
sleep. There were no trees near that window. I
scrambled down the log wall, pulled on clothes
as quietly as I could, and slipped outside.
Two figures waited in the tree shadows cast
by a bright half moon. “I’ve found the Gnairt’s
camp,” Vraj whispered harshly. “They probably don’t know they’re dealing with an official

Camp alien 69
of the Galactic Patrol, but I may need some
backup in the rescue.”
Opal was jumping around, wanting to know
what the “dinosaur” said. I only changed it a
little. “She says she may need our help rescuing the eggs from her enemies.” I hoped
that Opal would never actually meet those
enemies. Gnairt might be sort of human
looking, but based on personal experience,
I knew they are definitely more dangerous than
most of the dinosaurs that ever lived.
Vraj was already trotting off into the shadowy trees. Opal and I hurried, trying to catch
up. I wondered if all of Vraj’s people were this
snotty or if it was only the cocky kids trying
to prove how great they are.
We’d almost lost sight of Vraj when a voice
came from the shadows right beside us. “Going
somewhere, little lovers?”
We spun around. Two people stood there, one
cabinmate for each of us—Scott and Melanie,
both looking smug.
“Can’t think of a more unlikely couple,”

70 Alien Agent
Melanie said. “But isn’t tapping on windows
awfully old-fashioned?”
“Hey, it’s not what you think,” Opal
protested.
“No,” Scott offered. “Instead of going off to
smooch in the woods, it’s some science experiment. Forget it. You’ve already used up that
excuse.”
Opal was spluttering into a story, but I trusted my imagination more than hers. “It’s not
an experiment, it’s a rescue. We found out who
stole the Duthwite and we’re going to get it
back.”
“Who’d want a bunch of old rocks?” Melanie
laughed.
“What do you know?” Opal piped up. “You
didn’t see them.”
“Right,” I added. “They’re rare glow-inthe-dark rocks. Rock dealers would pay lots
for them.”
Scott snorted. “So a couple of clueless kids
confront big bad rock robbers. That’s a weak
TV plot.”

Camp alien 71
“Sorry, but it’s true.” Then I smiled. “You
can come and watch if you’d like. But maybe
you ought to get back to your cabins before
people start thinking you two are secret nighttime lovers.”
As both bubbled protest, I headed into the
trees. “Come on, Opal, the trail’s getting cold.”
When I turned to check, we weren’t being followed. But we had also lost our guide. After
stumbling along for a while, we finally saw her
waiting in a patch of watery moonlight, tail
twitching impatiently.
“About time you shook those two. I don’t
need any more native help.” She turned and
jogged off again with us straggling behind.
After what seemed like miles, she stopped at
the top of a ridge.
“The Gnairt are camped down there. I listened
in on them, and their plans have changed—for
the worse. Instead of leaving with the eggs,
they want to let them hatch here. Then they’ll
bring in rich hunters, using Earth’s natural
wildlife as an added hunting attraction.”

72 Alien Agent
“But that could . . . ” I was struggling to find
a way to say things so that Opal, who was understanding only my part of the conversation,
wouldn’t catch on to the truth.
Vraj continued through my translator. “That
could devastate Earth, what with hatched
Duthwi flying everywhere and alien hunters swarming about shooting every animal
they see. It would totally destroy the Galactic
Union’s approach to bringing in new planets gradually. Your natives would hate aliens
after that.”
I felt sick and chilled, as if I’d chugged down
too much ice water. The worst part was that so
much depended on the three of us. Laughable—
if it wasn’t so scary.
“What’s she saying?” Opal squeaked.
“Er . . . mainly she’s cussing out the egg stealers. They’re camped down there.”
Creeping slowly to the crest of the ridge,
we peered down through a screen of bushes.
Nestled among trees below was what looked
like a dome tent glowing with lantern light.

74 Alien Agent
It was probably more high-tech than that, but
for Opal’s sake I was glad it looked so Earthly.
“They have the eggs in there with them,”
Vraj whispered. “We need to get the Gnairt
away long enough to steal back the sacks. If
I go down the valley a little way and create
a diversion, you two could snatch the eggs.”
I explained the plan to Opal. She liked it—
better than I did. I knew these weren’t bad
guys trying to make a buck stealing glowing
rocks. They were creepy aliens who packed
some nasty weapons. But there didn’t seem to
be a lot of choices.
Vraj slipped off through the bushes and was
soon out of sight. Lying on our stomachs on
the damp mossy ground, Opal and I watched
the tent. She tried to ask me more about
evolved dinosaurs, but I shushed her. I doubted we could be heard from here, but my brain
was tired of making up stuff.
The chugging and peeping of night creatures
suddenly hushed. A new noise took over. It
sounded like several people screaming at the

Camp alien 75
tops of their lungs. Then they came crashing through bushes at the lower end of the
ravine.
“Help! Eeeek! A monster! Run to that tent!
Maybe they’ve got guns!”
Two screaming people charged up the ravine
heading for the Gnairt’s tent. At the same time
two other shapes slipped from the back of the
tent and fled through the trees.
Not the diversion any of us were expecting,
but it worked. Anyway, this was our chance.
Opal and I pelted down the slope and reached
the tent just ahead of the two screamers.
Leaping inside, we grabbed the stolen canvas
sacks. I turned to see Melanie and Scott staring
at us, wide-eyed, through the tent opening.
“What are you two doing here?” Opal said.
“We didn’t believe you,” Scott gasped. “We
followed you and . . . What is that thing out
there? It’s coming this way!”
“What thing?” I asked innocently.
“Like a dinosaur,” Melanie wailed. “With lots
of teeth!”

Camp alien 77
“Oh, that,” I said, looking around desperately, stalling for time. Several alien devices
were scattered around the tent. I grabbed one
randomly. Probably just a Gnairt can opener, but it did look pretty impressive. “That’s
just my laser holographic projection. I create
it with this gizmo. I wanted to scare away the
thieves so we could grab the rocks. But I guess
you ran into the image first and instead scared
them for us.”
Opal looked at me, obviously impressed. So
was I.
I shouldered one of the sacks and thrust the
other at Scott. “Let’s split before they come
back.”
The four of us scrambled up the ravine. I
stayed in the lead, keeping an eye on the trees
ahead of us and the just-visible flicking of Vraj’s
tail. Eventually it led us to a different path,
one that ran around the lake toward camp.
We walked for a while without saying anything. Then Melanie’s voice broke the silence.
“Sorry we didn’t believe you, Opal.”

78 Alien Agent
“That’s OK,” the pudgy little girl replied.
She was swinging along with a more confident step, and I could almost feel her radiating
happiness.
“That sure is a cool projection thing you
have,” Scott said. “It convinced us all right.”
He laughed sheepishly.
With my free hand, I patted the little can
opener or whatever it was that I’d stuck in my
belt. “My dad’s a scientist. He thought I’d
have fun with this thing at camp.”
“Hey, Zack,” Opal said. “Where are we going
to hide these things so the bad guys don’t steal
them again?”
I frowned. “The camp buildings aren’t safe,
it seems. What we need is to dig a big hole and
bury them until . . . until they’re taken away.
But we don’t have the time or the shovels.”
“Hey, I know,” Scott said, “if you don’t mind
a suggestion.”
I almost liked Scott now that he was deflated
a little. “Out with it.”
“We Sports Sprites had a water sports fest

Camp alien 79
and Hawaiian luau yesterday. We dug a big
hole up by the fire circle for roasting yams. It’s
not filled in yet.”
“Then that’s where we’re headed,” I said,
veering to the right.
It wasn’t long before we reached the fire circle, dumped the sacks into the luau pit, and
filled it in from the pile of loose dirt. Then we
sat on the fire circle logs, tired and dirty, but
not yet ready to go back to our cabins.
And now we had an added complication.
These two new recruits, though they knew less
of the truth than Opal, could still mess things
up. I’d caught a glimpse of Vraj hiding behind
a bush, and I knew she’d be fretting about a
security leak.
I cleared my throat. “Scott and Melanie, I’m
sorry you got scared and all, but could I ask
a favor? Could you keep quiet about this?”
“Sure thing,” Scott said. He probably didn’t
want people to know that Mr. Big-Man-aboutCamp had been scared witless.
“I won’t tell either,” Melanie said, then

80 Alien Agent
switched to a wheedling voice. “But could I
ask a favor back?”
“What?” I asked cautiously.
“Well, we Arts Angels are supposed to come
up with individual projects, poetry or painting
or something. I should do something theatrical of course, since that’s my art, but I can’t
think of a thing. If I . . . if we put together
a show using that laser projector, it would be
a real hit.”
“Yeah,” Opal said excitedly, then clapped a
hand over her mouth, probably just realizing
there was no laser projector.
Scott jumped in. “Right, and if we offer parts
to the others in our cabins, they’ll keep quiet about our being out tonight. We’ll say we
were practicing.”
“Yeah, but . . . ” Opal began.
I waved her down. “Let me think a minute.”
The idea was crazy, but it sounded like fun.
And now that my mission was wrapped up,
I could use some fun.
I stood up. “OK, we could do a play about

Camp alien 81
the Greek myth Andromeda. Opal knows that
stuff so she can write it. Melanie could be the
star, of course, since it’s her project, but we’d
all have parts. We’ll use that projector for the
sea monster, Draco.”
Opal giggled, the others applauded, and I sat
back, hoping Vraj had overheard. She’d said it
would take a while for the Patrol to come pick
up the eggs, so she’d have the time. She might
even enjoy this, and anyway, she owed these
kids something for their help.
Everything, at last, seemed to be winding
up nicely.
When, I wonder, am I going to learn?

p

Cha

x

si
r
e
t

Vraj definitely did not like the idea.
The next night I met with her at our regular
spot, the hill of the lone pine. “You expect me
to take part in stupid, childish native games?”
she spluttered as moonlight glinted dangerously off her teeth.
“Lighten up,” I said, averting my eyes from
those teeth. “Your job here’s nearly done.”
“One egg’s still missing,” Vraj snapped as she
paced around the tree.
Annoyed, I sat down on a fallen log. “Then
look for it. Or maybe somebody miscounted.
Anyway, the eggs are safe from hatching now,
tucked away from light in that pit. You’ve got

camp alien 83
to wait around for the ship so you might as
well have some fun.”
“This will not be fun.”
I shrugged. “OK, then it’s duty. Planned
or not, you’ve involved a lot of native kids
in completing this mission. Opal has been a
help, and it was Scott and Melanie who scared
the Gnairt from their tent. And remember all
those kids who collected your eggs? They deserve some payback. If you take the part of
a laser-projected Draco, some of the kids will
have fun doing the play and others will have
fun watching it.”
“As a member of the Galactic Patrol Corps,
it’s beneath my dignity to . . . ”
“Bah. You’re a Cadet. And is dignity more
important than honor? Aren’t you honor bound
to help those who have helped you?”
Her grumbling wasn’t translated, but finally
she snarled, “All right, what do I do?”
“We have permission to rehearse during rest
periods starting tomorrow. If you sneak down
to the fire circle and watch, you’ll see what’s

84 Alien Agent
expected of Draco. It’s easy. All you have to
do is stalk up to Andromeda, look fierce, and
threaten to eat her.”
She grumbled again.
“Come on, I can’t believe your species doesn’t
have plays.”
“Of course we do! We have highly developed
art forms. But this is . . . ”
“This is your chance to be a star. Most members of the Galactic Patrol Corps never get a
chance like this. And here you’ve lucked out
on your first assignment.”
She scowled but didn’t contradict me. So I’d
been right all along. This was her first assignment. She probably wasn’t much older than
me.
She kept grumbling like a small green volcano, but finally accepted the role.
For a couple of days, the play consumed
the energies of two cabins, Opal’s and mine.
Bessy and Jessy were thrilled to be acting with
a real, experienced actress, the Hollywood-

Camp alien 85
bound Melanie. Following Scott’s lead, even
Ramon and Carlos got into it. Rehearsals were
a bit ragged because not everyone had learned
their lines, but Melanie flounced around like a
temperamental director, shaming them into it.
Occasionally I saw a flicker in the bushes. Our
surprise cast member.
The campfire area on a bluff overlooking Lake
Takhamasak made a good stage. Log seating
sloped up from the flat clearing next to the fire
circle. The luau pit had been in part of that
clearing so some of the dirt was soft. However,
most of the stage area was hard packed and
perfect for acting. Bushes screened the area
behind our stage.
On the night of our performance, everyone
in the cast was almost too nervous to eat. I’d
met with Vraj the night before, giving her special instructions. She still scorned the whole
idea, but I thought her reptilian glare seemed
less fierce than usual. A hint of excitement
trying to break through?
The cast and the other performers at the

86 Alien Agent
night’s campfire were excused early from the
dining hall. We rushed back to our cabins to
put on costumes and then headed down to
the fire circle. I stuck my Gnairt gizmo in the
pocket of the old bathrobe I was wearing as my
king costume. I had to make sure that everyone would think Vraj was a laser projection.
Nervously we checked the props: the thrones
for the king and queen, the cardboard rock to
tie Andromeda to, the yardstick swords, and of
course, the Gorgon’s head. Jessy and Bessy had
built it from papier-mâché with rubber snakes
stuck into it so they wriggled and bobbed.
As the first campers trooped toward the fire
circle, we hid behind the bushes. On the excuse of checking my equipment, I slipped
into another clump of bushes where Vraj
was hiding.
“Nervous?” I whispered.
“Of course not!” Her voice seemed higher
than usual.
“All great actors get nervous, you know. This
could start a grand career for you.”

Camp alien 87
She snorted. “I am going to be . . . I am in
the Galactic Patrol.”
“Well, everyone needs a hobby. Besides, if
you have talent, it’d be wrong to deprive the
universe of it.”
“You really think I could have talent?”
“Sure. You’ll knock ‘em dead. Eh . . . that’s
just an expression.”
She grinned, showing more teeth than any
Hollywood star. “Right.”
I joined the other cast members crouching
and waiting. Once all the campers and counselors were seated, the campfire was lit, and
everyone sang the Camp Takhamasak song.
Then three girls sang songs by their favorite
rock group. They did not have a future in music. Next came a boy who juggled pinecones
and tin cups. Judging by audience sounds, he
only dropped things twice.
Then it was us. My stomach tightened. Opal
looked like she was going to be sick.
“You’ll do fine,” I whispered. “If actors
don’t get stage fright, the show wouldn’t have

88 Alien Agent
any zip.” At the moment, it looked like Opal
wanted to zip right out of there. I kept a grip
on her arm and whistled for Ramon and Carlos
to make their entrances.
Dressed as soldiers, they stepped from the
bushes. Their armor was cheesy-looking aluminum foil stuff, but their stick and cardboard
spears looked OK. Scott, crouching beside me,
beat dramatically on a drum. Several kids in
the audience jeered at the soldiers, but counselors hushed them.
I practically had to push Opal out onto the
stage. She began her speech about constellations in a really tiny voice. Someone in the
audience yelled, “louder!” That must have
made her mad because she started belting out
her lines. Scott banged his drum again. Opal
scurried back and threw on her wig and dress.
Then she and I strode out as King Cepheus and
Queen Cassiopeia.
We sat on our thrones, and, to more drum
banging, Melanie, in the role of Andromeda,
skipped out wearing a floaty nightgown thing.

Camp alien 89
She was accompanied by Bessy and Jessy, playing servants. For no reason I can figure out,
those two launched into a cheerleader routine,
waving pine branches and flipping up their little skirts. Through this ridiculous routine, Opal
and I gushed about how beautiful our daughter was. I could have gagged. Melanie must
have helped write those lines.
Finally Opal rose and yelled, “Andromeda
is even more beautiful than the sea nymphs,
Neptune’s daughters!”
That’s when Scott, behind the bushes, bashed
the garbage can to sound like thunder. The
last thwack was so hard I heard the can topple and bounce noisily down the hill. Scott
couldn’t stop it because he was busy making
his entrance. He was the god Neptune, in a
green sheet with shredded bits of garbage bag
trailing off him to look like seaweed.
It was a grand entrance, except that he
stepped on his costume and fell on his face.
Scott pulled himself to his knees. His face
turned from dust-powdered pale to blush

90 Alien Agent
red as laughter from the audience rose in a
wave. He jumped up, waving his pitchfork
menacingly and shouted, “Whoever laughs
at the great god shall feel his wrath after
the show!”
The audience quieted. For a moment, Scott’s
face blanked as he fumbled for his real lines.
I breathed again when he finally turned to us
and thundered, “Whoever compares the beauty
of a mere mortal to my daughters shall feel the
wrath of the great god Neptune!”
That was our cue to scream and wail and fall
on our knees, begging forgiveness. Bessy and
Jessy flailed frantically, and not to be outdone, Melanie threw herself on the ground and
flopped about like a dying fish.
Then came a bunch of talk where nobody
quite got their lines right, but in the end
Neptune agreed he would not send his sea
monster, Draco, to destroy the town, if we tied
Andromeda to a rock for Draco to eat instead.
More screaming and wailing, then everyone ran
into the bushes.

Camp alien 91
The audience cheered and clapped and
started to leave until Scott ran out waving
his pitchfork and yelling, “Sit down! There’s
more coming!” When some kids groaned, he
added, “Shut up! We’ve got special effects!”
Once they settled down, Andromeda entered
slowly followed by the soldiers prodding her
with spears. Then came the two wailing servants and the king and queen. Opal and I were
dressed in black garbage bags that were supposed to make us look like we were in mourning. I think they made us look like walking
garbage bags.
Andromeda was tied to the cardboard rock.
More screaming and wailing, and the two
servants did a sad little dance. Very sad, if
you ask me. Then we all trooped off except
Melanie, who stayed tied to her rock, trying to
look scared and beautiful.
Meanwhile, Scott, crouching behind the bushes, had torn off his Neptune costume and put
on aluminum foil armor and a colander helmet
to play the part of Perseus. Ramon and Carlos

92 Alien Agent
struggled into their Pegasus costume. (They’d
agreed to play the flying horse only if they could
be soldiers at the beginning.) Ramon had lost
the coin flip and gotten stuck with the role of
the horse’s butt. Carlos walked upright, holding the cardboard horse head. Ramon trudged
along, bent over with a yarn tail pinned to his
rear, while he flapped the cardboard Pegasus
wings. Scott walked between them, “riding”
Pegasus and trying to look heroic.
Pretending to not see Melanie, they staggered on stage to hoots of laughter. Scott fumbled through his speech about how he, Perseus,
was just coming back from killing the Gorgon,
whose glance turned people to stone. “Sounds
like our counselors,” some kid yelled. Then
Scott got good squeals when he wiggled the
snake-covered head at the audience.
Now came the special effects. Opal had crawled
out of the bushes and thrown a bunch of pine
needles and sand on the fire to make sparks and
to lower the light. Backstage I was making a
big deal of waving my gizmo and pretending to

Camp alien 93
press buttons. Then from behind the bushes,
we all started moaning, “Oooo, Draco the Sea
Monster! Here comes the terrible monster!
Andromeda is doomed! Doomed!”
On cue, Vraj burst out of the bushes. I’ve got
to admit, she looked plenty scary. And mad
too. I hoped she was just acting. She looked
mad enough to eat somebody for making her
do this.
The effect, though, was great! People
screamed and cried and cheered. Vraj must
have liked that. She made the most of it by
running up and down aisles, flailing her claws,
and snapping her teeth. Then she bounded
back onstage and stalked toward Andromeda.
Melanie’s screams were very realistic. For a second I even thought she might run off, bouncing her cardboard rock behind her.
Vraj was making frightful snarls when Scott
snapped out of his shock and urged his stumbling Pegasus forward. Pretending to jump off,
he pulled out his yardstick sword and waved it
timidly at Draco.

Camp alien 95
Vraj ignored him and kept gloating over miserable Melanie. Scott lunged forward, wiggling
the sword in Vraj’s face.
Explosively, Vraj spun around, yanked the
sword away from Scott, held it in her front
claws, and broke it in two. Watching through
the bushes, I was impressed. I’d just told Vraj
to do what fit the part. She was a natural.
Perseus yelped and jumped back. It was
probably not the reaction he’d expected from a
“projection.” I’d have to think of some way to
explain that later. Draco followed, claws outstretched, jaws gaping. Turning with a convincing scream, Perseus ran into the audience.
Then he seemed to remember that this was a
play and unhooked the dangling Gorgon head
from his belt. Slowly he walked towards Draco,
who was back slathering over Andromeda.
The audience was yelling, laughing, and
screaming with delight. But I was worried.
I wasn’t sure if Vraj understood about the
Gorgon’s head. We hadn’t rehearsed that part
since most of the cast thought it would just be

96 Alien Agent
a projection. Timidly, Perseus stepped forward
and wiggled the head at Draco. Nothing happened, though I caught a questioning look in
the alien’s eye.
“It turns things to stone,” I whispered loudly
under the audience’s screaming. “You turn to
stone and die!”
With a sharp nod, Draco turned and stared
directly into Medusa’s ugly papier mâché face.
Then she squealed like a fire siren and began
leaping about like she was being attacked by
bees. She flailed to the back of the stage and
with one final shriek, fell like a stone into the
bushes and rolled out of sight.
For a moment, we were all stunned. Then
I remembered I was the king. Singing happy
praises for Perseus, I strode from the bushes
with the others trailing me. Perseus untied
Andromeda, they hugged briefly, and we all
danced around the fire circle.
That was supposed to be the end of the
show.
We had circled the fire for the third time

Camp alien 97
when I felt the soft earth move under my feet.
It buckled and heaved like an earthquake in
mush.
Suddenly the ground quaked, toppling me
and the others to the ground. The soil, where
we lay, churned with orange arms that broke
free and began spiraling into the air. All around
us, there were dozens of orange starfish-things
the size of saucers. They swarmed into the air
and swirled about like moths around a light.
Then the swarm changed direction, and they
sailed off into the night. The cloud of orange
stars glided over the lake and disappeared beyond the trees.
After awed silence, the camp exploded with
cheers. What special effects! A Greek myth
turned into stars—right before our eyes! Kids
happily slapped me on the back. I just stood
in stunned horror.
The Duthwi eggs. The heat of the campfire.
They’d hatched! Duthwi were loose on Earth,
they and their mysterious menace. I’d totally
botched my mission!

Camp alien 99
Beyond the bushes, I glimpsed a yellowgreen streak—Cadet Vraj bolting down the hill
and along the lakeshore. Everyone kept congratulating me.
I’d never felt more miserable in my life.

en

v
e
s
er

pt
a
h
C

All the next day, the camp was buzzing about
the show. Kids said I ought to go to Hollywood
if I could do special effects like that. That
annoyed Melanie, who felt she ought to go to
Hollywood after her wonderful acting. I told
her that anyone who could work a computer
could do special effects, but not everyone had
acting talent like hers. It wasn’t true, but it
cheered her up.
Nothing could cheer me up, though. I’d really messed up big time.
I wanted to run out and help, but I didn’t
know how. My last glimpse of Vraj was her

camp alien 101
sprinting after the flying Duthwi, but I hadn’t
a clue where they were now. And I didn’t know
if the mysterious Duthwi menace came when
they were newly hatched or if they had to grow
up first. All I could do was wait for Vraj to contact me.
At Nature Nuts I just grunted when Opal
gushed privately about our wonderful acting
dinosaur and my great star effects though she
couldn’t figure out how I’d done it. I kept mysteriously quiet. When rest time came, I slipped
alone into the woods.
There, everything was quiet and peaceful.
Only a few birds chirped sleepily, and even
the insects sounded soft and drowsy. The air
smelled spicy with pine and warm earth. I
walked and walked without paying attention
to where.
Slowly I noticed that something felt different. The drowsy quiet had slipped into uneasiness. Birds cried sharply overhead. I stared
around and realized the trees here looked like
they’d been blasted by lightning or hit by a

102 Alien Agent
tornado. Splintered wood lay everywhere.
Trees rose halfway up, then ended in jagged
spears.
What could have caused this? The patch of
destruction was maybe thirty yards wide, and
beyond it, the regular forest took up again. I
was picking my way through the mess when
suddenly the explanation was in front of me.
A hole had burned right through a tree
trunk—a hole the shape of a star.
That’s what Sorn had meant about environmental danger. Duthwi ate trees. They destroyed them. And I’d loosed a bunch of them
on the world! If they spread and laid more
eggs, think of the damage they’d do! Oh, well
done, Agent Zack.
I spotted a little brook running through the
blasted patch, half choked with splintered
wood and pine needles. Listlessly I followed
it down the hill until it ran into living forest
again. Then I sat on a mossy rock and stared
gloomily into the silvery water.
Time passed. Gradually I realized the light

Camp alien 103
and shadow on the stream had shifted. Ripples
made one of the sunlit rocks look like it was
moving. I stared. It was moving! It looked
like a lumpy potato, and one of those lumps
was throbbing.
Slowly I reached out and grabbed the thing.
It was warm in my hands. I watched as parts
bulged in and out and little cracks snaked over
the surface. The whole thing shuddered, and
bits of the surface fell off. Orange stuff underneath wiggled like jelly.
Suddenly it shook like a wet dog, and chunks
of shell flew everywhere. An orange blob burst
upward and splattered onto my cheek. It
stuck.
“Mama!”
“I’m not your mama!” Was this thing talking
to me? I didn’t hear any sound, but the translator in my ear was tingling.
“Mama, Mama, Mama!”
I reached up and tried to pull the thing away.
Its gooeyness was beginning to harden—into
the shape of a star.

104 Alien Agent
“Mama, Mama, Mama, where are others?”
“Wha . . . what . . . ” I stuttered. “What others? Oh. The other Duthwi?”
“Brothers and sisters. Miss them. Lonely.”
“I don’t know where they are, but if you get
off my cheek, I’ll get you something to eat.”
Instantly the thing dropped into my hand,
a little orange star about the size of my palm.
“Hungry!”
“Right.” I picked up a piece of tree bark
and put it in the middle of the little star. Its
points closed around the chip, and in seconds
the bark was dust.
“More!”
I fumbled for a larger chunk of bark and
laid it amid the wiggling orange arms. They
snapped closed, and soon that piece was
gone too.
“Sleep now.”
The star closed in a tight ball and stopped
wiggling. Astonished, I stared at the little
thing. It must think I’m its mother because
it saw me before anything else. I decided I’d

Camp alien 105
better keep little Starry happy until I could
find Vraj.
I put the little orange ball in my jacket’s
roomy pocket and added some shredded bark.
Picking up a few more chunks for backup,
I hurried back to camp. Rest period was just
ending. I slipped into the cabin as the others left, pulled my pack from under the bunk,
and transferred the sleeping Duthwi inside.
Then I stuffed all the bark I had into the pack,
shoved it back, and hurried off to afternoon
Nature Nuts.
It was now easier to avoid being latched onto
by Opal, because after the play she’d become
almost popular. So I had all the mental time I
wanted to worry.
Before dinner, I checked on Starry. It was
sleeping again after eating all the bark. I went
outside to scrounge up some more, put that
in the pack, and went off to dinner. My plan
was to sneak out that night, taking the little
Duthwi to the lone pine tree in hopes that Vraj
would show up.

106 Alien Agent
Of course, those plans did not work out.
Before going to bed, while the others were
trooping to or from the latrine, I pulled out my
pack. It was empty except for a star-shaped
hole on one side. Frantically I looked under
the bed. No Duthwi. But there was a starshaped hole in the cabin’s wooden wall. One
hundred percent failure.
In agony, I lay in my bunk until my cabinmates were finally asleep. Then I managed to
sneak out. I half wanted to find Vraj at the
tree and half dreaded it. But she wasn’t there.
I sat and waited. Shivering in the chilly air,
I gloomily watched the stars. The sky across
the lake was lit by a faint display of northern
lights. Cool maybe, but I wasn’t in the mood to
be thrilled by nature. Even Opal’s chatty presence would have been welcome. But I was totally alone, and the more alone I felt, the more
I began to worry about Vraj.
Sure, she was a conceited grouch, but she
was also a lone alien given a tough job on
what to her must be a completely strange and

Camp alien 107
dangerous world. Besides, she was just a kid.
Finally, though, even worry couldn’t keep me
awake. I slunk back to the cabin and into a
restless sleep.
The next day, everyone at the camp seemed
a little down. It was the last full day of camp
that session, and even those kids who’d been
homesick at first didn’t want to leave now. An
extra-big campfire was planned for that evening, but I wasn’t in the mood for even thinking about fun.
In the afternoon, I trailed behind the others on our last nature hike. I didn’t feel very
chummy either. Suddenly something slammed
into my head.
“Mama!”
“Starry!” I cried from the ground, where I
was sprawled with a starfish thing plastered to
my forehead. It seemed to have grown.
“Mama, found brothers and sisters. They
trapped. Bad people trap them. Got to help!”
Its vocabulary had grown too. “OK, OK.

Camp alien 109
I’ll help. But you’ve got to let loose. And don’t
fly off, you need to show me where to go.”
“OK, I stay. But hungry!”
It peeled itself off and walked down my face
like a big, fleshy orange spider. Swinging my
patched knapsack off my back, I stuck in some
bark and twigs and urged the little Duthwi to
crawl in. I’d just reshouldered my pack when
Opal and Walt, the kid who’d given the talk
about nighttime animals, came walking back
down the trail.
“We just noticed you were missing,” Walt
said. I was glad to see he’d gotten chummy
with Opal.
“What’s that big red mark on your forehead?”
she asked.
“Oh. I ran into a branch. I have an awful headache. I think I’ll go to the nurse.” I
avoided actually looking at Opal. I knew that
if she guessed this was a cover story, she’d
want to go along. But with Gnairt involved,
things could get dangerous. Anyway, this was
my mess to clean up.

110 Alien Agent
At the nurse’s I complained of a migraine
headache. My mom gets those, so I knew how
to fake one. I said light hurt my eyes, and I
saw lots of glowing wiggly lines. The nurse
had me lie down in a dark room and said no
one was to bother me for several hours.
Once she left, I reached into my pack. Most
of the bark and twigs were gone, but the warm
little star was still there.
“Go help others now?”
Before I could say anything, it had scrambled up my arm and under my shirt, settling
onto my shoulder. It didn’t really hurt, having the Duthwi stuck there, but it tingled like
when my mother rubs smelly ointment on my
chest when I get a cold.
“Right,” I said. “We’re going to help now.
But where are they trapped?”
“Other side. Big water.”
At the window, I pushed aside the curtains
and looked out. This was the back of the nurse’s
building, facing the woods. Unlatching the
window, I pushed it open. Then I spied some

Camp alien 111
crayons and paper on a table and scrawled a
quick note, saying I felt better and had gone
to join the other campers. That way no one
would look for me for a while.
In the woods, I avoided paths, but when I
reached the lake, I realized my clever planning
had petered out.
Lake Takhamasak was not small. But somehow I had to get to the other side and rescue
hungry little aliens from bigger nasty aliens
who probably had terrible weapons. My only
ally was a snotty alien dinosaur who I hadn’t
seen in days. The Gnairt might have even
killed her by now.
No, this was not a fun summer, I said to myself as I started trudging along the shore.

ht

ig
e
r
e

t

p
Cha

Waves lapped gently against the sand as I
marched along. I stepped over a groove left
earlier by a canoe, then stopped. I could canoe across the lake!
I looked back along the shore. The camp’s
dock wasn’t far. And I knew how to canoe.
Sort of.
Keeping a wary eye out for counselors or
campers, I trotted back. The canoes were pulled
up on the sand and turned over. The first one
I came to was wooden and looked heavy as a
tank, but the next was light. I flipped it over
and hauled it to the water.
“What doing?” The tingly voice filled my

Camp alien 113
mind. Starry must have been sleeping on my
shoulder.
“I’m borrowing a boat so we can cross the
lake.”
“Hurry. You so slow!”
“I’m going as fast as I can. I can’t fly, you
know.” I shoved the canoe half into the lake,
then looked it over. “Can’t canoe either. No
paddle. I’ll have to go look for one.”
“No time. I paddle!”
“Oh sure.” I’d just spied a broken paddle on
the sand and decided to take it rather than
risk anyone catching me in the boathouse.
My feet got soaked when I launched the boat,
but soon it was gliding into the lake, screened
from the camp by a rocky point of land. Sports
Sprite Scott would have jeered to see me handling the canoe. I kept switching the stubby
broken paddle back and forth to keep us in a
slow, crazy zigzag.
“Too slow, Mama!”
Like an itchy whirlwind, Starry crawled out
of my shirt and down my arm. It examined the

114 Alien Agent
paddle, took a huge bite out of the blade, and
then crawled along the side of the canoe to the
back.
“Hey, don’t eat the paddle! How am I supposed to make this boat move?”
“I paddle.”
And it did, sort of. Starry climbed down
the boat’s stern to the waterline, held on with
two arms and began kicking with the others.
Slowly we moved forward. It kicked faster
and faster until we were shooting along like a
­paddle-wheel steamer. I remembered how earlier I’d been annoyed that I wasn’t getting a
chance to canoe at this camp. Be careful what
you wish for!
My hair blowing back, I crouched low, held
onto both sides, and watched the far shore
come closer. Closer and closer.
We weren’t slowing down! “Whoa! Stop paddling!” Starry did just in time to send the canoe scraping way up onto the beach.
Shakily, I climbed out. “Thanks. I’ll walk
now.”

“I fly. Hurry!”
Starry spun in the sand then shot into the air
like a small orange helicopter. In moments it
had disappeared over the trees. Some guide.
Leaving the pebbly beach, I walked through

116 Alien Agent
tall grass, then into the trees, trying to catch
a glimpse of orange. All I saw were dark pines
and shafts of late afternoon sun.
Abruptly the trees stopped. I found myself
standing at the top of a cliff looking down into
a landscape as bare as the moon’s. It was a
wide, gray valley dotted with piles of gravel,
rusty machinery, and a few small buildings.
Surely even Duthwi couldn’t make a place this
bare. It was an old gravel quarry, I realized.
Just then, a small pine branch crashed down
beside me. I looked up. My friend was snacking through a tree.
“Hey! I thought you were in a hurry.”
In a shower of sawdust, Starry landed on my
head. “Paddling hard work. Need food. Hurry
now. Follow me!”
It sailed into the air in front of me, maybe
fifty feet above the bottom of the pit.
“No way!” I muttered, looking down the sheer
cliff. But there was a way, and I knew it. The
problem is that it’s easier to accept the idea of
being an alien as long as it’s just an idea, as

Camp alien 117
long as you’re not doing weird alien things.
I sighed and lowered myself over the edge.
I just had to let my alien instincts take over.
“Don’t think, don’t think.” I chanted Agent
Sorn’s words to myself as I climbed down.
Somehow toes and fingers found tiny chinks in
the rock, and in moments I was at the bottom.
Lizardman strikes again.
An orange speck dropped from the blue sky,
buzzed over me, shot off to where the gravel pit turned a corner, and then disappeared.
Keeping to the cliff’s shadow, I ran in the same
direction.
At the rocky corner, I peered around into
another section of the gravel pit. This wasn’t
quite as deserted. There were several sheds,
a cinderblock building, and a few empty
gravel trucks. There was also, quite clearly,
a spaceship.
Not that I’d ever seen a spaceship before,
but there are some things you just can’t mistake. Also, several creatures were moving
near it, creatures that looked like they ought

118 Alien Agent
to be near a spaceship. They also looked like
creatures you didn’t want to see up close if you
didn’t have to. I had to, of course.
On hands and knees, I crept for a ways behind a low rock spur that finally gave out near
the remains of a rusty mobile home. Peering
around the wreck, I could hear the creatures
near the spaceship talking, but I couldn’t catch
what they were saying.
To get closer, I slithered snakelike through
the dust until I was crouched behind a stack of
metal barrels. It was still nothing but gargling
until, with a sharp pain in my ear, the translator kicked in. The first voice was high and oily.
I shivered. A Gnairt.
“Eighty is the number of Duthwi we have
to offer. Not a full hatching, perhaps, but
more than you’re likely to get a crack at in
any hunting park, legal or illegal. Give us the
money, and we’ll release them. In a few hours
they’ll be dispersed and will be as challenging
a hunting game as you’ll find anywhere in the
universe!”

120 Alien Agent
The next voice was watery and deep.
“The challenge is alluring, but what about
the Galactic Patrol?” A horrid gurgle that must
have been a laugh. “Not that we Flaaa have any
problems with breaking the law, we just do not
relish getting caught. It is an annoyance.”
“Would we allow our best clients to be annoyed?” Another Gnairt voice. “Should the
Patrol appear, which is highly unlikely, we
have the means to keep them at bay.”
A gurgle rolled into words. “How? Your ship
does not appear heavily armed.”
“No. But as always, we Gnairt are armed
with cunning, and that has given us two
weapons to use. First, we have captured a
Galactic Patrol officer, apparently the one
they sent here to reclaim the eggs. Should
the Patrol arrive and forbid your hunting,
we simply threaten to kill her unless you are
allowed to complete your hunt and depart
without pursuit.”
So that’s what happened to Vraj! Captured
by these slime.

Camp alien 121
The Flaaa grumbled. “But perhaps they
would be willing to sacrifice one Patrol officer.
Eighty is a fortune in rare, succulent Duthwi.”
“Which is why we have a fallback. Should
the Patrol continue to trouble your hunting
pleasure, we have native hostages as well.”
“Indeed? Are they imprisoned here too?”
“No need. See the weaponry mounted over
there? It is trained on the far side of this lake,
on a summer encampment of native young.
Nearly a hundred of them. And remember, this
planet is approaching the time of its invitation to join the Galactic Union. Mass slaughter
of their young by aliens would not be a good
introduction.”
Flaaa laughter sounded like someone throwing up. Or maybe that image came to mind
because that’s what I felt like doing. Leaning
against a barrel, I forced myself to think
calmly.
OK. Vraj, the operative I was supposed to
help, was captured and in danger of being
killed. Bad. The Duthwi hatchlings I was

122 camp alien
supposed to protect were going to be killed for
sport. Very bad. The place where my friends
and fellow campers were staying might soon be
blown off the planet. Very, very bad.
When I’d first realized that this was going to
be a bad summer, I didn’t have a clue just how
bad bad could be.

p

Cha

ne

ni
r
e
t

The sky above the quarry glowed with sunset. Not that I could admire it at a time like
this, but it told me I’d be losing light soon.
Whatever I was going to do, I’d better do it
now.
I crawled along the wall of barrels for a better look at the speakers. Immediately I wished
I hadn’t. Through a gap, I saw two Gnairt and
one creature that must have been the Flaaa.
Gnairt I’d seen before—none too handsome,
but they look basically like fat, bald humans.
Flaaa, however, were why the word “ugly” was
invented.

124 Alien Agent
This guy was a large puke-colored slug.
Lumpy arms bulged out of his body wherever he
needed them and then sank back in while another arm popped out somewhere else. Mostly
those come-and-go arms seemed to be juggling
a weapon-looking thing or scratching patches
of undulating skin.
If I’d had time, I would have been sick right
there.
I had to find where they were holding Vraj
and somehow free her. Slowly I crawled backwards. I’d almost reached the shelter of a rusty
piece of machinery when something grabbed
my shoulder.
“Mama!”
Good thing I was too petrified to scream.
“I take you to others.”
“Wait,” I whispered. “I need to find someone else first. They’ve captured someone who
could help us. She looks like a dinosaur. No,
you wouldn’t know that. She’s yellow-green,
she walks on two hind legs, and she has little
front legs with claws, a long thick tail, and

Camp alien 125
a big head with lots of teeth. Have you seen
her?”
“No.”
“Oh.” Where was I going to look for Vraj in
this huge place?
“Not seen, but know where she is.”
“Huh?”
“Hear very angry yellow-green thoughts.
Show where.”
Starry zipped off low to the ground. I tried
to keep up, but to my growing horror, we
seemed to be heading toward the spaceship. I
couldn’t break Vraj out of that. They probably
had high-tech security systems and weird alien
locks.
I crouched beside a wooden shed near
the ship, trying to build up courage. Starry
dropped on my head. “Hurry ! Yellow-green
person inside.”
“Right. But I’m not sure I can break into a
spaceship.”
“What spaceship? Yellow-green person inside wood place.”

126 Alien Agent
“In this shed?” Hesitantly I knocked on the
plank I was leaning against. From inside came
scrabbling, thumping, and muffled growling.
Cautiously I circled the building till I found
a door, a normal wooden door with a very nonnormal lock. The whole thing seemed to be
sealed with metal tape. I tugged and kicked at
it but nothing happened, except the growling
inside became more frantic.
“Mama want yellow-green person out of wood
place?’
I nodded.
“OK.”
The dish-sized orange star splatted itself
against a wall and, in a spray of fine sawdust,
chewed right through. It chewed another hole
on the way back out and another going in
again. In seconds, it had made a hole that was
big enough for me.
“Nyuk! Wood, very stale.”
“Sorry. But thanks.” Kicking in a few jagged
bits, I crawled through. The shed had only one
small, dusty window, and the day’s fading light

Camp alien 127
was even weaker inside. But from the growling
and thrashing, it was clear where Vraj was.
“Calm down. It’s me, Zack.” I walked toward
the heaving lump. My eyes had adjusted to the
gloom enough to see that Vraj had been thoroughly tied and gagged. Metal tape bound her
arms, legs, and jaws, but her tail still thwacked
about.
“Hey, watch where you swing that thing!
There ought to be a way to get you loose.” The
Duthwi couldn’t eat through the tape since
it wasn’t wood, but there were lots of tools
hanging on the shed walls. In the shadows,
I made out saws, hammers, and a metal snipper. Grabbing that, I knelt beside Vraj. She
thrashed even harder.
“Hold still!”
The tape around the ankles was the loosest.
Gripping a leg with one hand, I wriggled the
blade of the snipper under the stretched tape,
trying not to shudder at the feel of hard, slick
skin. It wasn’t like a snake’s, though. It was
warm, almost hot.

128 Alien Agent
After several snips, the tape frayed, then
snapped. Next I did the wrists, then, with more
difficulty, the jaw. That might have been a
mistake. She started complaining right away.
“About time someone got here! I’ve been
tied up for two days! I’m starved!”
A worrisome statement from someone with
teeth like that, but I tried to ignore it.
“Food comes later. Right now, we’ve got to
rescue the Duthwi before the Gnairt turn them
over to some really gross hunters.”
“Looks like they’re free already,” Vraj said,
watching Starry bouncing around the shed,
sampling wooden tool handles.
“That’s the missing Duthwi egg. It hatched
out and got the crazy idea I’m its mama. But
it led me here and knows where the others are
being held.”
“Duthwi are supposed to be smart as well as
tasty,” Vraj commented. I hoped Starry hadn’t
picked up on that last part.
The hole in the wall was small for Vraj, but
she forced her way through, further splintering

Camp alien 129
the edges. Soon we were both trotting behind
the flying starfish. The sunset brilliance had
faded, but the sky arching over us was streaked
with purple and deep crimson.
The Gnairt near the metal barrels had switched
on a greenish light. We passed close enough to
hear rumbling voices. “Ah, so it’s Flaaa they’re
dealing with,” Vraj hissed when she heard the
oily tones. “They’re rich enough to pay the
Gnairt’s price.”
Our little guide, flying low to the ground,
kept zooming ahead and zooming back when
we couldn’t keep up. Its orange skin glowed
slightly, enough at least for me to keep it in
sight. As we approached several low buildings,
Starry dropped onto my shoulder again.
“Mama, others in here. Hurry, get them
out!”
The cinderblock building ahead of us was an
abandoned ruin with a tree growing through
a gaping hole in the roof. We peered through
a doorway. Darkness was lit by a faint orange
glow. In a far corner, a shapeless something

130 Alien Agent
glowed like a lumpy pumpkin. We crept closer.
It looked like a large trash bag stuffed with
glowing Duthwi. They were boiling and bulging around in there but couldn’t get out.
Our free Duthwi zipped over our heads and
landed on the bag, thumping it uselessly with
its legs. Vraj and I crouched beside the bag. The
surface felt smooth and cold like plastic, but
Vraj’s claws couldn’t scratch it. I tried the metal snippers on a corner of the bag. Nothing.
“Don’t you have some fancy alien weapons
that could cut through this stuff?” I asked.
She snorted. “Of course, I had weapons, but
the Gnairt took them when they threw me in
the shed. We’ll have to carry the bag.”
That wasn’t easy. Duthwi in large numbers
are heavy. And bouncing around like that, they
kept shifting the weight, nearly knocking us
over as we lifted the sack onto our shoulders.
“Tell your friends to stop moving around!”
I snapped at Starry.
But all Starry said was “Eeeeeee!”
That squeal lanced through me. I stumbled,

Camp alien 131
and the whole bag fell on me. Muffled through
its squirming contents, I heard a Gnairt voice.
“Got away, did you? Not this time!”
A sizzle of weapons’ fire fried the air above
me. Desperately I fought my way out from under the bag. Vraj had ducked behind a cinderblock wall. The Gnairt fired at her again. A
chunk of wall exploded in dust, but Vraj leapt
free. She landed on the tree and scrambled
toward the gap in the roof. The Gnairt aimed
again.
Yanking the metal snipper from my pocket,
I threw it. I’d aimed at the bald head but only
hit a shoulder. Still, the energy shot went wild,
missing Vraj and shearing off a tree branch.
Now, however, Vraj had time to escape and the
Gnairt was looking at me.
I turned to run for the doorway, but the fat
shape of another Gnairt blocked it. Nowhere
to go but up. Leaping over the bag of squirming Duthwi, I bounded toward the tree. An energy blast exploded in front of me, setting one
end of the fallen branch on fire.

132 Alien Agent
Grabbing the other end, I swept up the
burning branch, meaning to throw it at the
nearest Gnairt. One blazing twig nicked
the bag.
“Eeeeeeeeeeee!” The sound was piercing.
That patch of bag melted, and all the Duthwi
burst free. The little building filled with panicky, flying starfish. Some shot out the hole in
the roof. Some poured out the door, knocking
that Gnairt to the ground. As he scrambled to
his feet, the other Gnairt joined him, and they
both ran out. I followed.
The sky was dark now except for a swirling
mass of orange stars. Free to destroy Earth’s
trees again, I thought grimly, but at least they
wouldn’t be sport for gross slugs.
Wrong. From back in the green-lit area, a
thin red beam of light shot into the air. A
soaring Duthwi plummeted down. One Flaaa
was getting in his hunt anyway.
I didn’t know what to do. Hide from the
Gnairt? Go after the Flaaa? Look for Vraj?
What I did was scream.

134 Alien Agent
Two clawed hands grabbed me and yanked
me to the roof of the cinderblock building. I’d
found Vraj.
“Can’t we stop them?” I gasped.
“We won’t have to,” Vraj yelled over the
noise of firing weapons and screeching Duthwi.
“They will.”
I followed her gaze into the sky. Clustered
blue lights were dropping out of the darkness.
“Just before the Gnairt caught me,” Vraj
said, “I got off a message to the Patrol. An
Emergency Assistance Required message.
Didn’t want to. Kind of an admission of
failure, but . . . ” She made a gesture I guessed
was a shrug. “Anyway, they’ve arrived, and
the Gnairt and their client can’t talk their
way out of this! A clear violation of Galactic
law. While they held me captive, they might
have bargained, but now they’ve nothing to
bargain with.”
We’d just jumped to the ground when I remembered. “Oh yes they do have something to
bargain with! Camp Takhamasak! I overheard

Camp alien 135
them. They’ll blow up the camp if they aren’t
let off!”
I was already running, though, without a clue
what I could do. Vraj ran after me. Ahead, one
Gnairt was running toward their ship, probably
to send off their threat, while the other ran
toward the cannonlike weapon mounted nearby. The only person not running was the Flaaa,
who was gleefully shooting screaming Duthwi
from the sky.
I pounded over the gravelly ground.
Overhead, the remaining Duthwi banded together and shot off toward the lake. Ahead,
one Gnairt had vanished into his ship while
the other was fiddling with the weapon. He
hadn’t noticed me.
Crouching, I fumbled over the ground,
grabbed a couple of rocks, and crept closer. In
the dark, I heard scuffling behind me. Vraj
must have been doing the same.
The nearly full moon had just cleared the eastern rim of the gravel pit. By its white light, we
saw the Gnairt slam on a pair of earphones and

136 Alien Agent
drop into the gun’s swivel seat. Unfortunately,
he swiveled my way.
For a moment we just stared at each other.
Then, with an evil grin on his bloated face, he
drew a smaller gun and aimed at me.
I threw one rock and dove aside. An energy bolt
sizzled through the air, grazing my hand with incredible pain. Gasping, I stuck that hand into
my pocket and threw my last rock with the other
hand. Then I sank, groaning, to the cold bare
ground. There was nowhere to run and nothing
to fight with. All I could do was play dead.
With the pain I was in, it didn’t seem much
like play. I just lay there in the moonlight, but
the Gnairt seemed to have lost interest in me.
My throbbing hand, cocooned in my pocket,
felt something sharp and hot. The alien can
opener. Great. But it hadn’t been hot before.
I glanced down. My whole pocket glowed.
Wincing, I pulled the thing out. One knob
glowed pink. Had the blast from the Gnairt’s
gun triggered the change? What was this
thing, really? Could it be a weapon?

Camp alien 137
I looked around. Hopefully Vraj was safe
somewhere, but she wasn’t near enough to
give advice. The Gnairt had gone back to his
cannon.
Overhead hovered the clustered blue lights
of a Galactic Patrol ship. It had probably already received the Gnairt’s demands: either let
them and the rich slug go free, or they’d blow
up a camp of native young—my friends, my
people, even if they weren’t my species.
Gingerly, I clutched the thing I’d pulled from
my pocket. If this was really some sort of weapon, now was the time to use it. Shifting as little as possible, I slipped the gizmo to my good
hand and aimed it toward the cannon. The
pink knob was glowing brighter now. Ready to
fire—or open a can.
Pulling myself up to a crouch, I pressed the
knob. Nothing happened. Then I spun the
thing around and pressed a silver knob. Still
nothing. No, wait. The pink was getting brighter and shifting to purple. This gadget had to
be a weapon. It had to work!

Camp alien 139
As I jabbed the knob again and again, the
purple glow deepened and spread up my
hand, my arm. Was this thing going to selfdestruct? No! I had to destroy that cannon.
I couldn’t let them blast the camp. I couldn’t
let my and Vraj’s mission fail so completely!
I seemed to be entirely purple now, glowing
like a neon sign. The Gnairt at the gun turned
and stared. Frightened and furious, I screamed
like a karate guy. Purple energy shot out of
my hand and through the air like a laser. It
slammed into the mounted cannon.
The explosion was deafening. Its force blew
me to the ground. I lay there, watching the
most incredible fireworks. Then they and everything else faded to black.

n

e
t
r
te

p

Cha

Major motion sickness. Worse than a roller
coaster. Worse than a fast car on curvy roads.
My head hurt, my stomach sloshed, and I
was bouncing up and down. Slowly I opened
my eyes. Everything was bouncing. Shadow,
moonlight, trees. My arms were stretched over
my head and hurting, like someone was gripping them. Someone with claws.
I snapped another notch awake. That “someone” was carrying me like a sack on her back.
“Vraj!”
“About time you woke up. Support your
weight! Grip my sides with your knees and
grab my shoulders.”
I tried. It was harder than horseback riding.

camp alien 141
“Where are we going?”
“To your camp, out of harm’s way.”
“But the camp’s going to be blown up!”
“Not now. You blew up their weapon, remember? Quite a show.”
“Oh. Yeah.” Things were falling into place.
“So what’s the danger now?”
“The Gnairt and Patrol ships are firing at
each other, and we’re in the middle. Now shut
up. I need my breath for running with a heavy
weight.”
I’d rather have walked—if my wobbly legs
could have held me. Anyway, the sizzling explosions behind us made speed seem like a
good idea.
“Off!” Vraj ordered when we’d finally reached
the main camp building. Gratefully I slipped
off, but I almost collapsed and had to grab a
log pillar for support. Slowly my legs began
doing their job again. I turned to thank Vraj,
but she was gone.
So was everybody else. Then I remembered

142 Alien Agent
it was after dinner now, and they must be at
the session’s last campfire. I stumbled toward
the fire circle.
At the crest of the hill, I gasped. The sky
over the lake was lit up like the Fourth of July.
Crisscrossing beams of light, red and blue, were
highlighted with brilliant white bursts. The
kids below me squealed and pointed excitedly.
Then came a massive explosion. Sky and
earth shook with noise, and light blossomed
over the lake like a fierce red flower. Chunks
of flame and a curtain of sparks dropped to
the water below. The remaining cluster of
blue lights skimmed over the distant trees and
disappeared.
Everyone cheered and clapped. “Best fireworks ever!” somebody yelled. “What a way to
end camp!”
As I stumbled through the crowd, someone
tugged my jacket. “Wasn’t that show just wonderful?” Melanie cooed. “I hope you didn’t
miss it, sulking at the nurse’s with a stupid
headache.”

Camp alien 143
Beside her, Scott grinned. “Nah, Zack knew
all about it, I bet. His special effects stars
started the show. That headache was just an
excuse so he could help set it up. Great job,
Zack!” He slapped me on the back, nearly toppling me over.
As those two swept off, there was Opal looking
up at me, eyes wide and worried in her plump
face. “What was that bit with the stars?”
“What bit?”
Her eyes widened further. “You really missed
it? Just as the fireworks began, a swarm of
those orange stars swept in from over the lake.
They dove right into the campfire and completely burned up. The fire flared up in a big
shower of sparks. Then there was a huge explosion across the lake, and the fireworks in
the sky got bigger.”
She grabbed my arm. “I’ve figured it out,
though. Those stars weren’t special effects.
They were real—just like the dinosaur. They
hatched out of those eggs, and then flew off
somewhere and evolved into baby dinosaurs.

144 Alien Agent
I bet what flew back and got burned up were
really just empty shells. The babies are still out
there, I bet. They’re all right, aren’t they?
Her eyes pleaded with me, wanting to believe
this crazy explanation. I wanted to believe it
too. But I didn’t.
“Sure, you’ve figured it out,” I said forcing a
smile. “You’ll make a great scientist.”
Relief seemed to shower over her. “Will I get
to see our dinosaur again?”
I shook my head. Some part of my brain
still seemed able to churn out stories. “No,
she’s going back into hiding. But she sends
her thanks. And you’ll keep all this secret,
right?”
“Totally! But when I’m a grown-up scientist,
maybe I’ll get to work with them.”
“Maybe,” I muttered as Opal skipped off to
join her friends. And maybe when the Galactic
Union decides Earth is ready to join them, everyone will accept aliens the way this kid accepted an “evolved dinosaur.” I guess helping
that happen is part of my job.

Camp alien 145
But the other part! My heart ached as I looked
down at the smoldering campfire. The Duthwi
must have felt that burning themselves up like
moths was better than falling to greedy hunters. But it shouldn’t have ended like that.
No one would call me Mama ever again.
I returned to the cabin in an exhausted daze,
and nothing, not even my aching hand or my
jabbering cabinmates, kept me awake.
The next morning we were to get on our buses right after breakfast. But as I halfheartedly speared my last canned peach, Muskrat, our
counselor, came up to me.
“Don’t get on the bus, Zack. We just got a
call from your mother that your aunt is picking
you up later.”
That snapped me awake. My aunt? She
wouldn’t . . . Oh, my Aunt Sorn. She could
probably imitate my mom if she needed to.
Then came the hauling of luggage and the
tearful farewells. I’d actually miss some of
those kids. Even Scott and Melanie had kind

146 Alien Agent
of grown on me. Opal gave me the secret
dinosaur-claw sign before clambering onto the
bus with her new friends. She wasn’t the same
Bashful the Dwarf who’d come here just a few
days ago.
Finally, the last bus rumbled off in a smelly,
dusty cloud. The camp was suddenly empty
and quiet. While the remaining counselors bustled about, I sat at a dining-hall table, feeling
alone and tired. My hand ached only a little.
Not enough to keep me from resting my head
on the table and almost drifting to sleep.
Someone sat down across from me. I jerked
myself upright.
A handsome, white-haired lady smiled at me,
my so-called Aunt Sorn. “Feeling all right?
Ready to go?”
I nodded. “Just tired.”
“I should think so after what our Cadet told
me. That was a good job you did last night.”
“Yeah, but it would have been better if the
Duthwi hadn’t all been shot or burned up.”
“Come on.” She stood up and walked

Camp alien 147
purposefully away from the dining hall. I
sighed and followed.
Instead of the parking lot, we headed toward
the campfire area. In the bright morning light,
it felt cold and deserted. No—down by the fire
circle, something was moving, digging like a
dog, sending up plumes of ash. Vraj.
I hurried to her between rows of log seats.
Scrabbling among ashes and charred wood, she
was pulling out what looked like lumpy potatoes. Duthwi eggs.
I stared, confused. “But how?”
Sorn came up behind me. “Duthwi are attracted to heat and light. That must be how
the Gnairt lured them into their trap.”
I suddenly remembered what I’d taken to be
northern lights across the lake. What a dummy! The lake was west, not north. I frowned.
“But Duthwi are smart. Light is one thing, but
why would they fly right into a fire?”
“Defense,” Sorn answered. “When Duthwi
are frightened, as they surely were by the Flaaa
hunter last night, they try to escape. The most

148 Alien Agent
secure thing they can think of is being eggs
again, and a really hot fire can turn a young
Duthwi back into an egg. They saw this campfire and headed for it.”
“Oh.” I looked down at Vraj. “Why didn’t
you tell me Duthwi could do that?”
She snorted. “Hey, I’m new at this. I didn’t
know till she told me this morning. Now help
me dig these things out.”
The three of us raked through the ashes,
pulling out sooty eggs and putting them in a
shimmering metallic sack. I hoped that Starry
was one of them and not one that the disgusting Flaaa had shot down.
As I put one more egg into the sack, the
word “Mama” echoed with a familiar tingle in
my mind. Smiling with relief, I held the egg in
both hands.
“It’s OK,” I whispered to it. “You’re going to
a nicer place. Mama says so.” I didn’t know
what the Duthwi home world was like, but I
hoped it was wall-to-wall with fast-growing
trees.

Camp alien 149
Sorn stood up, brushing herself off. “That’s
the lot. Now, Cadet, let’s get them to your ship,
and you can complete your mission by taking
them home.”
I offered to help, but Vraj stubbornly threw
the sack over her shoulder like she’d done with
me.
“You’re strong,” I said, “for an overgrown
lizard.”
She swatted me with her tail. A goodnatured slap, I think.
Vraj’s little ship was hidden among rocks and
fallen branches on the hillside with the lone
pine. From there, we could just see the roofs
of the camp and glints of Lake Takhamasak beyond. Not a bad summer camp, even if it didn’t
have horses.
When we’d stowed the eggs, Vraj bowed formally and saluted her superior officer.
Sorn saluted in return. “Mission well done,
Cadet Itl Vraj Boynyo Tg. You’ll go far in the
Galactic Patrol Corps.”
Vraj nodded crisply, then turned to me. Her

150 Alien Agent
usual yellow-green suddenly flickered to emerald. Was that a blush? “I couldn’t have done
it without help from this agent.” Her beady
yellow eyes looked into mine. “You’ll go far
too, Agent Zackary Gaither. Maybe we’ll work
together again.”
Quickly she reached into her ship, pulled out
something, and thrust it at me. “Here. You’re
quite hopeless at making your own.” It was
the beautiful little basket she’d made at Nature
Nuts.
With that, she scuttled into her ship and
slammed the hatch. The silver sphere rose silently into the air, the last dust and pine needles sifting from it. Then, in a barely visible
streak, it shot into the blue morning sky.
After moments watching it, Sorn said, “Well,
Zack, guess it’s time you went home too.”
I nodded, fumbling secretly in my pocket for
a tissue. I found something else.
“Oh. Maybe I should give this to you.” I
pulled out the silvery Gnairt gizmo. “What is
it anyway? I took it from their tent thinking

152 Alien Agent
it was just something like a can opener. But I
guess it’s really some kind of weapon.”
Sorn took it, looked it over, then tossed it
back to me. “It’s a can opener.”
“But it . . . ”
“It didn’t do anything. You did. It has a
little power cell meant for opening cans. You
took that power, expanded it, channeled it,
and used it as a weapon.”
I felt cold and a little sick. “Like what happened before. You know, it’s really scary being
able to do that sort of thing but not knowing
how. You keep saying I’m not ready for training
yet, but could I maybe get a few pointers?”
She chuckled. “Maybe you should. The
way things have been going on this planet,
we may need a trained agent here earlier than
we thought. We’ll talk about it on the drive
back. Though my hope is that for the next few
years you’ll get to live a perfectly normal human kid’s life.”
I followed her to the parking lot, not certain
anymore that I totally shared that hope. Sure,

Camp alien 153
discovering I was an alien agent with a weird
alien mission had totally messed up my life.
But I had to admit it had been a pretty interesting summer.

nt
Age

#21

13

it
5/Ga

her

n
e
la i dition
e
p
eX

[ALien Agent]
Book #3 of the

s e r i e s

e an
c
i
v
r
. Se orm

F mike g
a
l
e
Pam d by
te

ra
illust

TOP SECRET
from

ALIEN EXPEDITION

DOWNLOADING. . . .

The summer was starting to look like a real bust. Until
Alien Agent Sorn showed up, that is. After a slightly
awkward handshake, we walked to the burger place near
school. She said it was her treat, so I splurged on a root
beer float and large fries.
“I really wish we didn’t have to keep calling on you
before you’re older and fully trained,” said Agent Sorn.
“But something critical has come up on this planet. This
new assignment should be easy, though. You probably
won’t have to do a thing besides enjoy a foreign vacation
and be on hand just in case our other agent needs a bit
of help.”
“Sounds good,” I said, dumping ketchup on my fries.
“So where’s this vacation?”
“Mongolia.”
My hand jerked so much I sloshed ketchup on the white
Formica tabletop. She might as well have said Mars or
Alpha Centauri or something. “You mean, like over by
China?” I said, as I hastily wiped up the ketchup with a
wad of paper napkins.
“It is rather remote from your point of view, I suppose. We’ve arranged for your parents to be invited to
join an American expedition to the Gobi Desert this summer. And of course you’ll go along. It’s a real scientific
expedition doing an archaeological survey.

But it seems there’s going to be another expedition
there as well, unknown to anyone on this planet. It’s
from the Tirgizian Academy of Sciences. We tried to
persuade them to hold off with their trip until the
Galactic Union was ready to officially make contact
with Earth. Unfortunately, they are not a patient people. And they have friends in high places, so their
expedition is going ahead. They have sworn to keep
their presence absolutely secret from the natives, but
we thought it best to place an agent there to monitor things. And, as a backup to her, we need another
agent who can work with humans in case anything
goes wrong. That would be you.”
“And your other agent can’t work with humans?”
Agent Sorn smiled. “Well, she had a little trouble
last year, I believe.”
“Vraj? Yeah, I’d say looking like a vicious dinosaur
does make it kind of tough getting along with people.
How come you chose her?”
“She’s Tirgizian herself. And she can handle whatever contact is needed between them and the Earthbased agent—you. At least I’m finally giving you an
assignment where practically nothing can go wrong.”
You’d think that I’d have learned by now not to buy
that kind of line.

about the author

Pamela F. Service is also the author of My Cousin,
the Alien, the first book in the Alien Agent series.
She has written more than 20 books in the science
fiction, fantasy, and nonfiction genres. After working as a history museum curator for many years in
Indiana, she became the director of a museum in
Eureka, California, where she lives with her husband and cats. She is also active in community
theater, politics, and beach combing.

Pamela F. Service

is also the
author of My Cousin, the Alien, the
first book in the Alien Agent series.
She has written more than 20 books
in the science fiction, fantasy, and
nonfiction genres.  After working
as a history museum curator for
many years in Indiana, she became
the director of a museum in Eureka,
California, where she lives with her
husband and cats.  She is also active
in community theater, politics, and
beach combing.

Mike Gorman

is a seasoned
editorial illustrator whose work has
been seen in the New York Times,
The New Yorker, Entertainment
Weekly, and other publications. His
illustrations can also be found in
My Cousin, the Alien, book one of
the Alien Agent series. He lives in
Westbrook, Maine, with his wife,
three children, two dogs, a cat,
and a gecko.

Jacket art by Mike Gorman

tCarolrhoda Books

A division of Lerner Publishing Group

241 First Avenue North • Minneapolis, MN 55401 U.S.A.
Printed and bound in U.S.A.

