alien

expedition

[

Book #3 o

f the

ALien Aigeents
s e r

]

PameLa F. Service
illustrated by

MiKE GORMAN

t Carolrhoda Books

Minneapolis • New York

Text copyright © 2009 by Pamela F. Service
Illustrations copyright © 2009 by Lerner Publishing Group, Inc.
All rights reserved. International copyright secured. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise—without the prior written permission of Lerner Publishing Group, Inc., except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in an acknowledged review.
Carolrhoda Books
A division of Lerner Publishing Group, Inc.
241 First Avenue North
Minneapolis, MN 55401 U.S.A.
Website address: www.lernerbooks.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Service, Pamela F.
		 Alien expedition / by Pamela F. Service ; illustrated by Mike Gorman.
			 p. cm. — (Alien agent)
		 Summary: Young alien agent Zack joins an archaeological dig in Mongolia to ensure that there is no
trouble from the dinosaur-like scientists from Vraj’s home planet who are on a similar dig nearby.
		 ISBN: 978–0–8225–8870–2 (trade hard cover : alk. paper)
		 [1. Extraterrestrial beings—Fiction. 2. Archaeological expeditions—Fiction. 3. Kidnapping—
Fiction. 4. Mongolia—Fiction. 5. Science fiction. 6. Humorous stories.] I. Gorman, Mike, ill. II. Title.
III. Series.
	 PZ7.S4885Ali 2009
	 [Fic]—dc22	
2008020679
Manufactured in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 – B P – 1 4 1 3 12 11 10 0 9

eISBN: 978-0-7613-5694-3

]

t
n
e
g
A
n
ALiee r i e s

[

s

#1
#2
#3

My Cousin, the ALien
Camp aLien
ALien Expedition

For Bob, Bill, and everyone at BGC
—P. S.
For Gracelyn, Skye, and Samuel: thank you
for all the joy you bring to my life
—M. G.

Ag

1258

211
ent#

ai
35/G

ther

e
u
g
o
l
o
r
P

“I’m transmitting all the
information you need for this
job,” Chief Agent Zythis said
through the ship’s communication screen. Agent Sorn watched
as several of her boss’s tentacles jabbed controls.
“The Galactic Union is counting on you,
Agent Sorn,” Zythis said. A half-dozen of his
twelve eyes sparkled with confidence. Sorn
tried to smile back as she closed the link.

Turning away, she glowered out her ship’s
view port at the stars flowing by through
transluminal space.

Usually, the colored

streaks soothed her. Not now.
Annoyance sizzled through her.

Here

she’d been on an important mission to
planet Quafeer Nine. Zythis’s orders had
just diverted her to an even more important mission on planet Earth.
When was the Galactic Union ever going to
get enough personnel to handle this sector?
She particularly hated going to Earth.
Oh, it was a nice enough place, even though
it was not part of the Union yet nor even
aware that other planets were inhabited.
But Zack Gaither, the Union’s planted agent
there, was still too young and too untrained.
He was being asked, yet again, to go on a
possibly dangerous mission.
And she had to do the asking. Again.

Angrily she stalked to her makeup cabinet.

With this new assignment coming

when she was already in space, she hadn’t
been able to use the Union’s Physical
Transformation Service.

Good thing her

species was basically shaped like Earth humans. Her natural white hair would fit in.
But not her purple skin. Pawing through
bottles, she found a lotion that might do.
It should temporarily turn her a light tan.
Frowning, she thought about the ship’s
wardrobe. Designed for Quafeer Nine, it
was pretty flamboyant stuff.

Still, she

ought to be able to alter something.
Again, she cursed everyone involved in this
situation. She had not gone through years
of agent training to become a seamstress!
Grabbing a pair of sonic scissors, she
went after her wardrobe.

ne

ro
e
t
p

Cha

“Hello, Zack,” a voice said. I turned on the
sidewalk and looked at the woman standing in
the shade of a tree outside the school yard. My
stomach tightened with fear and excitement.
Despite her human-tinted skin and normal
clothes, I recognized her. Agent Sorn.
It was a few weeks before summer vacation
when I saw her waiting for me outside the
school yard. She might have been someone’s
grandmother, a basically human-looking person with a shock of white hair. But the sight
of her suddenly pumped me with adrenaline.
After all, the two times I’d had anything to do
with her before, I’d had plenty of excitement.

alien expedition 15
The alien lady smiled apologetically. “You
probably hoped you wouldn’t be seeing me
again for a long time.”
I smiled back. She might have been right a
few months ago, but not now. After last summer’s adventures, I thought I’d had enough of
being a secret alien agent. Back then I was
just looking forward to an ordinary school year
as an ordinary human student.
But I guess the dangers and excitement had
kind of seeped into my blood. I mean, over
one summer I’d discovered I’m really an alien,
adopted by unsuspecting human parents. I
ended up working with good aliens and being
chased and almost killed by bad ones. That
sort of thing is kind of a rush—if you survive.
So after a few months, ordinary school life had
started to look pretty dull.
Still, I was resigned to it. I was looking forward to hanging out with friends this summer.
However, my plans—once again—tanked. It
turned out that Ken’s family was going to
Hawaii (tough life), and Jessica had to help

16 Alien Agent
her grandparents move to Florida. The summer
was starting to look like a real bust.
Until Alien Agent Sorn showed up, that is.
After a slightly awkward handshake, we
walked to the burger place near school. She
said it was her treat, so I splurged on a root
beer float and large fries, while she ordered a
huge hot fudge sundae. “One of the plusses
about visiting your planet,” she whispered, as
the waitress left with our orders. We’d chosen
a pretty secluded booth. The kinds of things
we were likely to talk about seemed to require
spylike secrecy.
“How are you doing on the lessons that we’re
sending you?” she asked, as she plucked napkins
from the dispenser. I guess she was familiar
with messy sundaes. “Your parents haven’t
figured out that it’s not regular e-mail?”
I looked around to see if anyone I knew was
within sight. I could always explain away Sorn
as a long lost aunt or something, but juggling
too many lies gets complicated. “No,” I whispered back, “and I’m careful they don’t see me

alien expedition 17
practicing. The self-defense stuff is cool, but
learning how to use these powers of mine is
kind of scary. I haven’t got it all down yet.”
“And you won’t for a while. You’re still too
young. I wish I or some other agent could be
here to teach you personally, but frankly our
forces are way too thin in this sector. We just
can’t get to this planet very often. That’s why
it’s so important to have you here, an agent
who’s been brought up as a human. You can
act as an intermediary when the Galactic Union
finally makes official contact with your planet.
And, of course, it’s good having someone onsite who can help out with little projects before then.” We both smiled innocently at the
waitress as she returned with our orders.
Sorn shoved a strand of white hair back from
her forehead, gripped the spoon, and dove into
her sundae. I took a slurp of my float and
prompted her. “And you’ve got another little
project for me now?”
Sighing, she said, “I really wish we didn’t
have to keep calling on you before you’re older

18 Alien Agent
and fully trained, but something critical has
come up on this planet. This new assignment
should be easy, though. You probably won’t
have to do a thing besides enjoy a foreign vacation and be on hand just in case our other
agent needs a bit of help.”
“Sounds good,” I said, dumping ketchup on
my fries. “So where’s this vacation?”
“Mongolia.”
My hand jerked so much I sloshed ketchup
on the Formica tabletop. She might as well
have said Mars or Alpha Centauri or something. “You mean, like over by China?” I said
as I hastily wiped up the ketchup with a wad
of paper napkins.
“Between China and Russia. We’ve arranged for your parents to be invited to join
an American expedition to the Gobi Desert
this summer. And of course you’ll go along.
It’s a real scientific expedition doing an archaeological survey. Your dad will soon learn
he’s the lucky, average, high-school science
teacher ‘randomly selected’ to join the survey.

20 Alien Agent
Of course, the real reason we arranged this is
because the expedition is going to be in the
part of the world where we need you.”
“In Mongolia?” I said, picturing a lot of barren emptiness. “Kind of the ends of the Earth,
isn’t it?”
“It is rather remote from your point of view,
I suppose. But it seems there’s going to be
another expedition there as well, unknown to
anyone on this planet. It’s from the Tirgizian
Academy of Science. We tried to persuade them
to hold off with their trip until the Galactic
Union was ready to make contact officially
with Earth. Unfortunately, the Tirgizians are
not a patient people. And they have a lot of
friends in high places, so their expedition is
going ahead.
“They have sworn to keep their presence absolutely secret from the natives, but we thought it
best to place an agent there to monitor things.
And, as a backup to her, we need another agent
who can work with humans in case anything
goes wrong. That would be you.”

alien expedition 21
“And your other agent can’t work with
humans?”
Agent Sorn smiled. “Well, she had a little
trouble last year, I believe.”
“Vraj?” I cried, and then lowered my voice,
looking around to see if anyone noticed. At
the other tables, no heads had swiveled our
way. “Cadet Agent Vraj? Yeah, I’d say looking like a vicious dinosaur does make it kind
of tough getting along with people. How come
you chose her?”
“She’s a Tirgizian herself. In fact her parents
are part of the Tirgizian Academy of Science
expedition. Apparently they were never very
keen on their daughter becoming a Galactic
Patrol cadet. But now it’s proving useful to
the scientists, because she can handle whatever contact is needed between them and the
Earth-based agent—you. She is familiar with
this planet, after all.”
Vraj, I thought. She was a stuck-up, bossy,
bad-tempered sort when we’d first met last
summer—and still was at the end. But I’d kind

22 Alien Agent
of gotten to like her, in an odd sort of way. I’d
even gotten used to my fellow agent looking
like a velociraptor.
But this was no time for reminiscing. Not
with all the questions bubbling in my brain.
“So why is this bunch of scientists from a planet of dinosaurs on Earth anyway?”
“They’re looking for their roots.”
“Huh?”
“They have a theory that your Earth is their
long lost planet of origin. Hundreds of millions of years ago, their ancestors were moved
to Tirgizia, because the planet they lived on
was about to be hit by a huge asteroid. A helpful galactic race, which has since disappeared,
transported a sampling of the planet’s dominant species to an uninhabited world to give
them a chance to evolve. Those creatures did
evolve. Tirgizians have become highly intelligent beings. They have long searched the
galaxy for their mother planet. Their science
academy expedition is hoping to prove that
Earth is it.”

alien expedition 23
“Well, I can see why you don’t want them
seen by the natives. Humans watch lots of
movies about dinosaurs eating people and
trampling cities.”
“Exactly. But there’s probably no danger.
These are very cautious, responsible scientists,
so Vraj’s presence and your backup are just precautionary. And you get an exotic vacation
out of the deal.”
Scooping up the last smidgen of chocolate
from of her bowl, Sorn reached for the bill the
waitress had left, slightly smudged with ketchup and chocolate sauce. “At least I’m finally giving you an assignment where practically
nothing can go wrong.”
You’d think that I’d have learned by now not
to buy that kind of line.
Several days later, I came home from school.
My excited parents told me about the wonderful surprise trip to Mongolia they’d just learned
about. Dad and our family had been “randomly” chosen to be part of this great expedition
to the Gobi Desert. We would work on a survey

24 Alien Agent
of ancient human sites, while another part of
the expedition would survey a nearby area for
fossil remains.
It wasn’t hard for me to act astonished. The
idea of going to Mongolia was still boggling
my mind. I mean, the place used to be called
Outer Mongolia, and it was like saying “as close
to nowhere as you could get.”
It sure had that effect on my friends at
school—definitely beating out Ken’s trip to
Hawaii or Jessica’s Florida vacation when it
came to the wow factor.
I started reading what I could about Mongolia
in the library and online. Most things made it
sound as wild as I’d imagined. One book was
written by a guy who went there years ago,
looking for dinosaur fossils. There were snakes,
bandits, sandstorms, baking heat, and really
bad roads. An ideal vacation spot all right.
But I was determined to do what Agent Sorn
suggested. Offbeat or not, I’d treat this as
pure vacation. Like she said, what could go
wrong?

o

tw
ter

p

Cha

We spent a couple of weeks packing, repacking, and dealing with government paperwork.
But a few days after school let out, my parents
and I finally got on a plane for a long, long series of flights to the back of beyond.
I tried to act cool, as if I’d been on planes
lots of times. But actually I hadn’t. I suppose
when I first came to this planet it was on a
spaceship or something. But I must have been
a really tiny baby because I don’t remember
any of that. At least I wasn’t super nervous
about flying the way Mom was. She kept saying how she really hated the hollow feeling of
being thousands of feet up with nothing but
air under us.

26 Alien Agent
I decided to just sit back and enjoy this whole
flying thing. I read the catalog from the seat
pocket in front of me, selling lots of expensive
stuff I didn’t even want. I studied the plane’s
safety diagram, hoping that none of the stuff it
showed would happen. And, of course, I stared
out the thick little window.
My parents let me have the window seat. I
couldn’t get enough of watching the patchwork fields slip under us and the jagged treefurred mountains with their snaking roads and
hidden glints of lakes. And then there was
the ocean—a whole lot of ocean. At first it
was a huge, crinkly, blue sheet, and you could
see waves and ships. Then we got too high to
see anything but flatness. Even I finally got
bored looking out the window, except when we
glided through clouds piled up like gigantic,
white mountains. There were in-flight movies and video games too, so boredom wasn’t a
problem.
The airline food was okay, but it got weirder
and weirder as we changed to different national

alien expedition 27
airlines. The little balls of raw fish and rice
were particularly weird. I had to fight a desire
to bounce them around the cabin. The airports
got weirder and weirder too. The American airports were hurried and confusing enough, but
the ones in Japan, China, and Mongolia could
have been really bad. It was in them that I
discovered the language implant that had been
put in me last summer worked with Earth languages, as well as alien ones. I couldn’t read
the languages, but I could understand them
and even speak them.
The problem was that my parents didn’t
know about any of this alien business. They
thought they had adopted a regular human
baby. So I couldn’t let on that I knew what
was being said in all these foreign languages.
When airport staff tried speaking to us, their
English wasn’t exactly fluent. I pretended I
kind of figured it out and nudged us in the
right direction.
When we finally landed in Ulan Bator,
Mongolia’s capital, we were really tired. That

28 Alien Agent
whole trip had taken days. Someone met us at
the airport and took us to a crummy little hotel. In the morning, things looked better. Not
that Ulan Bator was much to look at when you
think of capital cities like Paris or Tokyo. It
was kind of a raw, sprawling place that seemed
to be in the process of either being built or
falling apart—probably some of both.
Still, we spent one day seeing the sights, including a museum with dinosaur fossils and
eggs and mounted skeletons found years ago
by that guy who wrote the book I’d read. We
had lunch in the little snack bar, which was on
a balcony overlooking the main dinosaur hall,
and gazed down on the skeleton of a dinosaur
related to Tyrannosaurus rex. I liked that view
best, looking down on the guy. Earlier, when
we’d been below and looked up into his teeth
and claws, I started getting nervous about my
assignment. I wasn’t worried about working
with Vraj. She was more or less my size, but
she was just a kid. I hoped I’d never have to
meet her parents.

alien expedition 29
Anyway, the next day we and a bunch of
other people piled into jeeps and headed south
toward the Gobi Desert. About two miles out
of town, the paved roads quit. For the next
eight hours, we drove at breakneck speeds over
chains of ruts and holes that braided across the
grasslands. There weren’t any road signs to
guide us. Our drivers, though, laughed, sang
to Mongolian rock music blaring from the CD
players, and generally acted like they knew
where they were going. The jeeps swayed,
bucked, and rearranged everybody’s bones. We
had to stop several times for someone to barf,
but thankfully it wasn’t me. Twice we stopped
and asked directions from guys herding horses.
Once we stopped for a hitchhiking woman
and baby, picking them up in the middle of
nowhere and dropping them off in the same
sort of place.
Sure, it was an adventure, but I’ve got to admit, I was glad when the land started to look
more like a desert. I hoped it meant we were
getting nearer to our Gobi Desert destination.

30 Alien Agent
Finally, we reached the base of a sprawling
mountain, where a cluster of big canvas tents
made up the expedition’s main camp.
We were welcomed by the director, Dr.
Longford, and other staff members. Then we
were taken to the cook tent and seated on
folding chairs around rickety wooden tables.
Along one side of the sloping canvas walls, big
metal pots were burbling on gas-fired camp
stoves. From these, a chubby Mongolian lady
ladled out bowls of greasy stew that turned out
to be chunks of goat meat and carrots. The
meat was tough and took forever to chew.
Good thing I didn’t know then that goat
would be basically all we’d eat for weeks. I
got even less fond of it that afternoon. We
watched the cook pick out a goat from one of
the local herds and slaughter it for our next
few meals. I don’t think it’s a good idea to
meet your meat.
After lunch, all the new arrivals picked out
tent sites and set up their tents. Yellow, blue,
and red tents sprouted like mushrooms over

alien expedition 31
this dry, grassy valley at the base of a sheer,
granite cliff. I set up my tent way at the outer edge of the tent cluster. For years, when
we went camping, I’d had to share my parents’
tent. Finally, for this trip, they’d bought me
my own one-person tent. It was great. Among
other things, I wouldn’t have my dad snoring
in my ear. It was always like camping with a
bear.
That night, we met with the other expedition members, including the group whose main
work was several miles away in another valley.
They were looking for dinosaur fossils. The
rock over there was sandstone, the type you
find fossils in. My folks and I were with the
group looking for archaeology stuff, remains
of ancient human occupation—like Indiana
Jones did.
The next day, the staff trained us in surveying. It was pretty simple really. Everybody
stretches out in a long line, about thirty meters apart (that’s about thirty yards) and walks
forward, keeping their eyes on the ground.

32 Alien Agent
Whenever anyone finds something like a scatter of broken pottery or chips from stone toolmaking or maybe a bunch of stone slabs marking a grave, that person yells out “site!” Then
everybody rushes over, takes pictures, records
things in notebooks, and takes a GPS reading.
It was kind of weird to think that here in the
middle of nowhere, satellites were passing overhead that could locate you down to feet and
inches. But I guess it’s no weirder than knowing that hiding somewhere nearby were evolved
dinosaur scientists from a distant planet looking for the same sort of thing that the paleontologists in the next valley were after.
The first day’s surveying was fun, but it was
really tiring. It was easy enough at first when
we were covering flat ground where boots just
crunched over gravel and skirted clumps of
spear-sharp grass. But then my line ran into a
rock outcrop. I looked around to check what
the others were doing. Sure enough, they were
keeping to their lines, maybe cursing a little,
but going straight up. There were actually lots

alien expedition 33
of ledges and footholds in the rock. But after
pulling myself up and then scrambling down
the opposite sides for a while, my legs felt like
overcooked noodles. I was really glad I had
a compass. I could have gotten totally lost
among all the clefts and rock pinnacles. As the
hot day wore on, though, I did manage to find
a couple of sites, a scatter of potsherds (broken
bits of pots), and a Buddhist inscription on a
rock face. That was pretty exciting. At least I
could stop worrying that as the youngest team
member, I’d let the others down.
That first night, as we were settling down
to bowls of goat fried-rice in the cook tent,
Dr. Schultz, the head of the paleontology crew,
poked in his head. He said he wanted to report
some strange doings at their worksite. I was
so tired I could scarcely chew my goat chunks,
but a tiny warning bell went off in my head.
I forced myself to listen—though the electric generator that powered our one dangling
light bulb made a steady rumbling sound that
threatened to lull me to sleep.

34 Alien Agent
“It looks like we’ve had a theft at our lab
tent,” he said, “so I wanted to warn you to
keep your eyes open.”
“What was stolen?” Dr. Longford asked, waving the other man to an empty seat.
Dr. Schultz joined us at the table but quickly
declined the offer of goat and rice. “Several
notebooks recording recent finds and one protoceratops egg.” He frowned. “We’d already
copied the notebooks, and that egg wasn’t the
best specimen. There were others in better
condition in that nest. But it’s disturbing.”
Longford nodded his bald head. “Any clues?
Footprints or anything?”
The fat paleontologist laughed. “Plenty of
footprints, but that’s what makes me think
maybe somebody’s playing a joke. They look
like great big dinosaur footprints.”
Longford laughed too, but I nearly choked
on my goat. So much for the Tirgizians’ pledge
to be inconspicuous. Well, I reasoned, as long
as no one saw them, it would probably be okay.
But Vraj, wherever she was hiding, had better

alien expedition 35
realize that her people, scientists or not, can’t
just walk off with stuff and not even bother to
hide their tracks.
Annoyed, I kept chewing. I couldn’t even
tell her that unless she contacted me first. She
definitely was not the sort to ask for help or
advice unless she had to.
The next day, the survey really got into the
rocks. Dragging myself up a cliff face, I was
uneasy, remembering my reading about poisonous snakes and Gobi bears. Too many rocks
were around for me to see any of my fellow
surveyors. I was tempted to just sit a moment
and admire the vast blue sky and puffy little
white clouds. Mongolia is like those places in
the American West, like the Big Sky Country.
But I didn’t want anyone to have to look for
me. And I didn’t want them to think that because I was a kid, I couldn’t keep up. So I
forced myself to grab another ledge and pull
myself up.
Just as I neared the top, a face snaked down
to meet mine. A reptilian face. Lots of teeth.

alien expedition 37
“Vraj!” I gasped, clutching the ledge. “Don’t
scare me like that.”
She sneered in her dinosaur-like way. “Yeah,
happy to see you too.” The same charming
personality I remembered.
I crawled the rest of the way up. “So how
come you let your scientists steal that stuff?
They could have been seen and messed up
everything.”
“I didn’t let them. Ever try to give orders to
your parents? I told the Agency it was a dumb
idea putting me, of all the people in the universe, in charge here. Parents and their coworkers are bound to treat you as a kid. Anyway,
they took the egg, and now they are really excited about the DNA samples from it. They say
it proves their theory. Frankly, I don’t care
what happened on this miserable planet millions of years ago. I just want off it now!”
I scowled, offended for my adopted planet.
“Well, I’m sure we don’t want your crew here
much longer either. Just get them to put back
the stuff they took, and then they can fly

38 Alien Agent
home with their great scientific discovery. End
of assignment.”
“Exactly my hope. I’m taking the notebook
and the fossil back myself. The adults are so
big and clumsy, they nearly blew it. Then you
needn’t worry about seeing me anymore.” She
gazed dejectedly over the barren landscape.
I felt a jab of guilt, remembering how Sorn
had said that Vraj’s parents had wanted her to
become a scientist and not join the Galactic
Patrol Corps. “Oh, yeah, well, I guess this
hasn’t been too warm a reunion. Sorry. How’s
it going in the Galactic Patrol Academy?”
She scratched her long, snaky neck. “Okay,
I guess. The coursework is going fine. But I
can’t afford failing a field assignment, and this
one is just ripe for that. Parents!”
“Yeah. Parents never really get it that kids
grow up and have to live their own lives.”
Twisting her tail tip in her clawed hands, she
nodded. “So I guess this is hello and good-bye.
Enjoy the rest of your rock-climbing vacation.
And, by the way, your planet’s not all that bad,

alien expedition 39
really. I guess I don’t mind having some ancestors from here. Distant ones, that is.”
She slipped off among the rocks before I
could even finish saying, “Thanks. And good
luck.”
When I caught up with the rest of the archaeologists, they were all excited over a stone wall
about a foot high, some sort of winter animal
corral, they thought. I was kind of down. Here
was the end of the Alien Agent part of this adventure. That left me with weeks of looking
for dead people’s graffiti and broken pots and
discovering how many ways there are to cook
goat. Could be worse, I guess. I could be hanging out at home while my best friends were
away on vacation. At least I can send them
postcards from an exotic-sounding place.
In fact, things actually got better. The next
morning, after reporting that our neighbors’
fossil egg and notebooks had been mysteriously
returned, Dr. Longford suggested that instead
of surveying, I might want to spend some time
with one of the local Mongolian boys. He said

40 Alien Agent
a boy named Jargul was about my age, and his
family’s herds and yurt were near our camp.
The kid knew a little English from school and
could maybe take me horseback riding.
That perked me up a lot. I’d read about
Mongolian yurts, round tents that could be
taken apart and moved along with their herds.
And I love riding.
Jargul and his sister, Segi, showed up
midmorning, riding brown horses and leading
a tan one with a long black mane and tail. A
really long tail that almost swept the ground.
It seems Mongolians never cut them. Both kids
wore shorts and T-shirts. Segi’s long, black hair
was held back in a ponytail with a pink plastic
Little Mermaid bauble.
Their English was recognizable. They proudly told me that they went to school several
months a year in a town near their family’s
winter camp. But because of the language
implant, my Mongolian was a lot better than
their English, so I told them I’d been studying
for our trip and wanted to practice it.

alien expedition 41
Jamming a foot into the metal stirrup, I
swung up into the small, high-backed wooden
saddle. It wasn’t quite as uncomfortable as it
looked, but I couldn’t see how really big guys
could fit into them. The bridle and reins were
mostly twisted rope, but the horse clearly knew
what it was doing. Soon we were riding across
the grassland. It was great. The gait was a
little jarring, but at least Mongolian horses are
short, almost like ponies, so it wasn’t too far
to the ground.
I managed to stay in the saddle and even
helped them herd some of their goats toward a
well. The horse did the herding, really, but we
took turns hauling up water in a leather bucket
and pouring it into a stone trough where the
goats climbed over one another, getting drinks.
Jargul and Segi taught me the various yelps,
whistles, and calls that supposedly make the
goats obey them. Still, obedience doesn’t seem
to be what goats do best. They’re cute, curious
creatures, and I regretted even more that they
made up most of my diet.

42 Alien Agent
We stopped for lunch at their grandmother’s yurt. Jargul and Segi may wear ordinary
Western clothes, but when their grandmother
came to the door of the round white tent, she
was dressed like the traditional Mongolians I’d
seen in pictures.
She wore a long green robe belted at the
waist and embroidered boots with upturned
toes. After ducking inside the low, wooden
door, I noticed the lattice sides and spokelike
roof poles of the movable yurt. I could also see
that the television was connected to a satellite
dish and electric generator outside.
She switched off a cartoon program as soon
as we stepped inside and gestured for us to sit
on the colorful rugs spread over the floor. In
the center of the yurt was a potbellied stove
with a kettle of water heating on top. Granny
creaked open the door of the stove and, taking
the lid off a basket, tossed in some more fuel—
kind of odd-looking fuel.
“What’s that?” I whispered to Jargul.
He grinned. “Dried horse dung.”

alien expedition 43
Don’t look like a shocked foreigner, I told
myself, but I’m not sure my face obeyed.
Meanwhile, Granny had pulled big china bowls
from a painted wooden cupboard. She ladled
them full of goat yogurt and passed them to
the three of us. I tried not to gag. Anyway, it
tasted better once she dumped in a bunch of
sugar.
As I ate the yogurt and fried dough balls,
I studied my hostess. Granny was probably
the wrinkliest person I’d ever seen, but her
smile gleamed among the bronzed wrinkles.
She hopped about as spry as a bird. At first I
thought she was bald, and then I saw the gray
stubble and realized that her head was shaved.
Granny and the kids asked me lots of questions
about life in America. They thought everything I said about my life or asked about theirs
was very funny.
Then Granny went to her cupboard again and
brought out a little orange silk bag. Squatting
on the rug, she poured out the contents—
knobby, whitish things. “Sheep knucklebones,”

44 Alien Agent
Jargul whispered to me. “Granny wants to tell
your fortune.”
The old lady scooped up the bones, shook
them in her hand, and muttered something I
couldn’t quite catch, even with my translator.
She spilled them out on the rug again. For
a moment, she studied their pattern, but she
didn’t say anything. Then she grabbed them
up and spilled them out again. After repeating
this several times, she abruptly scooped up the
bones, dropped them in the bag, and sat back
staring at me.
“Well?” I said after a moment.
After a longer silence, she shook her head.
“Much strangeness, much danger.” The look
she gave seemed to shiver right through me.
Then, slowly, she smiled. “Still, I am privileged
to do your reading, foreigner Zack. Never have
I seen one like it. Most in your reading, I do
not fully understand. But there is rightness
in you and in what you are doing, despite the
dangers. I am comforted that my grandchildren accompany you.”

That left me confused. Surely there wasn’t
much danger ahead now that the Alien Agent
part of my stay was over. I frowned, wondering if she meant snakes and bears. Then she

46 Alien Agent
laughed and forced more yogurt on us until
Jargul said we had better be off so we could
round up the goats for milking.
It wasn’t as easy as it sounded. Goats are
very stubborn. But it least it kept my mind off
knucklebones and weird fortune-telling.
When I was back at camp at the end of the
day, washing up for yet another meal of goat,
I decided that this really could be a good vacation, even if the only unfamiliar people I
dealt with from now on were Mongolian goat
herders.
I think I’ve mentioned how extremely wrong
I can be about these things.

ree
h
t
ter
p
a
Ch

After dinner (goat on pasta), we archaeologists, experienced and amateur, worked in the
lab tent, sorting potsherds. It was sort of like
doing jigsaw puzzles, something my parents
have always liked a lot better than I do. I told
my folks about my day as a Mongolian goatherd, and they talked about their finds. Then
after daylight gave out, we said good night and
wandered back to our tents.
I sat outside mine, watching the orange sunset fade to purple then black. The nights in
Mongolia are really amazing. The hot, desert
day quickly changed into a chilly, desert night.
I counted the first crop of shooting stars—
there were so many. And the sky was so black.

48 Alien Agent
There was no pollution or electric lights for
miles, unless you count our one light bulb and
Granny’s TV.
Finally, I crawled into my tent and sleeping
bag and lay there listening to the snuffling and
chomping of a horse herd that was wandering through camp. The animals were all free
range and seemed to think that every inch of
grassland was their rightful pasture. I was just
falling asleep when the peaceful horse sounds
changed to whinnies and sudden galloping
hoofs—like something had scared them.
It scared me too. Something was growling
and scratching outside my tent. Then with a
screech, the zipper door ripped open. Teeth
glinted in the starlight.
“Vraj!” I quavered as my trembling flashlight
lit her yellow-green face. “You’ve got to stop
scaring me like that. . . . But, hey, I thought
you’d be gone by now.”
“I should be,” she hissed. “But the others
really are gone.”
“So they left already. That’s good.”

alien expedition 49
“No, it’s not! They’re gone, as in disappeared.
They haven’t left the planet, their ship’s still
here. They’ve just vanished!”
“Vanished? Big dinosaurs? How many of
them are there?”
“Eight scientists, including my parents.”
“And they didn’t leave you any message or
anything?”
She snorted. “Would I be here if I had the
least clue where they are? They’d set up camp
in a shallow cave over in the next valley. All
their equipment is there, but they aren’t.”
I frowned. “The next valley is where the
human paleontologists are working. Maybe
your group saw our group coming and hid.”
“Ridiculous. Their cave had a conceal lock
on it. They could hide there, and no one outside could find the entrance.”
“Could they still be exploring?”
“No. I told you they were finished here and
getting ready to go home.”
Scrambling to pull on my jacket, I crawled
out of the tent to join her. I was afraid the

50 Alien Agent
thin tent walls wouldn’t hold if I asked her in.
“Well, there’s not a lot I can do besides help
look for them tomorrow. Maybe it’s time to
contact the Galactic Patrol.”
I think she rolled her eyes, but it was hard
to tell in just the starlight. “I’ve done that!
Or tried to. My communication channel is
blocked. Like somebody’s jamming it.”
“Oh.” Suddenly I felt a lot chillier. This
assignment was taking a bad turn, and I didn’t
want to hear that Vraj and I might be on our
own. “Well, there’s probably some simple
explanation for all of it, but I guess the best
we can do is search the area. There should be
some clues. I mean, these folks are kind of
big, right?”
“Big enough to stomp you into dust, if need
be. But yeah, search the area. Big help.
That’s all I was able to come up with too. Well,
what did I expect? You’ve been on exactly two
assignments, right? I’ll be in touch.”
What an annoying person, I thought as she
slipped off into the darkness. But scared too.

alien expedition 51
I rushed into the night and called softly after
her. My tent was fairly far from the others, but
I didn’t want anyone to peek out and see my
visitor. “And keep trying your communication
thing. I’ll try to help you search tomorrow.”
Without any e-mail here, I realized I didn’t
have any way of getting in touch with Sorn
or anyone off planet. I really hoped there
was some simple explanation for this turn of
events—one that didn’t put Vraj and me in
charge of this planet’s future.
The next morning, during a breakfast of
millet and goat milk porridge, my parents
talked excitedly about the kinds of pottery
fragments they were finding. I had a sudden
urge, quickly suppressed, to get up and hug
them. They were here with me, enjoying their
adventure, not vanished somewhere on an alien
world like Vraj’s parents. I had to help her find
them—and not just because it was part of my
assignment. She was a friend, in a prickly sort
of way. And parents are important, even when
they’re pains.

52 Alien Agent
It seemed there ought to be some way I could
get Jargul and Segi to help me search, without telling them what we were searching for. I
started piecing a plan together, but when they
arrived on horses after breakfast, Granny was
with them, and my feeble plan fell apart.
“Granny’s inviting you to go with us to an
ovo blessing,” Jargul said proudly, after he and
his sister got off their horses. Then he lowered
his voice. “It’s a great honor. She says you
have a strongly spiritual aura about you. To
her, you don’t feel like an outsider at all.”
Wouldn’t she be surprised if she knew just
how much an outsider I really was? I thought.
“What’s an ovo?”
Beside him, Segi giggled.
“Spiritual,
maybe, but you sure don’t know much.” She
explained, “An ovo is a sacred mound of stones
built up over years to honor the spirit of a
place. Usually they’re at mountain passes or
peaks.”
Jargul chimed in. “Granny’s not just our
grandmother. She’s the one around here who

alien expedition 53
knows the old ways and does what’s needed to
keep the gods and spirits happy. Come on.”
All the while, Granny had been sitting on
her horse, grinning encouragingly. I couldn’t
refuse, I realized. Well, maybe I could ask the
spirits where the Tirgizians were. At least if we
were heading for a mountain peak, there might
be a good vantage point to search from.
When I popped back into the tent to ask
my folks if I could go, they happily agreed.
Parents are always pushovers for the idea that
their kids are making new friends. And of
course I was. They didn’t have to know all
the details.
As we trotted away from camp, I wondered
which of the local mountains we were heading for. None of them were huge, but there
were a lot nearby that looked like some giant
had thrown down big wads of clay. Urging my
horse up beside Segi’s, I asked which mountain we were heading for. She pointed toward
one, but when I asked its name, she giggled
again.

alien expedition 55
“Silly, I can’t tell you that! Never say a
mountain’s true name within sight of it, or its
spirit will be offended.”
Right. I sure couldn’t afford to offend any
spirits at the moment. I needed all the help I
could get.
We followed a trail that cut through a steep,
narrow valley and up onto a rocky plateau. From
there, the actual peak of the mountain wasn’t
very far above us. Finally we dismounted,
hobbled our horses, and started up a faint,
rocky track. Granny scrambled on ahead, agile
as a spider—a bow-legged spider. She must
have been riding horses for eighty years.
I was a lot more out of breath than she
was when we got to the top. It was windy
up there. Sudden gusts blew hard enough to
almost knock us off our feet. Segi was wearing
a fleecy jacket over her pink T-shirt. Jargul
wore a traditional-style blue-wool robe, though
he had his shorts on underneath. It may be
summer in a desert, but I was glad for my own
hooded jacket. The gusting wind whipped at

56 Alien Agent
rags of blue cloth that fluttered like tattered
flags from a gnarled stick. It was stuck into
the top of a large pile of stones. Around the
stones were smaller piles of skulls. Horses and
goats, I thought.
Immediately Granny picked up a loose stone
from the ground, placed it on the ovo, and
began walking around it, clockwise. Jargul
and Segi followed her, and with a shrug, I
did the same. After three circles, Granny
stopped, fussed around in the big bag slung
over her shoulder, and pulled out a small rug.
Spreading that on the ground, she sat down
and then unwrapped a little bronze bowl filled
with weedy-looking stuff. She fumbled with
a cigarette lighter until the incense was lit
and then began chanting prayers and running
a long string of beads through her fingers.
Jargul, Segi, and I sat on the rocky ground
and watched.
The chanting, the incense, and the warm sun
almost put me to sleep. What woke me up,
though, was when Granny pulled a big white

alien expedition 57
seashell from her bag and blew on it. She also
jangled cymbals and beat on a little round
drum.
All this seemed to go on for hours. Sometimes
I tried to focus enough to look around at the
crags and ravines dropping away from our
peak. I didn’t see any sign of missing dinosaurs, just endless rocky folds and towers of
yellow, brown, and gray. I’d start getting antsy
about all the time I was wasting, sitting there,
but then the chanting and incense would wash
over me again.
Finally Granny stood up and reached for
the covered pot that Segi had carried up the
mountain. She dipped in a ladle and began
walking around the ovo again, splashing it
with what looked and smelled like goat yogurt.
That certainly broke the spell.
When Granny began packing up all her stuff
again, Segi whispered to me, “We’re finished
now. The spirit of this place is content for another year. Granny’s going home, but she said we
might want to show you around for a while.”

58 Alien Agent
“Okay,” I said, relieved I could now get on
with my task here, hopeless as it seemed.
It wasn’t long before Granny had scrambled
down the rocky peak and rode off on her shaggy
horse. Beside me, Jargul was pointing off into
the distance.
“That’s a dry lake bed over there. The
ground’s all white and crackled, and nothing
much grows there. But over there . . . ”
Suddenly he grabbed my arm. “Look! I’ve
been coming with Granny to make offerings to
the spirits for years,” he whispered. “But I’ve
never actually seen a spirit before.”
I followed where he pointed now. Partway
down our mountain, on the other side from
where we’d left the horses, was a dark figure.
It was jumping about and waving in a frenzied,
dinosaur-like way.

p

Cha

ur

fo
r
e
t

My mouth went dry. “Oh. Yes. A spirit.”
“What should we do?” Jargul whispered. “I
wish Granny hadn’t left.”
“It seems to want us to come down,” Segi
said. “Should we? Spirits can be dangerous.”
My mind raced. “Maybe I should go check it
out first. I mean, since I’m not from around
here, a local spirit shouldn’t have any power
over me.”
“You’re awfully brave,” Segi said as I began
climbing down. I felt like a fraud, but I wasn’t
afraid. I was angry. Why had Vraj shown
herself?
When I finally reached her, the arrogant
dinosaur was leaning casually against a rock.

60 Alien Agent
“What do you mean doing that?” I blurted.
“Those two humans saw you!”
She sneered. “I’ve been trying to get your attention for hours, but you were sitting there in
a stupor. A lot of help you are, Agent Zack.”
I tried to calm down. “Okay. Sorry. That was
kind of a weird ceremony. But now what do . . . ”
I looked back up the slope and groaned. Jargul
and Segi were climbing down toward us.
Turning back to Vraj, I snapped. “Hold on
a minute. Those two think you’re a spirit, a
mountain spirit. They believe in those things.”
No less likely than dinosaurs from outer space,
I thought, but I didn’t say it. “So sit down on
that rock and look spiritual. And anything you
want to tell me, do it in a singsong chant.”
She groaned, but sat and crossed her legs
like a statue of Buddha. “You mean sound like
that wizened old female did for hours? They
didn’t tell me there’d be this much indignity to
being a Galactic Patrol Agent.”
“Just do it,” I growled as Jargul and Segi
came closer.

alien expedition 61
She hissed back at me. “Well, I’ll chant if I
must, but I’ll do it in Tirgizian. Maybe I can
understand your painfully stupid Earth languages, but my throat refuses to speak them.
Translate however you want.”
The two stopped several yards away and lowered their eyes. “Granny was right, Zack,” Segi
said. “You are extraordinary. You can talk
with spirits.”
“A dragon spirit,” Jargul breathed excitedly.
“We are honored.”
“Er . . . yes. And . . . and she has an important message for us so she’s letting me understand spirit talk.”
Vraj shot me a brief glower, then closed her
eyes and began chanting Tirgizian in a high
singsong voice. “Listen up, Zack. I got a
message from my parents. They’ve all been
kidnapped. A Kiapa Kapa Syndicate is holding
them for ransom or something.”
“Who are . . . ” I began in Tirgizian, then
stopped and chanted it. “What is a Kiapa Kapa
Syndicate?”

62 Alien Agent
“Interplanetary criminals! They’re very powerful and even run some planets. The Galactic
Patrol is always fighting some scheme of theirs
and doesn’t always win.”
“So how did your parents contact you? Where
are they?”
“If I knew where they were, I’d be trying
to get them out now, wouldn’t I? I got a
brief message on my communicator—before
it went blank again. I’ll quote. ‘ Vraj, Kiapa
Kapa holding us. Will try to learn and send
location. Somewhere high. Get help.’ That’s
all. The Kiapa Kapa must be messing with our
communications. So you are all the ‘help’ there
is here, worse luck.”
A moment’s spurt of anger sank under a wave
of hopelessness. Then I turned and saw Jargul
and Segi’s wide-eyed gaze. “What is the spirit
saying?” the girl whispered shyly.
“Ah, yes. She’s saying that she needs help.
You . . . eh, you know about good spirits and
bad spirits?”
They both nodded solemnly.

63

64 Alien Agent
“Well, some bad spirits have captured some
other good spirits, and she needs to find and
free them.”
“And where are they?” Jargul asked.
“She doesn’t know exactly. The bad spirits are very sneaky. Just that it’s someplace
high.”
“High,” Jargul repeated, looking out at the
landscape around us, a landscape dotted with
peaks and plateaus and rock pinnacles.
Vraj broke in, talking to me in singsong
Tirgizian. “You really think these weak little
natives can help?”
I chanted back, “Stow it. They know this
area a lot better than either of us do. And
your cover’s okay as long as they think you’re
a dragon spirit. Can you breathe fire?”
She shot me a look that was as good as
fire.
“Okay, never mind. Anyway, European dragons, I think, are supposed to breathe fire, not
Asian ones. So just look wise and spiritual and
in need of help.”

alien expedition 65
I turned to Jargul and Segi, switching into
Mongolian. “This is a very young spirit, she
tells me. She came from afar to try to free her
fellows and she doesn’t know this area. Would
you two be willing to help?”
Jargul bowed. “We would be honored. But
why doesn’t she also ask help from the other
local spirits? The birds, animals, and rocks
might know something.”
Vraj, with her own implant, could understand
the Mongolian as well. I heard her muttering
in Tirgizian behind me. “Right, talk to the
rocks. Great advice, that is.”
Instantly I felt defensive and snapped. “Well,
sure, rocks may be out, but the local birds and
animals might have been disturbed by all you
aliens tromping around. Maybe we could sense
something from them.”
It was a pretty feeble idea, I knew, and I expected Vraj to bite my head off, verbally anyway. But instead, she said thoughtfully, “These
language implants do let us communicate with
other species, as much as their intelligence

66 Alien Agent
allows. I suppose we could get the word out to
some of the local creatures and find out if they
know anything that might help.”
So that is what we tried to do. The first
challenge, of course, was the horses. When we
walked around to the other side of the sacred
peak, they totally freaked as Vraj approached.
You could hardly blame them. You don’t need
to have seen a bunch of science-fiction movies
to know that big, toothy dinosaurs are trouble.
I’d never thought to try this language implant
thing on animals. But then we don’t have
a lot of pets because of my mom’s allergies.
And anyway, I don’t think goldfish would have
much to say.
The horses were straining against their hobbles so wildly I thought they’d break their legs.
Shooing Vraj back, I walked up to my horse and
clamped my hands on both sides of its head.
Isn’t that what Mr. Spock does when he tries a
mindmeld? I didn’t have a clue what to do after that so I just thought, “Calm, calm, smooth
and calm like water. Silly little lizard. Nothing

alien expedition 67
to fear. Friendly lizard. Be calm. Horses stronger than lizards. Calm, powerful horses.”
I don’t know if I was getting through, but
oddly enough, I did seem to feel bits of horse
thought, stuff about running and grass. And
the animals did become a little calmer.
I looked at Jargul and Segi, who were walking cautiously up to their horses. I tried to
sound like I was on top of things. “Okay, I
guess what we’re going to do is . . . is ride along
and . . . and whenever we see animals or birds
or something stop and . . . try to talk to them
or think to them and . . . and let them know
we’re looking for a bunch of big dragon spirits.
They may know something.”
I felt really lame saying this, and I could
feel Vraj mentally chuckling at me. I turned to
her and ordered in Tirgizian, “You. Just follow
along and talk to whatever you see. But try
not to spook anything.”
“Yes, boss,” she said sarcastically. A sarcastic
dinosaur, even when it’s pretending to chant,
is not a pleasant thing.

68 Alien Agent
First it was marmots—shuffling, brown
things like big, furry slippers. We tried thinking down their marmot holes. Occasionally
one would stick out its round head and give us
a beady stare. Then there were hopping things
that looked like long-legged mice with furtipped tails. A few stopped in their flight to
stare back over their shoulders. I picked up a
scattering of jittery thoughts, but I don’t know
if it was them or just me getting flipped out.
Jargul and Segi didn’t have implants, of
course, but they knew where to find animals.
Who knows? Being locals, maybe their efforts
were as good as mine or Vraj’s. There were lots
of birds too, and of course, plenty of goats,
cows, horses, and sheep. I didn’t get the impression that any of the creatures had seen
large dinosaurs lately—other than Vraj. And
she definitely did seem to make them twitchy.
We even tried the mental questioning thing
on a bunch of camels. They’d been sheared of
their wool and looked really odd with their two
humps all naked and floppy.

70 Alien Agent
Maybe it was my imagination, but their mental response seemed to match their sneering
expressions. They couldn’t care less about us or
our problems. And they were bigger than Vraj,
so she didn’t seem to impress them either.
Finally Jargul and Segi said they had to return to their yurts but would meet me in the
morning. Watching them ride off, I shook my
head, unsure if we had really gotten through
to anything. Vraj claimed that she had, but
she could have just been boasting. All I could
claim was that I’d gotten some really weird,
flighty, skittery thoughts bouncing back into
my head.
When I told Vraj I didn’t think this was helping much, she got snotty and stomped off into
the growing dark, snarling, “Why should you
care anyway? It’s not your parents or your career as a Cadet that’s at stake.”
“Well, yeah, but it is my assignment,” I called
back. “And I want this to work. I just don’t
know if this talk-to-the-animals thing is getting us anywhere.”

alien expedition 71
“If you come up with a better idea, native boy, tell me in the morning. I’ll be here
early.”
Annoyed and discouraged, I tromped back to
the cook tent. The archaeologists and paleontologists were buzzing about their finds of the
day. They had discovered some Turkic inscriptions and a new deposit of dinosaur fossils.
I tried to look enthusiastic, but I really didn’t
care much. My mind wasn’t on fossil dinosaurs
but on live ones. Dinosaurs who’d managed to
get themselves kidnapped and were depending
on a couple of clueless, inexperienced Alien
Agents to free them.
Their eyes glowing with their exciting finds,
my parents didn’t notice the cloud of gloom
over my head. “I’m really glad you’re having
fun with your young friends,” Mom said, over
our bowls of creamed goat. “But don’t forget
tomorrow is Saturday, so it’s only a half work
day. They’re planning on having some traditional Mongolian wrestling in the afternoon.
You don’t want to miss that.”

72 Alien Agent
Actually, I really didn’t want to miss it.
Among the Mongolians working in our expedition were some really big, tough guys who,
judging by their boasting, were champions in
this special form of wrestling. But I realized
that if I couldn’t finish up my real assignment
soon, I might have to miss the fun. What’s the
line from that old song my parents like to sing?
“Summertime, and the living is easy?” Ha.
“And in the evening there’ll be a big party,”
my dad chimed in, not noticing my gloomy
expression. “Supposedly they pull all the jeeps
and trucks into a circle, turn on the headlights,
play Mongolian disco music on the radios, and
go wild.”
“Aided by plentiful quantities of fermented
goat’s milk,” Dr. Longford added. “Not that
young Zack here will have that, but there ought
to be fruit soda brought all the way from Ulan
Bator for the occasion.”
Whoopee, I thought. Well, if we found the
missing dinosaurs, the live ones, then maybe there would be something to celebrate.

alien expedition 73
Wow, I could even bring a date to the party—the
beautiful and talented Cadet Vraj. Double ha.
At least the crazy picture of my parents’
reaction when introduced to my date cheered
me up. I certainly needed some cheering.

p

Cha

ve

fi
r
e
t

The next morning, I woke before dawn and
was too tense to go back to sleep. I dressed,
crawled out of my tent, and watched the
diamond-bright morning star slowly fade into
sunrise. Soon piles of pink clouds rose into a
baby-blue sky. They might have looked sappy
in a painting, but here, it was spectacular.
Swallows began swirling out of their cliffside
nests, whistling and darting through the chill
air—air that smelled like sage, mint, and wild
onion. I would have felt perfectly at peace, if
it weren’t for this assignment.
I could hear a herd of goats coming nearer,
every “baa” with a different tone. Some sounded
like baby toys and some, like they’d swallowed

alien expedition 75
a New Year’s Eve noisemaker. I tried focusing
my implant on them. I was definitely getting
better at it, but they weren’t talking about
dinosaurs. Mostly it was stuff like, “Where’s
Mama?” “Better grass here.” “I got to the top
of the rock before you!”
Sighing, I pulled on my backpack and headed
down to the cook tent. No one else was up
yet except the cook. Thankfully she hadn’t
finished making the goat milk porridge yet so
I got away with breakfasting on stale dough
balls. I stuffed a bunch more in my pack for
later.
Outside, Jargul and Segi were already waiting
for me, my tan horse beside their brown ones.
I didn’t see our other partner, but she popped
up once we were out of sight of the camp.
“Tried some of the night creatures,” Vraj
grumbled, “but the only ones like me they reported seeing were the two oafs who took the
egg fossil and notebooks from the other camp.
And that was several days ago, before they
all . . . went missing.”

76 Alien Agent
I translated part of that for Jargul and Segi
then said, “So, what do you suggest now?”
“Well,” Jargul said, “since the message said
they were somewhere high, let’s head up high.
You can try talking to the creatures that like
heights.”
I looked around and sighed. This area was
full of high places. I pointed at the peak
towering over our camp. “That looks about the
highest.”
“Don’t even point at that one!” Segi whispered. “It’s the most sacred. We haven’t ever
dared go near the top. But we could try its
flanks.”
This meant riding around the mountain’s
many spurs to get to the easiest side to climb.
As we rode, the sun rose, but it was immediately
hidden behind a rising purple wall of cloud.
The wind was a lot stiffer than before, and it
didn’t feel like the day was going to get as
hot.
We began a wide circle of the mountain, riding
with Jargul and Segi well in the lead. Vraj

alien expedition 77
trotted beside me, staying a little distance from
my still slightly skittish horse. At one point,
Vraj stopped to talk with a marmot. Then she
bent down and gobbled the fellow up.
She must have noticed my horrified expression and trotted closer, still picking tufts of
brown fur out of her teeth. “So?” she challenged. “This is hungry work.”
“But you shouldn’t really eat our informants,
should you?”
She shrugged. “That one didn’t have anything useful to say. Look, I really prefer my
meat well roasted with a nice cream sauce. But
this is a hardship assignment.” She patted the
small pack fastened around her middle. “The
nutrition pills they give us just don’t cut it.”
We continued on, leaving me to wonder if—
now that I could sort of talk to animals—I
would have a harder time eating things like
beef and pork. This alien agent stuff just
might drive me to vegetarianism. I didn’t
think I could talk with carrots anyway. And I
certainly didn’t plan to try.

78 Alien Agent
Eventually we turned into a narrow valley
that took us partway up the back of the mountain. When it became too steep and rocky for
the horses, we left them in a side valley with
plenty of grass and took to the rocks. We met
a few round, furry things, who claimed to have
never seen anything like Vraj and certainly
didn’t want to now. Nothing happened until
we got to a bare, rocky, and very windy plateau. Then Jargul pointed to the valley that
was now far below us.
“Looks like we have a few minutes to find
some shelter,” he said in a worried tone.
I looked where he was pointing but didn’t
see anything worrisome. In fact, it was too
hazy to see much at all. Then I realized the
haziness was a yellow cloud, slowly moving
toward us like a huge, lumbering animal.
“Sandstorm,” he said. “Doesn’t look too bad,
but you never know.”
Feeling very exposed on this open plateau,
we scurried to the other side, where a tumble
of rocks formed a semicircle. It looked like one

alien expedition 79
of those old animal corrals we’d found on survey. Thank you, ancient people.
We’d just reached the sheltering rocks when
the wind developed a voice, an angry, raspy
voice, and suddenly the yellow cloud was upon
us. Hunching behind the rocks with the others,
I closed my eyes and pulled up my jacket hood.
That didn’t do much to keep out the gritty
sand. It pelted against us like tiny bullets,
scouring our skin and filling our ears with pain
and noise.
The storm seemed to go on for ages. Then
slowly the howling softened. Finally I raised
my head and opened my eyes. The wave of
sand had rolled past us, trailing a few angry
twisters in its wake.
We looked at each other and laughed—even
Vraj. Each of us looked like a figure carved
from sand. We stood up as we brushed away
and spit out the yellow grit. “I hope the
horses are all right,” I said.
“They’re Mongolian horses,” Segi said
proudly. “They’re used to this sort of thing.

alien expedition 81
They’ll have taken cover and will probably
go back home on their own.”
“Well, I’m not used to it,” I commented,
offering my water bottle around. “That was
some storm.”
“It was just a little one,” Jargul said. “Out
on the desert, they can last for days. Often
storms like that come before a rainstorm, so
we’d better get moving.”
We all looked up at the sky and saw that it
was indeed piling with bruise-colored clouds.
Jargul shook his head and added, “Looks like
we’ve been sitting here too long.”
I followed his pointing finger and saw a big
black bird circling above us. “Are they dangerous?” I asked.
“Not if we’re alive. It’s a tas, a vulture. It
eats dead things, and we were here so long, it’s
checking us out.”
“Okay, let’s get moving,” I said with a shiver,
and all of us began climbing the rocky slope
that rose behind our shelter. Halfway up,
the circling shadow of the tas swept over me.

82 Alien Agent
It felt nearly as creepy as when Granny had read
my fortune in the knucklebones. I refused to
look up. The shadow moved on, rippling over
the rocks.
Finally we reached a ledge, and I forced myself to look up. The tas was circling closer.
“Go away,” I called. “Can’t you see we’re alive
and kicking?”
It just squawked and dropped closer. With
awkward back pedaling of huge wings, it
landed in front of us. This thing was enormous.
I’d never seen such a big bird. It hopped clumsily toward us, as big as a man in a really ugly
bird costume.
“Shoo, shoo!” Jargul and Segi cried, but it
ignored them.
Instead it stopped in front of Vraj, gave
her a beady stare and croaked in tas-talk, “If
you’d kindly die, I’d eat you. If not, I’ve got a
message for you.”
“For me?” I couldn’t miss the slight quaver
in Vraj’s voice. This bird was as big as she was
and even meaner looking.

alien expedition 83
“You’re the only thing around as ugly as the
big lizard who gave me the message. Want to
hear it?”
“Yes.”
“What you give me for it?”
“I’ll let you get away without eating you,”
Vraj snapped.
“No good. I can fly. You can’t.”
Hurriedly I fumbled in my pack, but all I
found to offer was some fried dough balls. The
tas just knocked them out of my hand.
“Got anything better?” I whispered back to
Jargul. Quickly he gave me a slab of dried goat
meat. In seconds, the tas snatched that away,
barely leaving my fingers behind. It swallowed
the meat whole.
It swallowed and gagged and finally got it
down. “Not bad,” it said, “but not dead long
enough.”
“Your message?” Vraj demanded.
“Right. ‘Being held inside main mountain.
Kiapa Kapa making demands Galactic Union
mustn’t meet. Free us.’ That’s it. I’m off.”

84 Alien Agent
“Wait!” Vraj cried as the creature stretched
its huge wings. “Where were they when they
gave you this message?”
“Didn’t agree to lead you there. Just deliver
message. Unless you plan to die now, I’m
off.”

p

Cha

x

si
r
e
t

“What a nasty bird,” I said, as we watched
the great black tas soar off into the sky.
“It probably hoped we’d die of fright,” Vraj
snarled, “except I wouldn’t give it the satisfaction. However, it looks like your human friends
just might. Better talk to them.”
Jargul and Segi were indeed round-eyed
and looked rather pale. “The bird just had a
message for us about the . . . the spirits we’re
trying to find. Supposedly they’re ‘being held
inside the main mountain.’ Does that give you
any sort of clue?”
Jargul lowered his eyes. “Granny was right.
You are special. We’ve never seen anyone deal
with a tas like that.”

86 Alien Agent
“But that clue doesn’t make things easy,”
Segi added. “This mountain would probably be
the main mountain. But it’s so sacred, we’ve
never explored it very far. There are stories,
though, about a cave near the top where
hermits used to live. That’s the only ‘inside’ I
can think of.”
“So I guess we go to the top of the mountain,” I said. The wind was picking up again,
and it felt like Jargul’s prediction of a rainstorm would come true.
Again we climbed. Before, when I’d been
climbing rocks on the survey, I hadn’t used
the alien abilities Sorn had once shown me.
When I do that, I kind of zone out and just
climb without thinking. On the archaeological
survey, I had to be constantly on the lookout
for ancient stuff. Now all that mattered was
getting to the top, so I went into climbing
mode.
Even when a snake coiled back and hissed
at me, I barely paused. A smattering of anger
and fear floated to me from the snake, and I

alien expedition 87
hissed the same thing back twice as strong.
The surprised reptile shot off and disappeared
into a rocky cleft. I kept climbing.
I was way ahead of the others. But as I
stepped onto what was almost the final ledge,
I realized I was not alone. A very, very large
sheep was facing me. It looked like his huge,
coiled horns could tip me off the ledge with
ease. He snorted surprise, but not a whiff of
fear.
When Vraj pulled herself up beside me, the
mountain sheep just snorted contemptuously,
“Another one of them.”
“Who’s them?” I snorted back.
“Them. The ridiculously big lizards.”
“Where are they?” Vraj asked eagerly.
“Trapped inside,” the mountain sheep
answered with a toss of his hugely horned
head. Then he trotted off, ignoring our pleas
for more information.
From a slightly lower ledge, Jargul and Segi
watched this interchange, and their awed expressions were almost embarrassing. I was

88 Alien Agent
beginning to wish that Vraj and I did have
some kind of spiritual powers. Then maybe all
these animals wouldn’t be so ornery.
Again, I gave the two Mongolian kids an
edited version of our conversation. “The big
sheep said the . . . spirits we’re looking for are
trapped inside. So I guess we’d better keep
looking for that cave.”
There wasn’t much farther up to go. The ledge
we were on led like a ramp up to a boulderstrewn plateau. There certainly wasn’t any
sign of a cave. At one end of the plateau was
a large tumble of rocks that probably counted
as the mountain peak.
“So where’s this cave?” Vraj grumbled. I
asked Jargul, but he just shook his head.
“We’ve never been up here before. But the
stories say that holy hermits lived here for
years. So it couldn’t have been just cracks
between rocks.”
Still, the rocks at the plateau edge were the
only place to look, assuming this was the right
mountain. I certainly wouldn’t put much trust

alien expedition 89
in directions given by either that nasty bird or
that snotty sheep.
As we walked toward the rocks, the wind
became heavy and wet, splatting us with large
raindrops. At first, the smell of rain on the
dry, dusty granite was soft and fresh. But the
drops got faster and colder and hit with more
force. Thunder suddenly rocked us with the
sound of a giant dropping his toolbox. And
almost at the same moment, the purple cloud
above us lit up with lightning. We began
running toward the rocks, which had almost
disappeared behind the wind-lashed rain.
The rocks weren’t much shelter, though.
We scrambled about looking for some kind of
overhang, until finally Segi cried that she’d
found a narrow cleft we could just squeeze into.
She, Jargul, and I managed, but Vraj almost
got jammed in the entrance. I didn’t know
that dinosaurs didn’t like rain, but this one
apparently didn’t. She yelled at us to squeeze
farther back so she could fit. We tried, and
suddenly Segi yelped and disappeared.

90 Alien Agent
“There’s a cave in here,” her voice echoed
from the darkness behind us. “And it’s dry.
Careful of the drop.”
Jargul and I soon joined her and, finally, Vraj
did as well, cursing in Tirgizian about worthless, rocky planets and scraping her lovely
skin.
Ignoring her, I said to Segi, “Good work. I
guess this must be your hermit cave. It isn’t
too sacred and forbidden for you to come in
here?”
She shrugged apologetically. “Not when the
other choice is drowning.”
“Besides,” Jargul added, “I’m sure if the
spirit of the old hermit is still around, he’d
make exceptions. We are trying to help other
spirits, after all.”
I felt a jab of guilt for having given them
that line. But if there was one thing absolutely
clear in my assignments, it’s that humans are
not to know that there are aliens around.
With the dark curtain of rain falling outside, we couldn’t see much of this cave.

alien expedition 91
Then I remembered the flashlight in my pack
and pulled it out. Vraj was also fumbling in
her pack and pulled out a rod that glowed in
a very alien-looking way. But then it could be
seen as a spirit light too. I suppose people see
what they expect.
The narrow cleft we’d crawled through led to a
higher, wider channel in the rock. We followed
it back until it opened into a room about the
size of our cook tent, except that instead of
canvas, the walls and ceiling were great slabs of
stone. The soaking wind couldn’t follow us there.
For a while, we just huddled out of the storm,
listening to thunder shake the mountaintop. I
shared some fried dough balls from my pack. Vraj
rejected these but took some of the dried meat
Segi offered. Then we began exploring.
Vraj and I played our lights over the rock
walls. The rocks were smooth, dark orange
marked with lighter splotches. After staring at
them a while, I suddenly realized these weren’t
splotches but drawings pecked into the surface
of the rock. We’d seen drawings like this on

92 Alien Agent
our archaeological survey. These looked like
pictures of goats with long, curving horns.
They marched silently around the cave walls,
occasionally joined by figures that looked like
horses or big cats.
“Maybe a bunch of ancient hunters holed up
here during storms and passed the time drawing goats,” I suggested.
“Or they could have been offering goats to
the spirit of the mountain,” Segi said.
Jargul added, “Or maybe hunters were working magic, so they could catch more goats.”
Vraj just growled, “Goats are not what we’re
looking for—though I wouldn’t mind one for
lunch right now.” I did not translate that for
the others.
She was right, though. If all this cave had
to offer was ancient goat drawings, we were on
the wrong track. “Let’s look carefully to see
if there’s a passage leading somewhere else,” I
said in Mongolian.
We searched every crack with our lights. It
was Jargul who noticed something important.

94 Alien Agent
“Look how there are a lot of goats drawn on
this rock wall, all marching to the left. And
then there’s a bunch more on that wall over
there, also marching left. But there are no
goats on the rock wall in between them.”
He was right. The panel between was plain
dark-orange rock.
Vraj snorted. “So the hunters got bored with
drawing and not eating. I too have better
things to do than hanging around this heap of
rocks.” With that, she kicked the middle panel
of rock. It shook slightly.
“Was that thunder shaking the mountain,” I
asked, “or did you make that happen?”
“Hmmm,” she said, examining the rock more
closely. Then she kicked it again. It definitely
moved a little, and a thread of rock dust dribbled to the floor. With a growl that sounded
like a ninja warrior’s, Vraj threw herself against
the edge of the panel. The rock made a sharp
grating sound, then it shifted inward.
“A door!” the rest of us cried at once, and we
all joined in pushing.

alien expedition 95
Slowly the opening grew, letting out a wave
of cold, dank, dead-smelling air. Finally, the
gap was wide enough for Vraj. But instead of
pushing herself through, she squatted down.
With her light rod, she slowly examined the
ground beyond the door.
“It doesn’t look like this door has been
opened for ages. The dust’s undisturbed. The
kidnappers certainly didn’t bring any Tirgizians
this way.”
Discouraged, I nodded and looked at the door.
If adult Tirgizians were much bigger than Vraj,
they wouldn’t have been able to fit through
it anyway, much less the cleft we’d crawled
through at first.
After I translated for Jargul and Segi, Jargul
peered past Vraj and said, “But it does look
like there’s a passage beyond. You said the
spirits you’re looking for are being held inside the mountain? Maybe this could take us
there.”
I nodded. “You’re right, but I’m not sure
about the ‘us’ part. This could be dangerous.

96 Alien Agent
Caves are dangerous anyway, and the . . . the
bad spirits could be very powerful.”
Segi smiled. “Which is why you need us to
help you out. Our Granny has taught us a lot
about spirits.”
“Yeah, but these—” I began, but Vraj
interrupted.
“Let them come. It’s their planet’s future
we’re dealing with here. I hate to admit it, but
we might need some help.”
That was some admission from her. And she
could be right. So, one by one, we squeezed
through the partly open doorway. Darkness
oozed around us, seeming to suck at our breath
and our light. This might still be Earth, but
just then, the inside of this sacred Mongolian
mountain seemed plenty alien to me.

n

ve
e
s
r

pte

Cha

Lifting our lights, we looked around. “Ah,
there are the other goats,” Jargul said and
pointed to the back of our door. On it, the
missing goats continued in procession, and I
realized that instead of a hinged door, this slab
of rock pivoted. If we closed it by pushing it
all the way around, the line of goats seen on
the other side would be unbroken.
Segi said what we all felt. “Let’s keep it
open.”
Walking a little farther into the dark, we
could see that the ledge we were on ended
at stairs, leading downward. Well, not stairs
exactly, but scooped-out places in the rock.

98 Alien Agent
We looked at each other and nodded. We had
to see where they led.
Vraj went first, holding her glowing rod in
front of her—then came Jargul and Segi. I
took up the rear, holding my flashlight high so
it could help light the way.
As we cautiously climbed down, I looked at
the rock walls beside us and noticed that some
had drawings on them. Not goats, but symbols
I couldn’t make out.
At a wide spot, we stopped in front of one,
and Jargul said, “That’s an inscription in old
Mongolian script. See, it’s written from top
to bottom. I can’t read it, though. They’ve
stopped teaching it in schools.”
Segi pointed to another inscription, written
from side to side in sharp, swooping letters.
“That’s Tibetan, I think.”
I nodded. “We saw some like it on the survey.
Dr. Longford said it says something like ‘O, jewel
of the lotus.’ I’m not sure what that means.”
“It’s a prayer,” Segi explained. “That’s one of
the names of Buddha.”

alien expedition 99

100 Alien Agent
As we continued on, I was thinking that prayers
were certainly something we could use about
now. What awaited us at the bottom of these
stairs might well be something we should not be
dealing with. Not that we had much choice.
Ahead of us, the steps stopped at a broad
ledge. We were surprised to see thin scraps of
daylight, littered over the dusty floor.
“There’s a little opening to the outside here,”
Jargul said, pointing to the rocky wall. “Phew,
and there’s a stink too.”
He didn’t have to tell us that. The lower
we’d gone, the more it made me want to retch.
It smelled like barnyards and dead animals.
Vraj poked her light rod toward the little gray
openings in the rock.
“There’s a bunch of sticks out there. And
something moving.”
“Yes,” a voice screeched. “Me!”
Twigs and pebbles burst aside as a face poked
in at us. A familiar face. The tas.
“I wish you filthy creatures would stop harassing my nest. First, that big scaly message-

alien expedition 101
leaver, and now you. Either have the good
manners to die right now or leave me alone!”
“Sorry,” I screeched back, happy if my poor
throat didn’t have to talk tas much more. Then
I turned to Vraj. “This must be where at least
one of your Tirgizians came to deliver that
message.”
“Yes, but they must have been caught doing
it.” Her voice was more cracked than usual
as she pointed her light to the rock floor.
“Footprints . . . and blood.”
Among the pebbles and churned-up dust were
dark red splotches. I felt a moment’s surprise
that Tirgizian blood should be red. But I guess
that made sense if their dinosaur ancestors and
other Earth animals were related. Then I felt
guilty, realizing that is wasn’t the color that
Vraj was concerned about. That blood could be
from her parents.
“There’s not much blood,” I hurriedly pointed
out. “The Tirgizian who left the message here
probably got scratched in a scuffle when it was
caught. See, there are more footprints on the

102 Alien Agent
stairs going down—but only a few drops of
blood.”
Vraj only grunted and continued down the
stairs. We followed, and I couldn’t help wonder
what Jargul and Segi thought of spirits that
could bleed.
The stairs were becoming broader and more
regular, and on either side we glimpsed more
inscriptions. Suddenly Vraj hissed and switched
off her light. I did the same with mine. It
took me a moment to realize that we weren’t
standing in total darkness. Our stairs were
now winding down one wall of a cavern, and
that big open space was lit by a faint light that
seemed to be bleeding from somewhere out of
sight.
Cautiously we crept down, straining to see in
the misty grayness. What I finally saw made
me catch my breath. I poked Segi, who was
just ahead of me and pointed. Below us on the
floor of the cavern was a huge figure. I hoped
desperately it wasn’t a hostile alien. Then I
saw it was a statue. An enormous Buddha. It

alien expedition 103
was carved into the rock wall opposite to the
one we were climbing down.
We kept descending and soon were right
across from the beautiful, serene, very peaceful face. The huge seated figure seemed to
be quietly ignoring the disruption in its cave.
And there definitely was disruption other than
what we were causing.
From around a tall corner of rock, along with
the faint light, came the sound of voices. Loud,
very nonhuman voices. Vraj motioned a halt
and strained to listen.
“The Kiapa Kapa are a mixed syndicate,” she
whispered. “Lots of species are involved. I
think I hear Cloob, Porgatagi, and Gnairt.”
I shivered. I had met Gnairt and didn’t want
to meet any more of them—or their friends,
either.
Vraj began moving again. “We’ve got to get
down there and see where they’re holding the
Tirgizians.”
Trying to be as silent as ghosts, we continued
down the stairs. Finally we reached the cavern

104 Alien Agent
floor. I glanced up at the big Buddha. Its face
was lit with a calm half smile. I wished I could
feel half as calm. I guess there’s an advantage
in being stone.
Vraj continued inching her way toward the
corner of the rock wall. We followed, but she
waved us back, snaking her head around the
edge. Finally she pulled back and huddled us
together. I tried to translate parts of what she
said for the Mongols.
“The next cavern is even bigger than this
one. There are about a half-dozen aliens
walking around or working with devices on
tables. I count four different species. The
Tirgizian prisoners seem to be in a sort of
cage of light that’s set on a pile of rocks on
the far side. It looks like the whole expedition is there—including my parents.” She
sank into a relieved silence for a moment,
then continued. “I can’t see any more without risking being seen.”
“So what do we do now?” I asked, switching to Mongolian. “We’re not exactly the

alien expedition 105
best-equipped rescue team. I mean we don’t
even have any weapons with us.”
“We have knives,” Jargul offered. “We always carry them along with chopsticks.”
Vraj snorted, then patted her pack and added
with a fierce grin, “I have something more effective. Not that it’s likely to be much use against
the weapons the Kiapa Kapa will have.”
“If you can talk with the spirits that are
caged,” Segi suggested, “they might have some
suggestions.”
Vraj grunted. I suspected she wanted to free
the captives in some spectacular way all on her
own and impress her parents. But obviously,
she needed help. Without another word, she
led us back into the shadows, skirting the stone
Buddha to where we could inch along the far
wall of the other cavern. Boulders and slabs
along its base made it easier to stay hidden,
but we had to be careful not to dislodge any
loose, noisy stones.
The enemy aliens, though, were jabbering
enough among themselves to cover our sounds.

alien expedition 107
I couldn’t pick out much of what they said
except occasional words like transmission
and financial potential. And I had to fight
the impulse to try to peer over the rocks and
get a glimpse of the aliens who made up this
Kiapa Kapa. But I figured that if I couldn’t
see them, they couldn’t see me. And that’s
the way I wanted it.
As we got closer to our goal, I looked up
and tried not to gasp.
On a flat rock outcrop sat a very large
cage. Its sides seemed to be made from
thin threads of violet light. Obviously
those threads were strong, because they
securely held creatures from a sciencefiction nightmare inside. Eight very large
dinosaurs were sitting, standing, or milling
around. Instantly my mouth dried, and my
palms got wet. I’d always loved monster
movies. But I really did not want to be
in the middle of this one.
Vraj crouched down and whispered,
“We’ll crawl up behind that cage, let

108 Alien Agent
them know we’re here, and,” she added grudgingly, “ask their advice.”
Stealthily we made our way around the back
of the rock outcrop and then slithered up
toward the top. The cage seemed to keep any
noise the captives made locked inside it, but
the aliens in the cave sounded uncomfortably
near. We tried to be very quiet. As we neared
the top, we saw that the glowing violet threads
came down evenly like tent poles, but the
ground they met was not even. In spots, there
were little gaps.
Vraj pointed to these, then shrugged. I took
that to mean what I had realized too: the gaps
were much too small for the captive dinosaurs
to escape through. Then she pointed to me,
and I did not want to understand what that
meant. She pointed to me again, made little
walking motions with her claws, and then gave
me a shove.
Maintaining silence, I shook my head
violently. But I knew it was no use. Those
gaps were too small for Vraj too. Segi was the

alien expedition 109
smallest of us, but without an implant she
wouldn’t be much use, to say nothing of not
wanting to put her in any more danger than
she was in already.
Finally I nodded, slipped off my backpack,
and crept toward the largest of the gaps. The
glowing cage wall spanned a narrow crevasse,
and by wriggling and shoving, I inched my way
through. I popped my head up just in time to
pull it down again as a large, scaly foot nearly
stepped on me.

ht

ig
er e

pt

Cha

“Some vermin’s creeping in here!” squawked
a voice in Tirgizian.
Another creature shoved the speaker aside
and peered down at me, where I crouched,
shivering in the crevasse. Its teeth gleamed in
the violet light. “No, it’s one of the natives—
a human.”
“Greetings,” I quavered, not venturing out.
“I’m here with Vraj. We’d like to rescue you.”
“About time,” said another voice, and before
I could yelp, a clawed hand pulled me into the
cage. Soon I was crouched in the terrifying center of a circle of staring dinosaurs. I suppose if
I had been thinking calmly, I would have seen

alien expedition 111
that they were not quite like the ancient dinosaurs you see in books. Most were standing on
two legs, and their hands had nimbler looking
fingers. But they still looked fierce, even the
ones with no sharp teeth.
In my little kid dinosaur phase, I’d learned
the names of lots of dinosaurs. It sure looked
like we had triceratops, duckbills, and tyrannosauruses right here. I was trying to get enough
moisture in my mouth to talk when a couple
of large velociraptors pushed their way toward
me. Vraj’s parents, I guessed.
“You must be the local agent here,” one said.
I couldn’t tell if it was her mom or dad. It’s
easier to tell with mammals. But then the one
talking said something very momlike. “Is Vraj
all right? We’re so worried about her.”
“Yes. Vraj and a couple helpful natives are
just outside.” I glanced at the cage wall and
realized you could not see out from the inside.
“Is there anything you can tell us about why
you are being held here or how this cage works,
anything that could help us get you out?”

112 Alien Agent
The duckbilled one grunted. “Fat chance
these runts will have breaking us out of here.
The Galactic Patrol needs to send a fleet.”
The tyrannosaurus gave a ghastly, throaty
laugh. “Don’t be an idiot! That would totally
violate Galactic Union policy. They’d sacrifice
us before they’d lose a chance to bring this
miserable planet into the Union.”
“How can you say that about this planet?”
wailed the triceratops. “It’s our long lost ancestral home. Its safety is paramount!”
The tyrannosaurus growled, “Not more
than—“
“Stop arguing!” the other velociraptor yelled,
which was pretty brave considering that as big
as it was, all the others were a whole lot bigger.
“We’ve got to talk to this humanoid. You’re
the Galactic Union’s local Agent, right? Zack
Gaither?”
“Zack will do.”
“All right, Zack, I’m Vraj’s father. To answer
your questions, the Kiapa Kapa is a syndicate of
economic developers with strong criminal ties.

113

114 Alien Agent
They are holding us ransom to force the Galactic
Union to turn this planet over to them. They
demand that the Union abandon its plans for
Earth. Our investigation to determine that this
planet was the birthplace of the Tirgizians is
purely scientific. But that knowledge could also
be exploited for enormous economic gain.”
“How?” I asked.
“It’s obvious,” roared the T. rex. “Tourism.
We Tirgizians have fantasized about our birth
world for millennia. Most of our planet’s
population would jump at the chance to come
here as tourists. And we are a very wealthy
people. Think of the money that could be made
by those running the tourist trade.”
My imagination filled with images of dinosaurs
in flowered shirts and sunglasses, trampling
over the planet, snapping pictures, being crabby
to the natives, and buying souvenirs. “Yeah, I
see. And I don’t think the native population
would welcome that.”
“Precisely,” said Vraj’s mom. “Not only would
it scramble the local culture and economy, it

alien expedition 115
would destroy any chance for a friendly entry
of Earth into the Galactic Union.”
I nodded. Camera-toting giant dinosaurs
were probably not the first aliens that humans
should be introduced to. But something left me
puzzled. “What you just said would certainly
be the position of the Galactic Patrol, but I
got the impression from Vraj that you didn’t
exactly approve of her working for them.”
The other velociraptor snapped, “That’s
because we wanted her to be a scientist like
us—a nice safe profession, we thought—and
not go gallivanting around the galaxy in the
military.” Then it leaned frighteningly close
and whispered, “And if we all get out of this
alive, we want Vraj to know how proud we are
of her, just the same.”
“Enough blather,” announced the duckbill.
”If these little creatures are going to get us
out, they’ll have to turn off the power in this
cage. Opening the outer cave door would help
too, while they’re at it. Both impossible tasks,
if you ask me.”

116 Alien Agent
With a swing of its meaty tail, the T. rex
bumped the duckbill aside. “Listen then,
boy. The controls for the cage and door and
everything else in this hideout of theirs are
in a booth on a ledge at the far end of the
cavern. The problem is, of course, that it’s
guarded.”
I looked up at this huge guy and couldn’t
help asking what I knew was a stupid question. “And there’s no way you can break out
using your size and strength? I mean, you are
dinosaurs.”
The T. rex laughed with the sound of falling
rocks. “If strength were what it took, the Kiapa
Kapa would be carrion. But the constraints
on this cage are sonic. No amount of physical
strength can dent them.” To emphasize the
point, its tail whacked against the glowing
wall. It bulged out like a soap bubble, then
snapped back.
But that turned out not to have been too
bright a move. “Hey, what’s going on in there?”
a voice yelled from outside. Suddenly the wall

alien expedition 117
became transparent from our side too. A tall
creature with tentacles sticking out of its head
like a giant sea plant stood outside. I dove
behind the triceratops but not before the tentacled thing caught sight of me.
“Vermin! Native vermin in the cave! Kill
it!” The creature raised what must have been
a weapon, but I was already scrambling down
the crevasse and out of there. Vraj, Jargul, and
Segi were up and running when I snatched up
my pack and joined them. We pelted over and
around the rocks, heading back for the other
cavern. Blasts of energy exploded behind us,
filling the air with rock fragments and gouts of
flame.
We charged into the semidarkness, darted
behind the Buddha, and scrambled up the
tumbled rocks beyond. Not daring to use our
lights, we climbed by pure instinct. A few
more shots erupted behind us but not as close
as before. I was in the lead now and grabbed
the others as they reached me, pushing them
down behind a huge boulder.

alien expedition 119
Alien voices came from below. “What was it?
One of those filthy things with horns? Or was
it a stupid human?”
What must have been the tentacled thing
answered. “I couldn’t see clearly. But the
modern humans don’t know about this place.”
“Then it was probably some cave creature
that those miserable Tirgizians were trying to
lure in to snack on. They don’t appreciate our
generous rations, I suppose.” The laugh that
followed was not a nice one.
“Still, we’d better keep a close lookout. We
don’t want any cave vermin fouling our equipment. Not with things going so well. We ought
to be hearing the Galactic Union’s response to
our terms any time now.”
The voices were receding, but I picked up a
parting comment. “We’d better, or their precious Tirgizian scientists will become as extinct
as their ancestors.”
Vraj whispered, “This spot is too exposed if
they decide to look for vermin again. There’s a
better hiding spot up farther.”

120 Alien Agent
“How can you tell?” I said, squinting into
the darkness.
Vraj snorted. “I forgot, none of you have
night vision worth anything. There’s a side
cavern at the top of this rockslide.”
When I’d translated, Segi whimpered. “I
don’t think I can make it up there. I wrenched
my ankle when we were running, and it’s really
starting to hurt.”
“Why didn’t you say anything?” Jargul asked.
“I was so scared, I hardly noticed it at the
time.”
“I can try to carry you,” I offered.
“No, you can’t,” Vraj snorted. “You’re so
weak and clumsy you’ll end up hurt like her.
I’ll carry her.”
With that, the young dinosaur scooped up
Segi and started clambering up the rock-strewn
slope. More blindly, Jargul and I followed.
When we’d found our way to the side cave
Vraj had seen, she whistled us to the back of
the cave and turned on her glow rod to a low
setting. A faint mist of light showed a tall

alien expedition 121
cleft in the rocky mountain. One wall shielded
us from the cavern below. Boulders the size of
small cars laid scattered about.
“It’s safe to talk here,” Vraj said.
“But it’s plenty smelly,” I commented.
“I wouldn’t know. I’m not afflicted with your
primitive, overdeveloped sense of smell.”
It did stink like rotten eggs, but I tried to ignore it as I told them what I’d learned from the
captive Tirgizians.
When I’d finished, Vraj asked, “And my
parents—and the others of course—were they
all right? They hadn’t been hurt?”
“They looked fine to me,” I assured her,
though the idea that large, toothy dinosaurs
could look fine was a stretch for me.
Jargul summed things up. “So all we have
to do is get to that control place, somehow let
the captives out of the cage, and open the big
door to the outside.”
“Right,” I said. That’s all we had to do.
Right. “Vraj, what kind of weapon do you have
in that pack?”

122 Alien Agent
“Standard Galactic-Agent issue. No good at
all against sonic constraints.”
“Well, maybe we could use it to create enough
of a diversion to get to their control room and
do something there. It’s way on the other side
of that cavern, though. It’d have to be some
big diversion.”
Vraj snorted. “May I point out that the Kiapa
Kapa is never without a great many weapons
themselves? But still, I should creep down
there again and get a better look. At least
they don’t realize that a rescue party is at
hand, despite you clumsily letting yourself be
seen.”
She ended with a bitter laugh that kept me
from objecting. She was partly right. It was
not my fault I’d been seen, but we sure weren’t
much of a rescue party.
“I’ll go with you,” I said instead.
“You will not. We don’t need anyone else
laming themselves in the dark. Stay here and
fix that girl’s ankle while I check things out.
I’m off!”

alien expedition 123
With only a slight swish and clatter, my fellow
agent vanished, leaving the three of us alone in
the stinky dark under a huge mountain in the
middle of Mongolia. This was definitely not
the sort of pleasant summer vacation I could
brag about to my schoolmates. Of course, if I
didn’t live through it, I wouldn’t have to worry
about that.

p

Cha

ne

ni
r
e
t

Vraj had taken her glow rod with her, but I
switched on my flashlight and sat beside Segi.
“Guess we’d better take a look at that ankle.”
“I’m sorry I was so clumsy,” she said as she
rolled down her sock.
“No, I’m sorry I got you into this. Oh, that
looks nasty.”
Her ankle was already purple and swollen
like a sausage. Vraj had told me to “fix that
girl’s ankle” when she left, as if that was something I could do. Of course, I should be able to.
Some of the computer lessons from the Galactic
Union had been about focusing energies into

alien expedition 125
healing. But I’d never tried it on anyone but myself so far, and that had only been to heal minor
cuts and scratches. I remembered how Sorn had
used it on my cousin after the Gnairt attacked
us. It had seemed so easy then. But now . . .
And of course, I didn’t want to let them know
I had any special alien abilities. So I’d have to
change my approach. “Well, actually, it looks
like it will go down pretty quickly by itself.
Maybe I could massage it a little to hurry it
along. That’s . . . eh . . . what they suggested
in my first aid class.”
I put my hands on her ankle, closed my eyes,
and tried to remember the lessons—the real
ones. Focus my energies. Visualize the injuries. Visualize how I wanted them to change.
My mind sunk into images of blood vessels,
muscles, tendons, and discolored skin. I only
came out of it when Jargul, sitting beside me,
gasped.
Dizzily, I opened my eyes. The ankle under
my hands looked like a normal ankle. I felt a
flush of surprise and pleasure but quickly tried

126 Alien Agent
to hide it. “See, it’s gotten better already.
They do that sometimes.”
Jargul just shook his head. “You’re good.
When Granny does healings, she uses incense
and incantations and special oils.”
Segi smiled. “She said we’d be in good hands
with Zack.”
I blushed, and then a wave of guilt just about
choked me. I couldn’t keep up with this game,
not when I was endangering their lives.
“Segi, Jargul. Now that the ankle’s better, I
want you to go up those stairs we came down,
walk out the cave door, find the horses, and go
home. This business here is getting much too
dangerous.”
Jargul looked at Segi, then answered. “We
can’t. These are our mountains and our spirits.
What affects them, affects us.”
I could have screamed over the mess I’d created.
“Look, you guys. I’ve got a confession to make.
About those spirits. They’re not really—“
Jargul held up his hand. “We know.”
“What? You do?”

alien expedition 127
He smiled. “Well, we may not know all the
things that you do. But we aren’t living in
the old times. We read. Sometimes we live in
town. We watch television. This is the twenty-first century.”
Segi nodded. “But just because that dragon
and the others . . . and you, aren’t like in the old
stories, it doesn’t mean you’re not spirits in your
own way. Some of you are good, some are bad,
and which of you wins will make a difference in
this place. So we’ve got to stay and help.”
I stuttered a bit then finally came out with,
“But you don’t understand.”
“We understand all we need to,” Jargul
interrupted.
“And I understand that my ankle’s all better,” Segi said as she jumped up and hugged
me. “Now I just wish our dragon would come
back so we can get going.”
I laughed, trying to cover my embarrassment,
I guess. “Right. This sure is a stinky place to
have to wait for someone. What makes it smell
so bad?”

128 Alien Agent
Segi giggled. “That’s easy. Bats.”
“Bats?” I cried, looking nervously around.
She grabbed my flashlight and shone it on the
cave ceiling. It looked like the rock there was
covered with dried leaves. Then one fluttered
a wing. Bats. Hundreds of them. Thousands.
I shivered.
Segi shown the light on the cave floor not far
from where we sat. “Bat droppings, see. They
sleep here in the day, then clouds of them fly
out of the mountain at night. That’s hundreds
of years of bat droppings you smell.”
“Gross. And creepy. Bats creep me out.”
“Really?” Jargul said. “In Mongolia bats
are bringers of good luck. That isn’t so in
America?”
“No, bats are creepy, evil things that hang
out with vampires.” Then I remembered the
bat pendants I’d seen in the Ulan Bator gift
shops. I’d thought they were for the international Goth tourists. “Well, if bats are good
luck here, we ought to be majorly lucky about
now.”

alien expedition 129
The other two laughed, then silenced themselves as we heard something below us on the
slope. I switched off my light, but in moments,
Vraj’s light replaced it.
“Okay, I’ve spied things out, but it doesn’t
look good. I’ve spotted the control booth and
what must be the door to the outside, but
they’re both way across the cavern and well
guarded. If we could just release the prisoners,
they could jump the Kiapa Kapa, and someone
could probably get to the controls and open
the outside door. That doesn’t seem to have
any sonic controls. But my personal weapon is
useless against sonic. I understand, Zack, that
you have certain abilities too, but I don’t think
they’d work on sonic.”
I shook my head. True, I did have certain
abilities as she said. The mental powers I’d accidentally discovered could do a lot of damage.
In my lessons, I’d been trying to learn how to
use and control them so they didn’t damage
me as well. But it all had to do with light and
molecules, not sound.

130 Alien Agent
“So what do we do?” I said and flinched as
something darted past me in the air. “Ugh.
I’m still not too fond of bats.”
“It must be almost evening,” Segi said.
“They’re waking up and getting ready to fly
out and look for insects. There must be an
opening further up this slope.”
Evening, I thought. I’d already missed the
wrestling my parents had wanted me to see,
and now I’d miss the famous Disco-in-theDesert party too. If I lived through this, I’d
have to come up with some good excuses.
Another little, furry body zipped past us with
a high-pitched squeak.
“Bats!” I cried, suddenly standing up.
“I believe we have already established that,”
Vraj said with a sneer.
“No! I mean, bats are sonic. They use sonar
to navigate. Maybe if enough of them flew
into the big cavern, they’d disrupt the sonic
constraints.”
Thoughtfully, Vraj scratched her reptilian
head. “Yes, but until the main door’s open,

alien expedition 131
there’s no way out down there. Segi just said
they’ll exit the mountain farther up.”
“So, we’ve got to persuade them to change
their little minds.”
They all looked at me quizzically. I grinned.
“It’s talk-to-the-animals time!”
Already more of the little flying rodents
were dropping off the ceiling and fluttering
around like autumn leaves. Over their fluttering, I called to the other three, “I don’t
know how bright they are. We could ask for
their help, but I’m not sure they’d see much
in it for them. But maybe we can get them
angry and then convince them that their enemy is down below in the big cavern. What
do you think?” The two Mongolians nodded,
but Vraj didn’t answer.
I cleared my throat. “Okay. Jargul, you and
Segi throw rocks up at them. Vraj, you and I
need to do some powerful bat-talk.” I sat on a
rock, but she didn’t move. “Okay?”
She shrugged. “A stupid-sounding idea. But
it’s all we’ve got.”

132 Alien Agent
Jargul and Segi picked up rocks from the
cave floor and hurled them up at the hanging
curtain of bats. In angry clumps, the creatures
dropped free and began fluttering overhead.
More rocks, and soon the whole massive colony
was swirling and darting above us. I crouched
down and squeaked for all I was worth. “Enemy
way below in big cave. Attacking you. Must attack them. Yell at them, dive at them. Attack,
attack, attack!”
Vraj seemed to be doing the same, but it was
hard to hear anything over the flapping and
enraged squeaking of the bats. I tried to fight
down my horror-movie-induced terror of bats.
They were swirling around me like a fluttery
black cloud. I hoped they were getting the idea
that we were not the enemy. Then, as if guided
by remote control, they clumped into a huge
cloud and swept down the slope. We jumped up
and watched them fly over the Buddha statue
and into the large lit cavern beyond.
“Hurry!” Vraj yelled. “We’ve got to get down
there!

alien expedition 133
Like mountain goats, we four all hopped over
the rocks and followed the squadron of bats.
When we reached the edge of the big cave,
their attack was obviously having its effect.
The Kiapa Kapa aliens were dodging and ducking and shooting their energy weapons with
little results. Bats are awfully quick.
I looked anxiously at the cage holding the
Tirgizians. The raging sonic interference seemed
to be doing something. The cage’s glowing bars
were turning from violet to throbbing purple.
Suddenly with an electric pop and sizzle, they
vanished. The trapped dinosaurs didn’t take
long to break free.
This was our chance at the main controls, I
thought, as the Tirgizians bounded out of their
cage and eagerly joined the battle. But the
control booth was on the far side of the cavern,
and the battleground lay between.
A bloated humanoid Gnairt was trying to
fend bats off with a chair. An alien that looked
like a tower of pebbles was hopping frantically
away from an infuriated tyrannosaurus.

134 Alien Agent

alien expedition 135
I glimpsed Jargul hurling rocks at something
purple and hairy, and Vraj was gleefully using
her own energy weapon. Something she hit
with its glowing beam exploded like a fiery
balloon, splattering green goo everywhere.
Trying to skirt the battle, I charged toward
the control booth near the far wall. Angry bats
were everywhere. I ducked, threw my arms
over my head, and tried to plow through them.
Suddenly I tripped over something. As I rolled
across the cave floor, I dizzily looked back. A
fat, bald Gnairt was glaring at me. He snatched
up a weapon and aimed it my way.
I’d been practicing mental weaponry in our
backyard, but all that came to me then was defense. I threw out a ragged energy shield just in
time to deflect his deadly fire. The beam bounced
off and smashed into the cave wall, sending up
a geyser of rock and dust. But its force sent
me bouncing backward. I landed on something
that felt like a porcupine and squealed like a
pig. With scaly hands, it tried to grab me as I
leaped up. Suddenly it was catapulted into the

136 Alien Agent
air by a rooting triceratops, the same triceratops
that had just stomped on the Gnairt.
I yelled a thank you over my shoulder as I
raced on. In several bounds, I reached the top
of the broad rock ledge and stumbled into the
shiny metal booth. Once inside though, the
controls dumbfounded me. There were so many
buttons, gauges, and levers. Screens showed
strange symbols, and lights glowed or flashed.
How was I to open the outside door?
Holding my breath, I reached out a hand and
pressed a button. Instantly the tall, blank
cave wall outside the booth blossomed into
a giant moving picture of dinosaurs, ancient
ones, walking and fighting in a swampy forest. Great. It looked like the Kiapa Kapa had
made a spectacular holographic movie about
past Earth to thrill their hoped-for tourists.
Terrific, but that didn’t help this jail break.
I started to press another button, then realized I could as likely blow myself up as open
the outer door. So, okay, Alien Agent, I told
myself. Do something alien!

138 Alien Agent
Closing my eyes, I spread my hands toward
the controls and tried to remember those alien
computer lessons. All I’d used them for at home
was exploding rocks and mentally dismantling
a clock. But Vraj and her weapon were somewhere fighting in the cavern, and I was all the
weapon we had in this control booth.
I tried to send my mind into the lit-up
panel and feel around. A bunch of confusing
alien stuff—symbols, circuits, and computer
synapses. I couldn’t figure it out. I’m no alien
engineer. But I didn’t have time to do things
nicely anyway. Just destroy it!
Frantically I channeled power from one set
of mysterious devices into another—depleting
one, overloading the other. Soon the control
panel was glowing, and then smoking. Deep
into the channels of power now, I happily continued shunting and pressuring. Suddenly
claws sank into my shoulder and yanked me
back, dragging me like a sack down the rocks.
Above me, the control booth erupted with
the sound, light, and heat of a volcano.

en

rt
e
t
p

Cha

I don’t think I totally passed out. The
pain of claws in my shoulder never left me.
Something picked me up and bounded behind
a boulder as a shower of rocks, ash, and hot
bits of metal poured down on us. The sounds
of explosion mixed with grating rock. Then
came roaring, snarling, and finally thundering feet.
As it all died down, I looked at the creature
crouched beside me. “Hurry up if you want
to thank me,” Vraj said dryly. “My fellow
Tirgizians have barreled out of here, and I’ve
got to stick with them.”
“Thank you?” I said, rubbing my throbbing
shoulder. Fuzzily I remembered being mentally

140 Alien Agent
locked into the ready-to-explode controls.
“Right. Thanks.”
“Anytime, Agent Zack. Bye.” With that, Vraj
leaped up like a kangaroo and bounded toward
the wall of the cave. Only now there was a
large open door in the cliff. The last of the
fleeing dinosaurs, Kiapa Kapa, and bats were
pouring out of it.
I staggered to my feet and looked around.
Jargul and Segi were standing in the middle
of the cavern floor. They saw me and waved
frantically.
“Hurry!” Jargul yelled. “That explosion loosened some rock. It’s starting an avalanche!”
I didn’t waste time looking. It sounded like
half the cave wall behind me was coming down.
Forgetting my cuts and bruises, I sprinted to
the others and the open cave door. We’d just
reached it when huge slabs of rock broke free
and crashed down on the blasted remains of
the control booth. Other rocks rained down
until the original floor of the cavern was completely buried.

alien expedition 141
Coughing and half blinded by the dust, we
stumbled through the door. Cool night air
surrounded us. We gulped at it thirstily. Then
the three of us stumbled farther from the cave
before sinking to the ground, shaking and
laughing with relief.
Slowly our laughter died, replaced by a new
very odd sound. Through the night came the
distant, tinny sound of music. Disco music. I
looked up. Some distance away, I could see flashing lights. They didn’t look like spaceship lights.
They looked like the headlights on trucks. Disco
in the desert! All those steps inside the mountain must have taken us way down to its base.
Jumping to our feet, we hurried toward the
lights and music. In the circle of trucks, we
saw a bunch of huddled humans. Then two
popped up and ran toward us.
“Zack!” my mom called, engulfing me in a
hug. “There you are! Are you all right? We
were so worried.”
“Did you see all that?” My dad yelled as he
hugged me next. “What on Earth happened?”

142 Alien Agent
There was certainly no way I could answer that. “Eh . . . yeah. What do you think
happened?”
Dad laughed. “Well, one thing that obviously happened was that we all drank too much of
that fermented goats’ milk. I swear I saw the
whole mountainside light up with a picture of
dinosaurs walking through ancient swamps.”
He shook his head and laughed again. I suddenly realized that the holographic tourist film
must have been projected on the outside of the
mountain as well as inside.
Still chuckling, my dad continued the story.
“And then there was a big explosion—an
avalanche, I guess—and it looked like real
dinosaurs were galloping over there. Must have
been a goat herd, but it sure spooked us.”
Several others were crowding around us now,
but they parted as a little bow-legged lady in
an orange robe hobbled up. Segi and Jargul
cried joyfully and hurried forward to hug her.
“Granny came this afternoon to bless the
wrestling,” Mom said. “We were surprised she

alien expedition 143
decided to stay for the party, but she seemed
to like the music.”
“If I didn’t know she was such a sweet old
lady,” my dad said, “I’d suspect she’d slipped
some hallucinogenic herbs in the drink. Those
dinosaurs sure looked real.”
When Jargul roughly translated for her what
my dad said, Granny laughed.
“The spirits were quite strong enough without my help,” she said, with a wink for her
grandchildren and me.
When that was translated into English, the
others laughed at the words. I laughed at the
meaning.
Thankfully, no one pressed us for more details. Segi, Jargul, and I were all given big
bowls of leftover barbecued goat. Then Granny
and her grandchildren rode off, and I walked
with my parents and the others back to camp.
My sleeping bag never felt so good.
The next morning, I slept late. By the time
I crawled out of my tent, I had my story all
figured out.

144 Alien Agent
But it turned out that some of the expedition members, including my parents, whose fermented goat milk hangovers weren’t too bad,
had already gone to explore the now-open cave.
Uncertainly, I went to join them. Peering in
the opening, I saw the entire cave floor piled
deep with rocky rubble. I hoped any sign of
aliens was thoroughly buried.
The front cavern where the aliens had been
was now empty, but I heard happy, excited
voices from the cavern beyond. Picking my
way across to it, I saw people shining flashlights on the giant Buddha and the inscriptions on the wall.
Seeing me, my parents and Dr. Longford
hurried over. “Isn’t this wonderful?” my mom
cried.
“It’s fantastic! It’s the find of the season!”
Dr. Longford exclaimed.
I smiled. The story I’d concocted just might
work. “Yes, that’s why we were so late yesterday. Jargul, Segi, and I were exploring
the mountain. We found a cave and a hidden

alien expedition 145
doorway up at the top. The stairs led down
here, and we saw the statue. But maybe all
the thunder yesterday shook the mountain so
much that it set off an avalanche.”
“You are very lucky you weren’t crushed,”
Mom said, hugging me again.
Longford nodded. “And we are lucky the
avalanche burst open the side of the caves.
We have so much wonderful work to do
here!”
After a while, I left them, all happily exploring. I had some exploring of my own to do,
but I didn’t know where to begin. Last night
a whole flock of aliens had burst out of that
mountain and scattered over the Mongolian
desert. Where were they now?
I set out into the desert, heading toward
a distant rocky knoll, the highest point in
the barren plain. Maybe from there I could
see something, maybe footprints, maybe . . .
I don’t know what.
I was certainly surprised at what I did
see.

146 Alien Agent
Below me in a little dry valley, two people
were sitting talking. One with a shaved head
and orange robe—Granny. The other was a
woman with Western clothes and very white
hair. Bewildered, I stumbled down toward
them. “Sorn?”
They both looked up and smiled. “Well, Zack,
join us,” Agent Sorn said in Mongolian. “I’ve
been having the most enlightening talk with
this wise woman here.”
Was Sorn trying to pass herself off as
a wandering tourist? I must have looked
confused.
Granny grinned and patted a seat on the rock
beside her. “Don’t be troubled, boy. This is my
land, and I understand a great deal about it.
About its spirits, the ones that walk here now,
and the ones that walked here long, long ago.
The land is always happy to see its own return,
no matter how far they must travel.”
I looked questioningly at Sorn. She smiled.
“This is a woman who knows and can keep
many secrets.”

alien expedition 147
Laughing, Granny stood up. “And so can my
grandchildren, twenty-first century though
they may be. You are always welcome in our
yurts, Zack, no matter what world you call
home.”
With that, she hobbled off toward her
horse waiting nearby. In moments, she was
trotting over the grassland toward distant
yurts.
I turned my gaze to Sorn. “Remarkable woman,” she said. “This planet certainly produces
some amazing creatures. It has for millions of
years, it seems.”
“So what happened? Where are the Tirgizians?
The Kiapa Kapa? And why are you here?”
Agent Sorn laughed. “First me. As soon as
the Kiapa Kapa transmitted their demands to
the Galactic Union, we dispatched a squadron.
But we didn’t dare intervene until we heard
from you or Vraj, or had some better inkling
of how things stood. We were monitoring
the site as best we could, however. When
all of their equipment exploded—largely

148 Alien Agent
your doing, I understand—we slipped down
here.”
“Well, Vraj and the two Mongolian kids did a
lot too. But then what happened?”
“We eventually found and rounded up
everybody. This Kiapa Kapa Syndicate is headed
for jail, and the Tirgizian scientists are headed
back home with a scientific triumph. They
promise to wait until Earth is ready, however,
before they come again.”
“And Vraj?”
“She’ll be heading back to the Academy with
high honors. Seldom has a Cadet Agent performed so well on assignment.”
“I’m glad. This Agent career sure means a lot
to her. Oh, I forgot. Her parents wanted me to
deliver a message to her.”
Sorn laughed. “I think they delivered it
themselves. They really are quite proud of
her—just as I am proud of you.”
We sat in silence awhile, looking over the
rolling landscape, which after yesterday’s rain
had suddenly turned more green than brown.

alien expedition 149
Sorn sighed and looked at me. “If your life
goes on like this much longer, we may have
to tell your parents about you too. Leading a
double life can be hard.”
For a moment my stomach clenched. Did I
really want my parents to know I was an Alien
Agent? I’d gone through a lot of change in
this last year. Did I want more?
Slowly I answered. “Yes, it’s hard, but I don’t
know if they . . . if I . . . if we are quite ready for
that just yet. The same way Earth isn’t quite
ready for dinosaur tourists.”
Sorn chuckled and stood up. “Well said. So
I guess I must leave you now, free to enjoy a
real vacation here at the ends of the Earth, as
you called it.”
She walked to a large rock and pulled from
behind it what looked like a streamlined silvery motorcycle. It hummed into life as she
mounted it. Then with a wave she sped away,
soon disappearing into the distance. My gaze
shifted from the thin trail of dust behind her
to the great arching bowl of blue sky.

alien expedition 151
The ends of the Earth. The kids back at school
certainly will be impressed. Yurts, horseback
riding, dinosaur fossils. I’ll just keep some of
the details to myself.
Laughing, I stood up. The problem with being a secret agent, of course, is the secret part.
But that was okay for now. Alien or not, Earth
was home—at whatever end.

nt
Age

#21

1

ai
35/G

ther

n
e
la i unter
o
c
en

[ALien Agent]
Book #4 of the

s e r i e s

ice man
v
r
e
F. S gor

la by mike
e
m
a
P ated
r

illust

TOP SECRET
from

ALIEN ENCOUNTER

VOICE RECOGNITION CONFIRIMED

BEGIN TRANSMISSION . . . .

I had just returned home from a secret assignment for
the Galactic Union. It finally looked like the rest of my
summer could be a normal human-kid-type summer.
Wrong.
I was in the kitchen rummaging in the fridge for an
afternoon snack. Then my mom came in with the mail.
She handed me a fat envelope. I didn’t recognize the
return address. But when I opened it, I discovered that
I had won an essay contest. My essay, “What I’d Do If
I Met a Real Alien,” had won an all-expenses-paid trip.
One parent and I would travel to Roswell, New Mexico, for
their annual UFO festival.
The problem was that I had never entered any
contest.
But I knew enough to recognize this was the Galactic
Union messing with my life again. So I acted happy in
front of my mom. Then I escaped upstairs to my room. I
dropped into the swivel desk chair. Taking a deep breath,
I switched on my computer.
Sure enough, there was an incoming message from my
boss, Agent Sorn. Locking my bedroom door, I made the

coded entry. Sorn’s smiling purple face popped up on my
screen. She looked kind of apologetic.
“Zack, you should have your packet now. I’m sure
you’d like a little explanation.”
I tried not to look as annoyed as I felt. So much for
my hopes of a normal human summer. Still, my curiosity stirred a little. Sorn raked long fingers through her
hair. It stood up like a polar porcupine’s. “Have you ever
heard of the so-called flying saucer crash in Roswell, New
Mexico, back in 1947?”
I thought a moment. “Yeah, I think I saw a TV program about it once.” I didn’t remember much. That was
before I had any personal interest in aliens, after all.
“But didn’t it turn out to be a hoax or something?”
“Your government would like you to believe that.
They put out several cover-up stories. Said it was really
a weather balloon and such. But, no, it was real. A real
alien ship did crash.”
“Whose?” I knew enough by then to realize there were
nearly as many types of aliens as stars in the sky.
“Nythians. The Galactic Union had placed Earth off

156 Alien Agent

limits. They warned interstellar travelers to stay away.
No one was to interfere before Earth’s civilization had
reached a higher level of technology and stability. But
we didn’t have enough personnel to really enforce it. The
Nythians are kind and peaceful but very private. They’re
not known for joining groups or obeying rules. They’re
also a very curious people. They’d become interested in
Earth and concerned about it getting nuclear weapons. A
number of Nythian ships visited Earth in the 1940s and
1950s. Some were seen, but most humans didn’t take the
sightings seriously.
The big problem came in July of 1947. One Nythian
ship was damaged in an electrical storm. It crashed near
Roswell. Several civilians found the crash site first, and
word leaked out. But soon the U.S. military whisked
away the wreckage and the bodies of the crew. Then they
tried to hush things up.”
I was stunned. “So the government does know about
the existence of aliens!”
“Actually, only a small group knew the truth. Other
people in the government believed the denials. Evidence

alien expedition 157

would have been slim because Nythian bodies turn to
dust shortly after death. A crashed ship is programmed
to self-destruct automatically. Crew members have only
a short time to cancel that.”
This was interesting, but I didn’t see how I fit in. “So
what’s the problem? That was long ago. What does it
matter now?”
Sorn gave a tired little laugh. “We didn’t think there
was a problem until recently. Oh, some humans latched
on to the story of a UFO crash and short, bug-eyed
aliens. Books and magazines about UFOs popped up.
Roswell became the center for UFO believers and hokey
alien souvenirs. They even hold an annual UFO festival
there. Quite harmless really.”
Sorn was becoming annoyingly dramatic, stretching
out the story like this. “So what changed?”
She sighed. “Recently we learned about a Nythian
child named Tu, the son of one of that ship’s crew. He
has—what’s the Earth phrase?—yes, developed ‘a bee in
his bonnet.’ He believes his father somehow survived the
crash and is still on Earth. It seems this kid has stolen a

ship. He’s headed toward Earth. According to his worried
mother, his idea is to go to Roswell while they are having
their festival. He hopes to learn if there were any survivors and if his father might be one of them.”
Something wasn’t making sense to me. “Sorn, that
was more than sixty years ago. The dad wouldn’t be
young anymore. And even if he survived the crash, he
probably wouldn’t be alive now.”
Sorn shook her head. “We’re not talking about humans
here, Zack. Nythians mature very slowly. They have very
long lives. The real danger is that the young Nythian will
get himself caught. Nythians tend to be rather naive and
trusting. If the U.S. government or UFO enthusiasts get
their hands on a real space alien, who knows what would
happen? It could certainly destroy the Galactic Union’s
plans. We hope for a gradual introduction to the idea
that other planets are inhabited.”
I was beginning to get the drift of this. “So my job
is . . . what? Find this kid and tell him to go home?”

She smiled. Her amethyst-colored eyes actually twinkled. Her species can do that. “That’s right. You’ve
become quite a capable agent, Zack, even though your
training isn’t complete. You’re clever and resourceful.
I’m sure you’ll be able to carry this out. And whichever
parent you choose to go with you won’t even catch on.”
I just grunted.
Sorn looked concerned. “I do hate dumping all these
tasks on you. But this is very important, Zack. So much
depends on you. You don’t mind too much, do you?”
I managed to smile and shake my head.
“Good.” She sounded relieved. “And anyway, this is
really a simple assignment. And it also gives you a fun
little vacation.”
Sorn is a nice person. The Galactic Union seems to be
a fine outfit with a mission I’m proud to be part of. But
I have got to learn not to buy statements like that.
Simple and fun? Yeah, right.

END TRANSMISSION

about the author
Pamela F. Service has authored more than 20
books in the science fiction, fantasy, and nonfiction
genres.  After working as a history museum curator
for many years in Indiana, she became the director
of a museum in Eureka, California, where she lives
with her husband and cats.  She is also active in
community theater, politics, and beach combing.

Pamela F. Service

is the author
of the Alien Agent series. She has
also written more than 20 books
in the science fiction, fantasy, and
nonfiction genres.  After working
as a history museum curator for
many years in Indiana, she became
the director of a museum in Eureka,
California, where she lives with her
husband and cats.  She is also active
in community theater, politics, and
beach combing.

Mike Gorman is a seasoned

editorial illustrator whose work has
been seen in The New York Times,
The New Yorker, Entertainment
Weekly, and other publications. He
lives in Westbrook, Maine, with his
wife, three children, two dogs, a cat,
and a gecko.

Jacket art by Mike Gorman

t Carolrhoda Books

A division of Lerner Publishing Group

241 First Avenue North • Minneapolis, MN 55401 U.S.A.
Printed and bound in U.S.A.

