Sale of this book without a front cover may be unauthorized. If this book is
coverless, it may have been reported to the publisher as "unsold or destroyed"
and neither the author nor the publisher may have received any payment for it.
VL 7 & up RLI: IL 7 & up
A Fawcett Juniper Book Published by Ballantine Books Copyright © 1990 by
Pamela F. Service
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. Published in the United States by Ballantine Books, a division of
Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of
Canada Limited, Toronto.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from
the Publisher.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 89-28025 ISBN 0-449-70404-1
This edition published by arrangement with Atheneum, an Imprint of Macmillan
Publishing Company
Manufactured in the United States of America
First Ballantine Books Edition: December 1991
Some of this is for Karen, and some for Gayle
prologue
A THRILL OF FEAR AND EXCITEMENT TINGLED THROUGH THE
boy as he took up his station on the high redwood deck. Dutifully he surveyed
the houses and lawns below as evening settled over the comfortable suburban
neighborhood. Mothers had already called the younger children in, but several
older ones still scrambled after a soccer ball in the deepening twilight.
The boy watched them, feeling deliciously superior. Those kids were playing
games, but he was carrying out an important mission. He was standing watch,
being sentinel for the secret meeting.
This was the first Resisters meeting he'd been taken to, and he was proud that
his parents trusted him so much. Of course, the other adults hadn't wanted him
in on the actual meeting where they planned things—the strikes, the attacks,
the clandestine radio broadcasts, the pamphlet writing, and the rest. But it
was important for someone to keep guard as well. Strangers might approach the
house or start watching it, or a Tsorian ground car might cruise by. And of
course, it was important that he watch the sky.
Nervously he looked up. The pale evening blue was darkening, and a few stars
were beginning to appear—like
newly awakened eyes. He shuddered. Somehow when the stars were out, it did
feel as if they were watching. After all, that was where they came from. The
Tsorians, the conquerors of Earth. The enemy. Daringly he whispered the word
aloud and felt a new thrill of defiance.
The enemy, yes, but they wouldn't win, they wouldn't be here long. Even after
nine years, resistance hadn't crumbled. All over the planet there were
Resister groups like this one. And someday their disruption, their sabotage,
and their full-scale rebellion would work. The Tsorians would give up. They'd
leave and let humans run their own world.
Again he scanned the neighborhood. The soccer game had dwindled down to two
persistent players and one yappy dog. In the house opposite, a bedroom was lit
up, and he could see a kid sprawled on the floor assembling a model. In
another house, the fish-tank glow in the front room silhouetted a family
watching TV.
Otherwise, though, there weren't many lights. The subdivision didn't even have
streetlights. Good thing too, he thought, since it would probably foul up his
night vision.
Again he scanned the sky. More stars now. He wondered how the old Greeks had
come up with those crazy ideas for constellations. What patterns he did see
didn't look anything like theirs. But then, they had probably spent a lot of
time looking at the stars. They weren't afraid of them the way people were
now.

A pity really, because those stars were rather pretty when you had to spend
tune looking at them like this. Some were set together like jewels, and some
were big and on their own. They were different colors too. That one was almost
red, and some of the others were sort of gold. And there was a blue one.
Several, Blue. No!
He jumped from his chair in panic, staring at the growing blue lights. Then he
jammed a hand down on the intercom. "Tsorians!" he yelled. "Blue ships!
They're coming this way!"
The tinny voice on the other end was his father's. "Got you, Ricky. We're
ditching. Get away from this house-fast!"
One more glance at the three blue lights, clearly closer now, and he dove
through the door. As he pelted down the stairs, he heard slamming doors and
yelling voices from the basement.
In moments he was outside. Like panicky bugs, Resis-ters were racing for their
cars. The soccer players stopped their game and looked upward. Then, yelling,
they began running for their homes. The squealing thrum of the ships already
tainted the air.
He heard his parents calling him and began racing for their car. On both sides
of the street doors opened and people stumbled out, looking up. Three glowing
blue triangles were hovering above them. Screaming, people grabbed up little
children and began running down the street, barely dodging the first fleeing
cars.
He redoubled his speed, wishing his own car weren't so far down the street.
Overhead, one of the triangles veered away, dropped, and flew low over the
street. Blue energy shot from it. In an instant, the house they'd just left
was engulfed in flame.
The air throbbed with it. Everywhere on streets and lawns, people, dogs, and
cars fled in panic. Mouths were open, yet he could hear nothing but the ships
and the flames.
His parents ahead of him. The car door open. Twisting, he looked back. The
ship had turned and was making
another run. Pulses of energy swept down the street, engulfing house after
house.
The last thought Ricky Jensen had before the blue heat reached him was, "It
isn't fair! The enemy shouldn't win."
one
THE PLANET HAD CIRCLED ITS SUN ONCE SINCE THE BOY'S
death, but Aryl had been on this world's surface less than half of that time
and knew nothing about it. Already she considered her stay far too long.
Standing now at the balustrade of the Headquarters plaza, she gazed out over
the ocean. She frowned. It was wrong. The colors were wrong, the smell was
wrong. Everything was wrong.
An ocean should be green, and so should the sky. And behind that sky, stars
should stretch in a glittering curtain, close-packed and bright in their
friendly familiar patterns. When this world turned from its sun, the sky was
cold and dark with great stretches of emptiness between its stars. And those
stars were ah1 in the wrong patterns.
An orange disk sailed into her sight before curving back toward eager,
outstretched hands. Turning, she stared at the native children laughing and
playing at one side of the plaza. Suddenly her homesickness doubled. She was
about the same chronological age as those children. Yet she was Tsorian. Last
year she had gone through First Passage. The end of childhood. The end of
playing and schooling and irresponsibility. She was bonded.
Sighing, she turned back to the alien sea. The sharp breeze battered her with
its odd tangy smell and billowed the hair around her dark face into a pale
gray cloud. Not that she could regret this change. It was the pattern of life.
And her bonding was not an average one, because her parent was not an average
Tsorian adult. She felt a comforting surge of pride. He was Rogav Jy,
Commander of the Ninth Fleet of the Tsorian Empire. He was her father.
Below, the waves boomed and foamed over dark, green-splotched rocks. Their

sound dulled the discordant strains of the wailing alien music. But at last
Aryl turned from them and scanned the large mixed crowd, presumably enjoying
the annual party that the Tsorian Occupation Headquarters threw for the native
staff and their families. She picked out her father immediately. It wasn't
difficult; his black body-suit and deep maroon complexion were the same as the
other Tsorians', but his black cape was the only one showing a green lining,
the color of command rank. The only one besides her own, of course, since as
his bond-child she automatically shared his rank.
He was talking now with a native female, one with outrageous red-brown hair.
Aryl tensed. Her bonding with her father was very close. She loved and
respected him, and now bonded to him, she would complete her preparation for
adulthood, for rank and career, under his training. She'd share all his
activities and learn all that he assigned her to learn. But one thing that he
expected her to learn still seemed highly distasteful—this mingling with
natives and learning their ways.
Rogav Jy had an Empire-wide reputation for that sort of thing. They said it
was something that helped make him a great commander, being able to understand
aliens— friends, foes, or neutrals. But Aryl was only one year away
6
from her sheltered nursery world. Aliens made her very uncomfortable, this
batch particularly.
Just look at that female, she thought. Proper hair isn't red. It's black or
white or a shade of grey; possibly ash gray like her own or a dark steel gray
like her father's. But these people had an undisciplined riot of shades for
hair, and for skin as well. Some were brown, some pink, some tan. Tsorians
were orderly, uniform. From world to world, age to age, their skin was a calm,
sensible maroon.
Aryl shook her head and looked away. The alien scenery was unsettling enough,
but not as bad as the natives. Yet it seemed she couldn't avoid them. A young
native male, with pale skin and hair a dusty yellow, now leaned against the
railing not far from her. His attention was fixed where AryFs had been a few
seconds earlier, on the Tsorian commander talking with the native female. Aryl
wasn't practiced in interpreting native expressions, but it did seem that this
boy was scowling. She knew she'd have to force herself to talk with some
native today, yet this one hardly looked like a promising target.
The boy abruptly turned his attention to the plate of food he was holding. He
took a few jabs at something on it, then suddenly flung the whole thing, plate
and all, over the railing. The brittle native crockery shattered, splattering
food all over the rocks.
With raucous cries, a white, winged animal swooped from the sky and began
gobbling the discarded morsels. Aryl shuddered, but the expression on the
boy's face lightened. He reached into a pocket and brought out a chunk of some
native food that he tore into bits and began flinging to the greedy animal.
Within moments, two more creatures circled down from above and started
squawking harshly and jostling the first.
Primitive and barbaric. Again Aryl shuddered and turned away. This whole world
seemed so crude and uncivilized. How could these natives stand to interact so
closely with animals, with grossly lower orders? She sighed resignedly. Well,
if she was going to force herself to follow her father's example, she could
probably find no greater challenge than talking to this surly, barbaric alien.
Jason glowered across the milling, jabbering crowd to where his mother stood
talking with that alien. He was the one she'd mentioned, he supposed, the one
with the green cape lining. Then, he recalled, had come another of her
lectures, this one about how he should learn the Tsorian color ranking so he
could tell one from another. But he didn't want to. He didn't care who was
who. They were all nasty, murdering invaders as far as he was concerned.
And he certainly didn't want to be standing here watching his own mother talk
with their chiefl Angrily he turned back to watch the gulls gobble the food
he'd flung to them. They were greedy and they were quarrelsome, but at least
they were from Earth.

It was bad enough, Jason mused, having his mother be a known collaborator.
What would the kids at school say if they knew he'd gone to this Tsorian
garden party and munched their dainty hors d'oeuvres? Well, he admitted,
probably most wouldn't care a lot. They thought more about the fortunes of
their school teams than about their planet having been gobbled up by an alien
empire. But the kids he cared about, the ones he wanted to get in with, they'd
think coming here was next to treason. Some of them, alter all, had actually
been friends of Ricky Jensen's.
Jason had known him too, but not well. Ricky had hung around with those other
kids, the ones who furtively called
themselves Resisters. And none of them would have anything to do with
Jason—not with the son of a collaborator.
Later, of course, they'd all learned that Ricky's parents had actually been
Resisters, real ones, and they'd belonged to a secret group. But it hadn't
been quite secret enough. Last year the Tsorians had wiped it out, along with
Ricky and half a neighborhood. It wasn't far from home, just over the hills,
and Jason's mother had taken him there once to see the devastation. The
Tsorians didn't let such spots be built on again. They wanted them to remain
as stark reminders of the consequences of defying the Tsorian occupation. But
to Jason it had seemed more a reminder of why that occupation needed defying.
The food splattered over the rocks finally ran out, and the seabirds flapped
heavily off in search of other pickings. Reluctantly Jason turned back to the
party.
To his surprise, a Tsorian was standing nearby, a young female looking right
at him. At least he thought she was young, though her hair was almost white.
Stupid to have drab hair colors that didn't even give a clue to a person's
age.
Jason was turning back toward the ocean when the girl took a step closer and
spoke in dry, harshly accented English.
"I see you have provided your own entertainment, feeding those . . . animals.
Amusing, but don't you want to throw disks with the others?"
"I don't feel like playing."
"Oh. Do you come here to the Headquarters often?"
"No, not if I can help it."
She was silent a moment, then said, "It is beautiful here."
"It was," he began, then continued boldly, "before you
Tsorians came. My father used to tell me there was a park here by the water.
With the redwoods and Mount Tamal-pais beyond, it probably was beautiful."
The Tsorian frowned. "Come now, this planet has more than enough wilderness.
It's almost unkempt. Our Headquarters doesn't intrude on you."
"Intrude? I suppose wiping out armies and rebellions and innocent civilians
isn't intruding?"
"We can't let you natives disrupt our holdings here. This is a strategic
planet. The needs of the Empire must come before those of a few natives."
Quivering with anger, Jason looked straight into her pupil-less eyes. Eyes
like black marbles, he thought, like hamsters' eyes. "Have you any idea how
arrogant you sound, calling us 'natives' as if we were a pack of primitive
Indians?"
The other breathed in sharply and flexed her claws a moment as if
contemplating some violent response. Then she shifted her gaze beyond him,
across the Golden Gate Bridge to where the city of San Francisco gleamed in
the afternoon sun.
"Indeed," she said simply. "And who are these 'Indians'?"
"The people who lived here before the Europeans came and took over."
"And these 'Europeans' had a superior technology?"
"Of course."
She smiled tautly. "So there it is, the natural order of things. You see, it
really is just the same."
Jason grabbed the railing to keep himself from sending a fist through that
sneering alien face. "It's not the same at all! The Indians and Europeans were

one species. Sure, they squabbled about land, but you Tsorians came and
10
took everything from us, from all of us, Indians, Europeans, everybody. You
took our independence, our future!"
"Ridiculous! We've given you a better future."
"Oh, really? The only marvelous technology you've shared with us is the
business end of your weapons!"
Jason turned and snatched a plate from the automatic serving tray that was
gliding by them. One by one he picked the glistening curls of meat off the
plate and tossed them onto the rocks. Cheering raucously, two sea gulls
swooped from the sky and began fighting and gobbling. The Tsorian glared at
him a moment, then abruptly turned and stalked away.
Jason smiled grimly and continued to watch the gulls. At last he'd said what
he'd wanted to say. And he'd said it to one of them,
Slowly his elation faded. Big courageous act. Gripping the plate, he launched
it like a Frisbee onto the rocks, scattering the startled birds. Someday he'd
do something, something besides talk. Something that made a difference. Ricky
Jensen had tried, hadn't he? Well, someday he, Jason Sikes, would try too.
Only he'd succeed!
II
two
ARYL STOMPED AWAY. WERE ALL NATIVES THAT RUDE AND obnoxious? Probably not or
they wouldn't be working here in Occupation Administration. And besides, these
aliens did things oddly. Young people didn't bond with a parent, didn't work
with them in their careers. That boy's parent probably wasn't anything like
him. Still, it was hard to imagine such incredible disharmony between parent
and child, alien or not.
Well, she wouldn't try. This compulsory event was unpleasant enough without
dwelling on one misfit native. She looked around, then joined a group of young
Tsorians. They saluted the command green of her cape and began speaking with
guarded respect. Bonded to parents in Fleet or Occupation forces, they too
were bound by protocols of rank. As long as their capes all bore the same
rank-color, they could talk and joke freely among themselves, but with her
they had to be respectful.
Aryl left them as soon as politeness allowed. Not a whole lot more pleasant
than her last encounter, she had to admit. She could almost see why her father
mingled with natives, sympathetic ones at least. Relations with them were
outside restrictions of protocol, while every
12
Tsorian here, besides herself, was below his rank and strictly not to be
fraternized with, outside of duty.
She looked about for him now. He was no longer with that native woman but was
standing near the exit. Good. Maybe they would soon be going. Aryl made her
way through the crowd, then slowed as she saw that her father was talking with
Oimog Vak, Governor of the Occupation.
Governor Oimog's hair was a lighter gray than the Commander's and she was
nearly as tall, but under her standard tight black uniform, her body was going
to fat. Rogav's was solid and muscular, and at the moment, Aryl noticed, it
was tense with anger.
Aryl moved within hearing. Whatever was her father's business was hers as
well.
"Commander Rogav," the Governor said in an oily, unpleasant tone, "I won't be
put off any longer. I need those ships."
"You wouldn't need them, Governor, were this occupation being properly run."
"It is being properly run, Commander! Precisely by the regulations. This is no
Colony, let me point out, nor even a Ward World. It is an Occupied Strategic
Planet. Occupied for the sole purpose of providing the Empire with a foothold
in an endangered region."
The Fleet Commander showed his pointed teeth in a calm, humorless smile. "I do
not dispute that, Governor, nor do I doubt that you are running things

strictly by the regulations. What I dispute is the adequacy of those
regulations. Since each world and each species is different, logic dictates
that each set of occupation regulations should be different. If the Hykzoi can
be kept at bay, this world will eventually be upgraded in status. Instead of
occupied
13
aliens, these people will become colonials, a regular part of the Empire. Why
embitter them now?"
Oimog's sneer was poorly concealed. "Your reputation for being soft on aliens
precedes you, Commander. It may win you some sort of romantic maverick status
among your troops, but it will have no impact here. I have final say on how
this occupation is run, and I will not cede it to a military troublemaker with
a tenuous political future."
Aryl was appalled to hear anyone speak to her father like that, although she
knew the Governor, being outside the military hierarchy, had a limited right
to do so. But her father only shrugged.
"Not a totally inaccurate description, I admit. But may I point out that I am
also a Fleet Commander—in your sector."
The Governor sniffed. "That is condemnation in itself. This isn't a bad
occupation assignment, but for the military it is clearly a dead end. I have
learned where you stand politically. Those who sent you here were looking for
somewhere to dump you—a region technically endangered but where there was
little likelihood of trouble actually happening or of your making more of a
name for yourself."
Indignantly Aryl stepped to her father's side, though as was proper, Oimog
took no notice of her as a separate individual.
Rogav plucked a drink off a passing serving tray, balancing the goblet
delicately between his three clawed fingers. "Again, not a bad analysis,
Governor, except for one thing. In my estimation, and I am not totally alone
in this, trouble is extremely likely to happen here. True, a single fleet is a
modest force, but the Empire has demands on many borders. And not everyone is
as devious or as militarily blind as
14
certain occupation governors or their friends. Fleets are not sent around the
universe solely to advance or squelch a single political career." He took a
slow sip of his drink, then continued, "With proper leadership, a fleet
stationed here could hold back a Hykzoi attack. It could, that is, if that
fleet were not depleted by inept governors trying to hold together poorly run
occupations."
Oimog Vak opened and closed her mouth several times, then abrupUy she turned
and strode away.
Rogav chuckled into the remains of his drink. "Well, Daughter, now you see why
I have such a 'tenuous political future,' as Oimog so aptly put it. I just
can't keep from pointing out uninformed, pompous fools."
"Well," Aryl said, "at least she won't get your ships for her occupation."
Rogav sighed, his dark, craggy face taking on new shadows. "Ah, but she will.
Strictly 'by the regulations' occupation governors do have the right to demand
support if the military force is not on combat alert. I'm already in quite
enough trouble with some Imperial authorities without being accused of
contributing to the failure of an occupation. Never mind that it's the
heavy-handed occupation tactics that are causing that failure. I know her
political connections won her this post; they're far better than mine will
ever be. But even a bureaucratic blockhead like Oimog ought to see that these
natives need to be dealt with differently."
As far as Aryl was concerned, she'd as soon they weren't dealt with at all.
But at least the matter was only a peripheral one for her father. The Hykzoi
threat was the reason the fleet had so recently been sent here. And the
suggestion that an actual confrontation might be more imminent than they'd
thought—that was exciting. The sooner she got off
15

this planet and saw the sort of action she was being trained for, the happier
she'd be.
Jason stared out the car window, but his anger kept him from seeing much. The
bridge girders swept by as the car sped eastward across the Bay.
His mother finally broke the heavy silence. "Well, now you see, Jason, that
wasn't as bad as you thought it was going to be."
"No, it was worse."
"Oh, come on. I saw you talking with that girl, the Commander's daughter,
judging by the green cape."
"I don't care whose daughter she is, she's an arrogant creep. She started the
conversation, and I stopped it." For the first time since they'd left the
party, he turned to look at his mother. "But I did see you in what looked like
a long, happy talk with her scumbag father."
"Jason! Rogav Jy is the most important Tsorian on this planet."
"Mother, he's one of them\ Our conquerors, the enemy. What have they given us
in exchange for making us all slaves? A few Headquarters jobs and an annual
garden party!"
His mother shot him a strong, sharp look. Not anger so much as something Jason
couldn't quite define. Then she jerked her attention back to the road.
"I'd hardly say we are slaves, Jason. The Tsorians may have readjusted things
on the national and international levels, but they've scarcely interfered with
the economy or local governments or the education system—not with anything
really important."
"So, humiliating our armies and dictating to national governments isn't
important? Or what about incinerating
16
those private radio transmitters, or crushing those rebellions in Australia or
Pakistan or Denmark? Or, how about what happened over in Walnut Creek last
year? I suppose having their neighborhood wiped out wasn't really important to
those people."
Marilyn Sikes frowned, then answered tensely, "Those people brought it on
themselves. And remember, the Tsorians have only been here ten years. There's
bound to be trouble at first."
"Not just at first, Mother. Some people will never give up. Not everyone's as
easy to beat into submission as you collaborators."
For a moment, the only sound in the car was the steady rumbling of tires. Then
his mother said in a taut voice, "Jason Sikes, I am not a collaborator. I am a
realist, and I should also point out that I am your mother. I won't have you
talking to me like that."
"Then why don't you start acting like a mother I can be proud of?"
Abruptly he turned back to the window. The lights spangling over the dark East
Bay hills blurred and shimmered. He swallowed and blinked, but refused to be
seen raising a hand to wipe away tears.
That's what he really wanted, he realized suddenly, someone to be proud of.
Ricky Jensen had had that. It was a ghastly way to go, but at least Ricky and
his parents had been together, and he hadn't been ashamed of them.
Even that nasty Tsorian girl, Jason supposed, probably was proud of her
father. She had certainly been loyally spouting their propaganda.
Jason clenched his fists. How sick can you get? Here he was actually envying a
dead boy and an arrogant alien girl. He scowled at the lights and the
crouching darkness.
17
t h
r e e
BRILLIANT PINPOINTS OF LIGHT UNDIMMED BY ATMOSPHERE, the stars receded
endlessly in all directions. Aryl hung suspended in a void. She gripped the
arms of her chair, trying to maintain some sense of up and down. Suddenly the
vision blurred and shifted. A new stellar pattern emerged, dominated by a
single bluish star circled by tiny flecks of reflected light. Aryl felt
immensely sick.

"The Ydrog System, sir." First Adjutant Theelk's sharp voice jarred in the
darkness.
"And the Hykzoi bases there?" Aryl heard her father speak from the void beside
her though she could see nothing but stars. In response to his request, the
focus zoomed in on the planetary systems. Again Aryl's stomach lurched. She
had been looking forward to her first trimensional briefing. Now all she could
think about was not disgracing herself by getting sick.
Theelk's crisp response burst out of nowhere. "Our probes have shown increased
activity where the flashing lights indicate. However, this may be due to
massive retaliation for a rebellion on the innermost planet."
"And the status of the rebellion?" Rogav asked.
"The Hykzoi largely obliterated the native population,
sir.
18
"Hmm. Typically Hykzoi. And from our point of view, at least, very helpful,"
From somewhere to Aryl's left Subcommander Hlon Az piped up, "How is that,
sir?" Aryl was relieved. She had wanted to ask that question, but didn't trust
what her digestive system would do if she opened her mouth.
Her father answered. "The native population of Ydrog's innermost planet was a
major source of slave labor for Hykzoi projects in that sector. If the Hykzoi
were willing to eliminate them, then it's safe to assume that this sector is
not the location of any Hykzoi military buildup. So we may look elsewhere for
the origin of a Hykzoi attack. Now, Theelk, anything from the Oanu probes?"
Aryl braced herself. It was the sudden sweeping changes that were the worst.
She wished she could close her eyes, but didn't dare risk missing any of the
briefing because her father might quiz her on it.
As the universe resettled, Theelk replied, "Nothing, sir, but the In Erzu
probes have reported undefined activity just beyond the range of effective
detection. Somewhere here, in the direction of the Qvi-Nars Corridor."
"Hmm. It could mean a new farming complex as easily as a military buildup. But
in the absence of anything more solid, it is something. Now, Theelk, switch to
the two-empire overview."
Aryl dug her claws into the chair, but that did little to steady her stomach
as the scale plummeted. Hundreds of stars became thousands. Overlain on the
starfields were two transparent clouds of color, red and blue, spreading
toward each other.
"Finer," the Commander ordered. A pulsing change, and a magnified portion of
the blue stain was shown protruding into the red.
19
"That, Subcommander Hlon, is the trimension we'll use in tomorrow's briefing
of the strike leaders. They must remember that this is a beachhead for the
Empire and a very tenuous one at that. I believe that the Hykzoi, at least,
are fully aware of this, and that far sooner than some elements seem to
realize we will be facing a substantial Hykzoi attack. Since I can't seem to
convince the authorities to strengthen our forces here, we'll just have to be
alert and do our best with what we have."
Hlon's voice quavered slightly. "Then in deploying our forces, the positioning
of our vanguard could be critical."
"Correct. And that is precisely the purpose of this exercise. We must pinpoint
the origin of that attack before it is launched." Gratefully Aryl heard her
father stand up. "That will be all for now, Theelk."
Instantly darkness vanished, and the universe shrank to the confines of a
single office. Aryl's black eyes blinked rapidly as she tried to adjust to the
welcome flood of tight through the now-transparent walls. Still not trusting
her stomach, she let her father escort Theelk and Hlon to the door.
When he returned, Rogav stood looking at her severely a moment, then smiled
broadly. "Well, Daughter, I'm proud of you. At my first trimensional briefing
I got sick all over my captain's boots. You'll get used to it, though, and
there Te some mental tricks I can teach you to help with those sudden
transitions. So, anyway, what did you think?"

"About the content of the briefing?" Cautiously Aryl stood up and walked
across the room to the curved transparency of the wall. "I think we'll be
stuck here a while longer until the Hykzoi either begin their attack or we
figure out where it's coming from."
20
Her father sighed. "Correct. And I am not a patient person; I don't like
waiting." He joined her and together they looked across the narrow channel of
choppy water at the odd angular towers of the native city.
"I particularly don't like waiting on a newly conquered world. Not one that's
been conquered in this manner, anyway, as an outpost rather than a colony. The
natives are always obsessed with what they've lost and still don't realize
what they stand to gain. This group, I think, has particular promise. They're
quite spunky, really, and there's much they could offer our philosophers and
artists. Oimog's a fool to treat them as she does." Rogav laughed ruefully,
then added, "And I must confess to a certain reprehensible prejudice for
species that basically resemble my own. There are few enough of them in the
universe as it is."
Feeling Aryl shudder, he chuckled. "But then I forget, this is your first
alien world. On my first one, the natives resembled blobs of turquoise jelly.
They were quite clever, but kind of hard to relate to."
Aryl frowned, trying to imagine talking with creatures like that. She failed.
Her father continued musingly, "You know, if I live long enough to retire from
the military, I think 111 go into education. They really ought to introduce
more alien species onto the nursery worlds. Too many children go through First
Passage without knowing a thing about them."
"But that's the sort of thing bonding is for."
"Hmm. I suppose you're right. There really wouldn't be much point in a kid
bonded to a clerk on Yaxil Majhat learning all about flying amphibians or
turquoise jelly blobs." His voice turned serious again. "But for someone
21
bonded to a Fleet Commander, there's a lot of point in it. And this is a good
enough group to start with."
Aryl looked across to the alien city. Already she and her father had walked
its streets and visited its museums and places of recreation. The natives had
things they defined as art and music and architecture, but she had trouble
seeing them as such. She could probably manage to if she tried. But frankly,
she didn't want to. She just wished the Hykzoi would hurry up and attack.
Rogav turned away and strolled back to his desk. "I've decided that what we
need now is something more intimate than tourism and academic study. I'm
inviting a couple of natives to have dinner with us. That's the get-acquainted
custom here. The adult is a female who works in the Headquarters liaison
department. She has a son about your own age, so that should be interesting
for you."
Interesting! Aryl's stomach churned. This could be worse than a trimensional
briefing.
"Mother! How could you?" Jason jumped up from the dinner table, sending his
chair careening back against the sideboard.
"Jason, sit down," Marilyn Sikes said patiently. "Think about it. It's like
he's my boss. I had to accept a dinner invitation."
Jason righted his chair and dropped angrily into it. "You make it sound like
you work for some insurance company. Mom, he's a conquering monster!"
She reached across the table and firmly grabbed her son's hand. "Not a
monster, Jason, a Tsorian. But the conquering part is right. His people
conquered ours ten years ago. That's something we have to accept."
"My father never accepted it!"
22
Briefly her face crinkled with pain. "Your father died seven years ago. A lot
has changed since then."
"Yeah, but not for the better."
"Maybe not, but that doesn't change the reality of it. And present reality is

that Fleet Commander Rogav Jy has invited us to dinner, and we will accept the
invitation."
Jason snatched his hand away. "We will not. Go ahead and pander to that
monster if you want, but count me out!"
Jumping up, he rushed to the front door, then turned and looked back at his
mother, his face red and crumpled. "When I was little, I used to think you
were wonderful. You and Dad could do nothing wrong. Then Dad died, and you
took that awful job with them. And now you're a traitor, and I don't want
anything to do with you!"
He slammed the door behind him. In the chill night air, his tear-dampened
cheeks felt clammy and cold. Angrily he rubbed them, but tears kept welling
up, blurring his vision as he ran. Yet he hardly needed to see where he was
going. He knew.
Indian Rock. Always his special place, his refuge when he needed a world of
his own. At the end of his street it rose up, a huge protrusion of bedrock and
tumbled boulders with houses lapping all around its base. In its crags and
crevasses, caves and cliffs, were places for hiding or for games or for quiet
thinking.
It was thinking he needed now, that and solitude. Heedless of any danger, he
scrambled up the steep, rough stairs, little more than hollows in the stone,
supposedly made by Indians who had once used this place. Finally he levered
himself onto the broad thronelike boulder that crowned it all and sat hugging
his knees, tensely looking about him.
His eyes had dried, but his throat and chest still knotted
23
with misery. The cold wasn't bad, although in the west, the fog had already
spilled in from the ocean and covered the Bay. The lights of San Francisco
were lost under its pale shroud, but around him the Berkeley Hills still
sparkled, and above, the stars shown clear and untroubled.
Untroubled? Hardly, he thought bitterly. They were where all the trouble came
from. There was nothing comforting or friendly about them.
When he was very little, his dad had taken him out here to look at stars, and
in the summer they'd gone out on the beach at Uncle Carl's cabin. Dad had told
stories about the constellations, the Greek ones and the Indian ones, and
sometimes too he'd told stories about what it would be like when people
finally went out there, the adventures they'd have in space and the
discoveries they'd make. Jason had loved it all.
Then came the night when the sky had flamed with explosions as their air force
shattered under the Tsorian invasion. After that, no starry sky had seemed the
same.
Jason's father had never forgiven the Tsorians for that or for anything else.
It was more than just taking the stars from us, he used to say, it was
betraying our past and stealing our future. Jason had not really understood
that then. Now he did.
Jason cradled his head on his knees. Now he felt the same about
himself—betrayed past, stolen future. Agreed, his mom had needed a job after
his father was killed in that plane crash, but why did she have to take one
with the Tsorians? Didn't she care anything for her husband's beliefs—or for
her son's?
He lifted his head, but the stars were gone, blotted out by the rising fog.
Good. The fog was cold and dank, but at least it came from Earth.
24
After a while, though, it was too much, chilling his skin and seeping into his
bones. Stiffly he lowered himself off the top rock. He'd have to go home now.
But he wouldn't stay. If he'd made any decision tonight, he guessed that was
it. He'd have to leave home. Maybe he could stay with a friend or with Uncle
Carl. Or maybe he'd just drop out of school and get a job and live on his own.
He couldn't keep living with his mother, not anymore, not the way she'd
become.
His decision was made, but it didn't make him feel better. As he began working

his way down off the rocks, it hung in his chest like something heavy and
cold. Standing at last on the pebbly ground, he noticed that the fog seemed
thicker. In it, the twisted branches of a nearby oak looked strange and
menacing. Beyond, tall blurred shapes of eucalyptus loomed like disembodied
ghosts. The only thing visible beyond that was the eerie yellow smudge of a
streetlight.
He started walking toward the light, then stopped. A new shape was taking form
in the mist, taking form and moving toward him. A voice came, flat and
muffled. "Jason, is that you?"
Instantly he was angry at himself for feeling relieved. "Yes, Mother, it's me.
What do you want?"
"I want you to come with me someplace tonight."
"No, Mother, I'm not going. I'm not going anywhere with you, not anymore."
"Jason, please. Don't argue. Just get in the car. I've brought it here."
"Mom, it's no good. I'm not going—"
"I said don't argue! Jason, please just come with me tonight. All these years
Fve tried to protect you. I should
25
have known it wouldn't work. You're too much like your father."
Jason opened his mouth to protest again, but his mother raised a hand. "No,
Jason, please. If you still want to argue, we can do it later. But there's a
meeting I've got to go to, and I want you to come along. Don't worry, it's not
another Tsorian garden party."
Suddenly Jason was very tired. He didn't want to argue. The sight of their old
Chevy glowing bright and green in the fog was comfortingly familiar. He'd go
along with his mother just one more time. Tomorrow was soon enough to make the
break.
They drove in silence along fog-dimmed streets. Trees and mailboxes seemed to
float in front of nearly invisible houses. The fog became even thicker where
the hills flattened and spread westward toward the Bay.
Jason didn't want to think, let alone talk, but his mother finally spoke up.
"There's one thing you need to know, Jason, even before we get there. It's
about your father."
Jason stiffened. If she said one carping word about his father being an
idealist or anything, he'd jump out of the car at the next stop sign.
"You know how he died?" she asked.
"Of course. In a plane crash up north."
"That's what I've always told you, but it's not true. He was booked on that
plane, and it did have mechanical troubles and crash. But he never got on it.
He was killed the day before, the day the Tsorians put down the Seattle
Uprising. Your father was one of the Resister organizers there."
Jason leaned back against the seat. He felt very odd, as if someone had just
reached inside his mind and rear26
ranged the pieces. He tried to see the new picture but couldn't focus on it.
Suddenly he turned to his mother, frowning. One portion had emerged. "Then ...
then if Dad was a Resister, if he was actually killed by the Tsorians, how . .
. how could you have done this? How could you have turned collaborator and
actually gone to work for those murderers?"
"That's the other part of what I'm trying to tell you, Jason. I'm a Resister
too, I always have been. It's a Resister meeting we're going to tonight."
27
four
JASON DIDN'T HAVE TIME TO LET THIS SECOND REVELATION do more than jiggle at
his mind. The car slowed, then swung through an open gate in a chain link
fence.
For blocks they'd been driving down wide, deserted streets past yellow smears
of streetlights and drab bayside warehouses. Now he stared at the similar,
fog-obscured building before him. No windows, no signs, weeds dotting the
cracked and littered parking lot. They rounded a corner and joined several

other parked cars huddled up against the back of the building.
"But why—" Jason began when his mother had switched off the engine.
"Sorry, no questions now. We're late already."
She led him to an unmarked door, pulled out a key, and opened it. The hallway
beyond was dark and empty. Taking a flashlight from her purse, she confidently
traced a route through large, echoing rooms and down trash-littered stairs.
Finally, at another unmarked door, she knocked. Twice, three times, then once.
"The secret knock is silly," she whispered conspiratori-ally, "but it appeals
to Beardsley's sense of the dramatic."
The door opened and a young, Hispanic-looking man
28
let them into a fairly large windowless room, lit by a single hanging bulb. In
the center stood a battered wooden table and a collection of unmatched chairs.
The dozen or so people sitting on them were equally unmatched: men and women
seemingly of all ages and social groups.
The large, broad-shouldered man at the head of the table pointed to a couple
of empty chairs. "About time, Marilyn. And you know our rule against bringing
in new members without approval."
"George Beardsley, don't be pompous. You know very well this is my son, Jason.
It's way past time he was brought in on this."
"Perhaps, but—"
"No buts! If you want me here, you take my son too."
Jason felt uncomfortable and confused. But a strange new feeling was growing
in him too—pride, pride in his mother.
Beardsley laughed awkwardly and leaned back in his chair. "Blackmail, huh?
Well, it was just a formality anyway. Welcome aboard, Jason."
Jason mumbled his thanks and sat down, trying to shuffle his seat a few more
inches back into the shadows.
"Now, Marilyn," Beardsley continued, "we'd just come to your part of the
agenda. Anything to report?"
Mrs, Sikes smiled confidently. "Yes. I've decided to scrap the others I was
working on and concentrate on Rogav Jy, the Fleet Commander."
A thin, bald-headed man whistled. "That's aiming pretty high. Isn't he the top
dog?"
"That's right, Professor Ackerman. But the more I think about this scheme, the
more I'm convinced that's the only way to go. The Tsorians are ruthless, but
they're also very leader-oriented. If an abduction is going to do us any
29
good, it'll have to be someone important enough to make them willing to
bargain."
Jason tried to look cool and attentive, but it was hard to hide his rising
happiness. Just a few hours ago, his life seemed to be falling apart. Now it
was all put back together—in an incredible way.
The bald professor was still voicing doubts. "Well, I don't know. I don't know
about this whole thing, really. Remember that group in Switzerland who
kidnapped some Tsorian administrator? The Tsorians just sacrificed their man
and wiped out a good chunk of Lucerne in response."
"That's right," a white-haired lady said, nodding. "I've had no problem with
most of our other projects. Circulating pamphlets, or a little sabotage now
and then, or that petition drive in the universities to protest exclusion from
Tsorian technology. But this seems awfully risky. We don't want our
neighborhoods to go the way of the one in Walnut Creek, and they hadn't even
kidnapped anybody."
"Yes, I know," Marilyn continued. "But conditions are special now. At the
moment, the most important thing to the Tsorians seems to be defeating an
attack from an enemy called the Hykzoi. This Rogav Jy has the reputation for
being something of a military wonder-worker, and apparently they'll need that
since they don't have a particularly large force here. If we snatch him away
now, they're likely to forget about saving face and do some serious bargaining
to get him back."

"It's a gamble," someone said.
"Sure it's a gamble," responded a man with a short brown beard, pushing back
his chair and standing up. A considerable paunch sagged over his belt. "And I
don't mind that. But if you ask me, we're dealing with the wrong
30
players. If these Hykzoi are so strong, it's them we should be dealing with.
Sure, the Tsorians might throw us a bone or two to get their chief back. But I
bet those Hykzoi would give us a lot more. If we could help turn this war in
their favor, they ought to be plenty grateful. We could probably call the
shots around here."
Jason glanced at his mother. She looked as if she'd just bitten into something
nasty. "Jerry, that is a really bad idea. As I understand it, these Hykzoi are
not good guys. For all we know, they'd as soon eat us as bargain with us."
"Tsorian propaganda," the other jeered. "You've been working with those purple
monsters too long. You're going soft on them."
Jason tensed, and beside him his mother seemed to bristle like a cat. "Jerry
Barns, you have no right to say that. I have more reason than most to hate the
Tsorians, and you know it."
"Sure, sure, don't get riled. But you've also worked with them enough to get a
little brainwashed. Why should we trust everything you say about them now?"
Several voices were quickly raised in objection, but to his own surprise,
Jason's was the loudest. "Because she's the one you've had do your dirty work
all these years. She's the one who's had to put up with those creatures, so
you'd better listen to what she has to say about them!"
Jason looked down and blushed, not so much from his brashness as from the fact
that a few hours earlier he'd harbored even worse doubts about his mother. He
smiled awkwardly when she reached over and squeezed his hand.
"Let's try to keep down the name-calling," Beardsley said severely, "What do
the rest of you think of Jerry's idea?"
Professor Ackerman cleared his throat. "It's interesting
31
but hardly workable. We've no reason to believe these Hykzoi would be either
better or worse than the Tsorians. And you know the old saying about the devil
you know."
"Besides," said the young man who'd opened the door, "how do we even contact
them? Or what language do we use? At least the Tsorians have learned English."
Seeing the nods of agreement around the table, Beards-ley said, "Ah1 right,
let's table Jerry's approach for a while and decide what ransom we'll ask from
the Tsorians. It's got to be something worth the risk."
Jason sat quietly as discussion swirled around him. Professor Ackerman, an
astronomer, wanted to force the Tsorians to share their achievements in space
science and medicine and all the other advances that frustrated humans felt
extraterrestrial contact should have brought them. Others were for demanding
Tsorian withdrawal at least to their Mars base, while the majority, led loudly
by Jerry Barns, wanted complete Tsorian withdrawal from Earth's solar system.
After a time, Jason tuned it out. His brain was already on overload. It was
enough to bask in the fact that he was a Resister and the son of Resisters.
At last the meeting broke up, and by ones and twos the conspirators slipped
out to their cars. Jason welcomed the cold, ocean-scented slap of fog. It
seemed to set a seal of reality on the evening.
As they left the parking lot for the bleak, foggy streets, his mother said,
"Thanks for coming to my aid in there. Most of the others are okay, but that
Jerry Bams is an unmitigated jerk."
"Yeah, he sure is." Jason blushed and looked out the window. "I... I guess I
have been too, Mom. I'm sorry."
She smiled at him, then looked back at the road. "That's all right, kid. I'm
sorry too. I shouldn't have kept you in
32
the dark, but somehow after what happened to your dad ... And then there was
the Walnut Creek group. I knew Ricky Jensen's parents. They were so proud of

their son. I'm proud of mine too and just didn't want to risk losing him."
"Hey, Mom. Nobody's going to lose. Except the Tsorians. With us working
together, they're doomed."
Their laughter filled the car, and for the moment, Jason felt every bit as
confident as his words.
33
i v e
JASON TRIED NOT TO CRINGE AS THE GIRL'S CLAWS SCRAPED
across his palm. His mother had said that Tsorian use of the human handshaking
custom showed respect, but somehow the girl's expression did not seem very
respectful. It looked more like she'd just touched something slimy from under
a rock.
Then a diplomatic, sharp-toothed smile slid over her face. Not to be outdone,
Jason smiled back, trying desperately to think of light conversation. There
was something he'd noticed in the introductions the Fleet Commander had given.
"Eh ... when your father introduced you just now, he called you his
bond-daughter. What does that mean?"
Jason thought he saw a flicker of exasperation on Aryl's face as she glanced
to where her father was seated with Jason's mother in a nearby part of the
Headquarters lounge. Quickly she looked back and said in her oddly accented
English, "You really know nothing about that?"
"No, nothing."
With a suppressed sigh she gestured to a couple of free-form chairs and took a
seat. "We Tsorians spend the first years of our lives on nursery planets
growing up with
34
others our age, learning a little of everything—arts, music, history,
philosophy, and all the sciences, of course."
"You don't live with your parents?" Jason asked, surprised.
"Of course not. The only adults there are the instructors and such. Naturally
we know who our parents are. We keep very close watch on their careers, and
occasionally one or both might come by for an acquaintance visit."
"Sounds pretty grim."
Briefly, she looked annoyed. "No, not at all. It is very pleasant. There are
no rank distinctions then, so you can associate with whomever you want. And
you can play. There are few responsibilities except to learn. But then comes
the First Passage, and all that changes."
Despite himself, Jason was getting interested. "So what's that?"
"It comes at what must be about your age of twelve. It's then that a child
must choose which parent to bond to. The child then becomes an adjunct to that
person, joining him or her and taking on the same rank and career track. Ah"
learning from then on is what the parent sets out as being essential to that
career."
"So you chose your father to be bonded to because you wanted to be a Fleet
Commander?"
The stare from her black hamster-eyes made him feel squinny.
"By the time of my First Passage, my mother had died. She was a strike
squadron commander and was killed in a skirmish with the Skreel. But I
probably would have chosen my father anyway. He is something quite special. He
demands a lot, but I am learning a lot too. Our bonding is very strong."
She flicked a claw against a piece of floating sculpture.
35
With a jangle all the pieces bobbed and spun, rearranging themselves in a new
pattern. The metallic noise grated against the quiet Tsorian music that always
thrummed through the lounge. Some background music, Jason thought. The
throbbing gurgles sounded more like backed-up drains.
Nervously Jason glanced to where his mother was chatting with Commander Rogav
about this war they were having with the Hykzoi. He marveled at her cool. He
himself felt as tight as a spring and about as subtle as an elephant. Surely
it must be stamped all over him that he was here as a Resister kidnapper and

not because he wanted to dine with these creeps.
Guiltily he looked back at the girl. She seemed tense but not suspicious. Not
that he was sure he could recognize either in a Tsorian. He'd better keep her
talking. She was looking at him with an expression that seemed straightforward
enough—arrogant annoyance.
"You ... eh, you mentioned a 'First Passage.' Is there some sort of 'Second
Passage' too?"
"Of course! You certainly are ... unfamiliar with Tsorian ways, aren't you?
The Second Passage comes at the end of the bonding period. There's a sort of
evaluation of your aptitudes and skills. Then you pass into adulthood with a
rank and career track of your own. Often it is similar to that of your bond
parent."
"So you'll become a fleet commander?" Jason was genuinely surprised. What a
system. For the first time he heard a Tsorian laugh, a dry, crackly sound.
"Hardly! Well, it's possible, of course, were I to pass into command rank, but
there are many different stages in any rank. My mother was much lower in the
scale of
36
command, but she still shared my father's rank so it was permissible for them
to have social contact."
"You mean ... ?"
Aryl glanced quickly to where her father had just stood up. She seemed
relieved. "It's time for us to go up and dine."
Rogav lead the party to a bank of lift tubes, stepped into one black opening,
and disappeared. Marilyn gave Jason a brief encouraging smile and followed
suit. Jason looked at Aryl. Her smile was unmistakably smug. With exaggerated
ease she stepped into another black opening and vanished, leaving Jason
suddenly alone.
He swallowed down panic and stared at the opening before him. It wasn't just a
hole, it was a featureless void. But he'd have to step into it; he couldn't
let his mother go into this alone. Fighting not to close his eyes, he stepped
forward.
Black nothingness engulfed him. He was standing on nothing solid, yet somehow
something was holding him and even moving him upward.
After a moment the blackness in front of him shimmered, and as if through a
veil, he could see a lighted scene with the others waiting for him. Gratefully
he leaped out.
Again his mother's quick smile was mocked by the smugness on the alien girl's
face. We ought to kidnap her while we're at it, he thought, not that anyone
would want her back.
Fighting the last of his queasiness, he followed the others. Clearly they were
now much higher up in the conical Headquarters tower because the transparent
outer walls had a more noticeable curve. They entered an area where
irregularly shaped tables seemed to rise out of the floor like mushrooms. The
Tsorians, clustered on the floor around
37
some of them, hastily gave their commander an open-clawed salute. Absently
Rogav acknowledged these as he led his group to a small table abutting the
transparent wall and sat on the lushly carpeted floor.
Jason couldn't help but be impressed with the view.
It was spectacular. Though still far from the top of the tower, they were
higher than any human skyscraper. To the south, San Francisco glowed with
light, and to the east the velvety dark hills seemed strewn with jewels.
Between them, the blackness of the bay was spanned by four slender bridges
that glimmered like dew-hung spiderwebs.
When Jason finally forced his attention from the view, he realized Rogav was
speaking.
"Your ancestors evolved from less carnivorous sorts than ours, but our
nutritional requirements are not unlike. I hope the same can be said about our
ideas of'tastiness.'"

He pulled a short, square column out of the table's center, jabbed at some
controls, and within moments a patch of blackness appeared in its side. Rogav
reached in and withdrew four platters and four high-sided bowls.
Drinking-cups, Jason decided as he eyed the bluish liquid sloshing in his. The
contents of the platters were even more questionable.
Rogav apparently noticed his and his mother's doubtful expressions. "Vegetable
matter crisped around meat-some is even locally grown." Picking up a long
tubular scoop, he jabbed into his own plate with the two prongs at the scoop's
end.
Jason looked across the table at the plate in front of Aryl. It was full of
quivwy gelatinous stuff, sort of like gray tapioca. Suspended in it were
round, purplish things that she was jabbing at and popping into her mouth.
Jason felt ill.
38
His own meal, a heap of little greenish curls, looked uncomfortably like
insect larvae. Gingerly he prodded one with his prong, then hurriedly stuck it
into his mouth. It crunched. Please be vegetables and meat, he thought,
forcing himself to swallow and poke at another one.
As he chewed, he glanced up at Aryl. There she was again, radiating smugness,
probably expecting him to be sick. Well, he wouldn't be. He tried to think of
something suave to say. Finally he leaned back and said airily, "Not bad. Have
you had much opportunity to taste our food?"
She looked a little surprised. "No, not much. I haven't been here that long."
"Oh, really?" Casually he waved his eating prong toward the view. "And what do
you think of this planet of ours?"
She was silent a moment, then answered, "It is interesting, if a little wild.
But one thing I don't understand is how you can bear cohabiting with so many
subintelligent life-forms."
"Huh?"
"I mean, you hardly modify your environment at all. Plants growing everywhere,
and you sort of fitting yourselves around them. Even in the cities there are
almost as many plants as buildings. People even have them inside the
buildings. And little animals too, all sorts of little animals. Quite
primitive really."
Right, Jason thought, we like city parks and pet poodles, so we're primitive.
Might as well shock her for all it's worth.
"Well, that's the way we like it, and there's not enough of it if you ask me.
My mom and I have pet goldfish; I'm trying to talk her into a dog, and we've
scads of house-plants. In fact, right near our house there's a park, a big
39
clump of rocks and trees that the city builders just left and built around.
Anytime I get upset and want to be alone and think, I go there."
"You go to a rock?" Aryl's shocked expression delighted Jason, but before he
could enjoy it fully, an exclamation from Rogav interrupted.
"Ah! There is one of your planet's greatest glories."
"The moon?" Marilyn said. "Don't you have moons?"
"Some planets do, but few that large. The Emperor's own world, Elak Tsor, has
only a ring of dust and asteroids. It makes a very pretty glittering, but is
nowhere near as grand."
"Well," Marilyn said evenly, "it is comforting to know that there are some
things about us you people admire."
"There are many things we admire," Rogav responded. "I've been learning about
your past, about your culture. There's much you can oifer our Empire."
"But that's what I've been saying. That's the very sort of thing those
Resisters so much resent. They wonder what good it is having you admire our
past if you take away our future?"
Jason stiffened. His mother was skating on awfully thin ice here. What was she
aiming at?
But Rogav seemed to be enjoying the debate. "We haven't taken away your
future, we've offered you a new one. Joining the Empire means sharing futures

you've never dreamed of."
"I hope you pardon my frankness, but sharing usually means doing things for
mutual benefit. A lot of people are wondering where the 'mutual' comes in. I
mean, we have been part of your empire for ten years now. Not all humans are
Resisters, but a good many do think we ought to get something positive out of
this relationship."
40
Rogav laughed bitterly. "Yes. What is the phrase? 'You've put your claw on
it.' If your world had been a normal Imperial acquisition, things would have
been different. Much would have opened up for you already. Technology,
education, travel throughout the Empire. But as long as your world remains on
the edge of Imperial conflict, you'll unfortunately be treated as little more
than a military outpost."
"You know what's funny?" Marilyn said, taking a hesitant sip from her drinking
bowl. "Before you people showed up, a lot of us imagined that if any alien
race survived their own technology long enough to get into space, they
wouldn't be militaristic but sort of pacifistic and philosophical."
"Ah, but you see, you were reasoning from the experience and values of your
own species." Rogav shook his head. "You may be alarmed by your own
militarism, but it is nothing compared to ours. We consolidated our home world
into one totalitarian empire long before we had the technology either to blow
ourselves up or to get into space. When we did get there, we just expanded the
practice. Of course, there are plenty of pacifistic, philosophical species in
the galaxy, but naturally they aren't the empire builders, so they weren't
likely to be the ones you'd meet first—no more than you'd be likely to meet
the least militaristic Tsorians when your first contacts are with the
military."
Marilyn nodded thoughtfully. "And then to add insult to injury, after so many
centuries of thinking ourselves the most splendid things in the universe, the
first aliens we meet simply crack down on our governments and rebellions and
otherwise ignore us. I suppose a lot of people feel that if someone had to
conquer us, we want them to take us seriously. If they aren't going to
obliterate or remold us,
41
at least they could help us. As the phrase goes, 'We want to have our cake and
eat it too.'"
"I do take you seriously. But to know if the analogy is correct, I'd need to
know what a 'cake' is."
"A cake? Why, that's absolutely basic human cuisine. But you realize, of
course, that you're going to have to learn what it is now, because Earth
custom demands that if your dinner invitation is accepted, you have to accept
one in return."
"A tempting offer, but I'm not sure everyone in this building would approve of
the Fleet Commander skipping off to dine in a native home."
"I'm not talking about everyone in this building. I'm talking about you.
Besides, I thought you said you took us seriously, quaint customs and all."
"Ah, you have caught me there. I will give it some thought, see how the
military situation develops. Now, let me order us another course."
On the drive home, Jason mentally reran the whole incredible evening. Such a
contrast to the last time he and his mother had been there together, not so
much in what they did, as in his being aware of why they did it. But one thing
still made him uneasy.
"Mom," he asked at last, "why did you talk to him so much about what the
Resisters think? Wasn't that a little dangerous?"
"I don't think so, Jason. From everything I've heard, this Rogav Jy is a very
independent, unconventional sort. I wanted to give the impression that I am
too, that I can understand what the Resisters are saying and yet come to my
own independent conclusions and act on them. I'm gambling on that being the
sort of person he admires—and
42

from whom he might accept a dinner invitation away from Headquarters."
"He didn't actually accept the invitation."
"No, but he didn't refuse it either. And the little challenge I threw in there
at the end should help. I get the feeling there are some other authorities at
the Headquarters he'd love to defy."
Jason chuckled. "You know, you're getting awfully good at this secret agent
stuff. I'm impressed."
"Thanks—I think. But really this whole thing is becoming a lot more difficult
than I imagined."
"Hey, no, you're a great Mata Hari, or whoever. You know, that old-time lady
spy."
A smile quivered around her lips but quickly vanished. "Thanks, but that's not
it. The role-playing is not the hard part. It's that, well... the longer I
work with the Tsorians, the more I come to see them as—as individuals. Their
ideas and actions are wrong, of course, but I can see how they came to them."
"Mom! They're the enemy."
"Jason, I'm not forgetting that. But they're not the faceless enemy anymore.
That's the problem. It's a lot harder to hate them. And blind hate is what you
really need to be good at something like this."
For an unsettling moment, Jason thought he almost understood what she was
trying to say. Then he shunted the thought aside. These people were the enemy,
pure and simple. They had to be beaten. Any other viewpoint was asking for
trouble.
He looked over at his mother. No, they definitely did not need any more
trouble.
43
S
1
X
WITH THE THREE CLAWS ON HER RIGHT HAND,
ARYL
loosely gripped the bar. A twist of her wrist, and her whole body rotated
slowly around it. Then she let go. The low gravity spin arched her toward a
second bar, which she hooked with her knees. She rocked there a moment before
swinging around and finally perching on top. Ash-gray hair floated like smoke
about her dark face, then slowly settled onto her shoulders.
The low-grav rec facilities here were pretty good, a lot better than on her
nursery world, though nowhere near what they were on her father's flagship.
Still, it was easier to simply reduce a ship's artificial gravity than negate
a planet's real gravity.
Pulling her feet up to the bar, she kicked off toward a complex of hoops and
spirals. Jerking suddenly at the trill from the communicator on her belt, she
sailed past the bar she was aiming for, flailed at the next, and only caught
the last bar by the claws of her feet.
Hanging upside down, she activated the communicator, trying to keep annoyance
out of her voice. "Aryl here."
"Rogav here. An lopheenian Primal is in orbit and has requested a Proximity
Conference. This could be impor44
tant. I would like you to attend. Meet me as soon as possible in environmental
chamber number two."
"Yes, sir." Aryl sighed, then let go.
Dropping steadily downward, she grabbed a passing bar for one final spin, then
landed gently on the floor and hurried to change out of her exercise suit. A
group of several other low-grav enthusiasts were just coming in and saluted
her before she'd even fastened her green-lined cape to the shoulders of her
black uniform. She acknowledged them, then hurried to the lift tubes.
As Aryl rose toward the proper floor, she forced her thoughts to the subject
of lopheenians. What could be so important about a meeting with one? She'd
never paid much attention to them in her studies, beyond their poetry, of
course. lopheenian poetry was drilled into everyone. Some of it wasn't all
that bad. There was more to them than poetry, though, but before she'd half
sorted it out, she was at the door of the environmental chamber.

Cautiously she walked in, not sure what conditions lopheenians liked.
Apparently slightly low gravity, she realized after a few bouncy steps. And
also hot and humid. Running claws through hair that was already becoming lank
and damp, she looked for her father. He was seated by a table studying a data
screen.
Without looking up, he threw out the expected question. "Aryl, tell me what
you know about lopheenians."
She cleared her throat. "The name comes from a star system in the Grendth
sector. The lopheenians are a very old civilized race. They've inhabited that
and several adjacent star systems for ... for a long time."
"And?"
"They are, eh... noted for their devotion to the arts and philosophy, and for
their political neutrality."
45
"The result of which being .. . ?"
"Oh. That they are often called upon to be mediators in interstellar disputes
and are given pretty much free right of travel throughout the known galaxy."
"Good. So, the question arises, why should an lo-pheenian Primal want to see a
Tsorian Fleet Commander? There are no records of any lopheenian missions in
this region, and they generally consider Hykzoi attitudes toward the arts to
be irredeemably barbaric, so they're not likely to have much business there.
All of which suggests that this Primal may have something to convey to me,
though he'll never come out and say it. lopheenians are maddeningly indirect.
Help me listen for it, will you. I wish Subcommander Hlon were here. He could
use the diplomatic experience, but he's off inspecting the Mars base. So
you'll have to listen twice as hard."
The entry chime sounded, and Aryl looked toward the door. With a mechanical
sigh, it opened to its full height to admit the tall diplomat.
On an undulating motion from a profusion of long golden strands, the
lopheenian swept into the room. The curtain of delicate strands cascaded from
the uppermost and largest in a chain of golden spheres of diminishing size
that made up the body. The lowest, marble-sized segment swung a few feet above
the floor. Swaying back and forth between the supporting veil, each ball
gleamed with polished brilliance. The second sphere from the top, however, was
banded with vibrating purple, which emitted a sound like tinkling chimes.
Having completed the formal greeting, the lopheenian switched to a language
within both species' capabilities. "Fleet Commander Rogav Jy, I am
Jargaroovun, Primal Ordinary of the lopheenian Assembly. I am delighted that
46
fortuitous chance has provided me with the opportunity to visit one of the
newest jewels in your resplendent Imperial crown."
"We are honored by your presence, Primal. Anywhere that Tsorians tred is
always home to our most valued friends, the lopheenians."
As the two continued with the diplomatic niceties Aryl's attention wandered
from the conversation. So very odd looking, these lopheenians. Yet despite
their extreme alienness they weren't the least repulsive. That was surprising,
considering how repulsive she found the natives of this planet. But maybe that
was because the people of Earth were not alien looking enough, she thought
suddenly. Maybe the more a species looks like one's own, the more the little
differences stand out. Instead of seeing them as obvious aliens, they look
like failed attempts to be like oneself.
The thought made her strangely uncomfortable. She switched her attention back
to the conversation, hoping she hadn't missed the hidden message her father
was seeking.
"Yes, a Primal sweeps as widely as an Ohmal rage-wind," the lopheenian was
saying. "My journey through this sector to the worlds of the Five Brothers
system has been most diverting. It even provided the unexpected pleasure of
visiting Ineef. A perfect gem of a world, so splendidly crystalline. My stay
there for several of its all-too-brief days allowed me to enjoy its endlessly
varied sights. Although I must admit to remorse at owing this pleasure to the

woeful state of public health on Umurstis. Another plague, it seems,
requiring, of course, the diversion of all interstellar traffic. I heartily
trust it is quelled soon, although I myself am selfishly in its debt."
47
"Ah, an interesting experience, indeed," Rogav said politely. Aryl tried not
to fidget as she stood beside him. They could not, of course, sit, as
lopheenian anatomy made it impossible for their guest to do so. "And the rest
of your journey was uneventful?" the Commander continued.
"Life is never without event, Commander. The little multipedal folk of Krif
III requested an lopheenian mediator for one of their endless swarm-holding
disputes, a simple matter really. Then between there and E'Nti, the ship's
propulsion unit developed something called a 'reactive overlap,' a confusing
technical matter that thankfully could be left to the technicians."
To obey her father, Aryl was straining to follow all of this, but she couldn't
see how any important message could be buried in this travelog. The two moved
to a discussion of the new bardic academy on one of the Five Brothers worlds.
Then the conversation turned to poetry, and Aryl finally tuned out. She'd read
more than enough lopheenian poetry. There were two schools she remembered: the
short, simple works and the long, convoluted, boring ones. She suspected this
lopheenian, were he a poet, would represent the latter.
Finally the conversation moved into concluding formalities, with Aryl still
shifting uncomfortably from one foot to another. All the while the lopheenian
had ignored her presence, showing his appreciation of Tsorian custom in
treating a bond-child as an extension of the adult. Preferable to dealing with
the uncouth local aliens, Aryl thought, since it spared her having to think up
innocuous conversation.
At last, the lopheenian jangled through his farewell dance and swept from the
room. As the door contracted
48
behind him, Aryl dropped into a chair. With a laugh, her father did the same.
"Well, Daughter, did you catch it?"
Aryl tensed up. Quiz time. "A message, you mean?"
"Yes, a jewel buried beneath all that garbage. Come, think back. What did he
say first?"
Desperately she thought back. She'd tuned out the greeting. But then he'd gone
on. "He said something about Primals being like Ohmal rage-winds."
"Ah, very good. You picked that up."
Aryl was startled but tried instead to look sage and thoughtful.
"Yes," he continued happily. "Ohmal rage-winds are notorious for all the
flotsam and jetsam they pick up. So right away he was telling me he had picked
up some information. And did you catch where he'd hidden it?"
Mentally she rummaged around again. "Well, he talked about all those planets,
the quarreling little people with lots of feet, and the pretty crystal world
he was able to gush about because a plague on ... on Umurstis diverted him
there."
"That's it, right there! All that talk was in aid of one sentence. The one
about how he'd been diverted from Umurstis because of one of their outbreaks
of plague."
"Well... eh, don't they have plague? I mean, I thought they did, regularly."
"They do! Very regularly. Every twenty-three to twenty-five Imperial years."
Aryl tried not to look as blank as she felt.
"But you see, the last outbreak was only nineteen and a half years ago, so the
diversion of shipping, no matter what the authorities said, must really have
come from
49
some other cause. And what is there outstanding about Umurstis besides
plagues?"
Aryl shook her head. She'd just exhausted her knowledge of Umurstis.
Rogav answered his own question. "Statrozine. Umurstis is one of the major
galactic centers for mining statro-zine."

Now Aryl brightened. She knew about statrozine. "And Statrozine is an
essential element in the cooling system of Hykzoi warships."
"Right! And it gets better. The closest Hykzoi base to Umurstis where
statrozioe can be refined is Binitrivi, and Binitrivi is right in the heart of
the Qvi-Nars Corridor."
"And that is right in the center of the Hykzoi area where our probes have been
reporting unusual activity!"
"Exactly!" Rogav laughed triumphantly.
Aryl felt as exhausted as if she'd run a race. But her father took no breather
before turning his conclusions into actions. He jabbed at his communication
console.
"Theelk, contact Subcommander Hlon on Mars. He is to immediately take charge
of the Fleet vanguard, while they commence preparations for departure to the
Qvi-Nars Corridor." The Commander paused and a slightly malicious smile spread
over his craggy face. "And notify Governor Oimog that I am immediately
recalling all of our strike ships from occupation duty. She can play petty
dictator on her own, now."
Closing communications, Rogav got up and strode to the transparent wall. He
saluted toward the landing derrick where the lopheenian's ship was already
preparing for departure. "Thank you, Primal Jargaroovun, for your interesting
little monologue. I wish you a continued pleasant trip/'
50
Aryl watched as one tendril of the landing derrick slowly uncoiled upward and
released the opalescent egg that was the lopheenian ship. It hung suspended
for a moment then swiftly rose into the alien blue sky.
Aryl turned and smiled at her father. "Does this mean we'll be leaving here
and going into action soon?"
"Yes, and about time too." He gestured to the rumpled hills, now golden in the
light from the planet's westering sun. "Not that this world is all that bad,
as primitive outposts go. An interesting people too, full of potential— at
least they would be if small-minded political appointees like Oimog could keep
their claws off them.
"But Aryl, you and I aren't bureaucrats, or even diplomats. We're soldiers. We
don't belong on this or any planet. We belong out there." His gesture seemed
to tear at the air and light that hid them from the stars.
Commander Rogav walked back to his desk and threw himself comfortably into a
chair. "But things won't be ready for a while yet. We still have a bit of
waiting in store." He turned thoughtfully toward his communications console.
"Maybe the time has come to take that native woman up on her invitation."
Aryl shrugged and turned back to look at the alien landscape, realizing
suddenly that every landscape she'd see for the rest of her life would
probably be as alien. She tried not to hear her father's conversation with the
native employee.
But still, she couldn't really approve. Understand maybe. Eve of battle and
all. And even if more choices were open to someone of her father's rank, he'd
still probably be attracted to the unconventional.
Still, these creatures were so ... alien. She shrugged again. Well, at least
this invitation, in native fashion,
51
seemed to have been confined to the adults. She doubted if she could take
another moment with that native boy. For days she'd felt guilty because she'd
not been quite as diplomatic as she might have been with him. But all that
really didn't matter now.
A smile crept over her face. In a short while, nothing about this world would
matter. They'd be out where they belonged, among a whole new arrangement of
stars.
52
seven
JASON FORCED HIMSELF NOT TO HURRY. BE COOL, HE TOLD
himself, slow and casual, just like walking home from school on any normal

day. Deliberately he looked at each house and garden as he sauntered past. And
suddenly it struck him. He might not see any of them again.
Year after year, walking home from one school or another, he'd passed these
houses or ones like them. And tomorrow he might be dead. At the very least,
he'd be different. He'd be part of a major revolutionary action, or a major
crime, depending on the point of view. In any case, he'd not be the same
little kid who'd trudged unnoticingly past these gates and flower beds, mind
on homework or on who was bullying whom at school. The thought excited— and
frightened—him. It was like standing on the high-diving board, poised to leap.
Before he realized it, his own house was before him. Quite a nice place
really, in a modest, pseudo-Spanish sort of way. The roof was red tile, the
walls rough stucco, and the doors and windows were arched. In a niche by the
heavy wooden door, St. Francis stood, benignly feeding birds. A wry smile
crept across Jason's face. A very human saint this. A Tsorian saint would
never feed birds.
53
Businesslike again, he walked up the ivy-bordered path and let himself in with
his key. He glanced at the grandfather clock ticking ponderously in the hall.
Two hours before his mother and her guest were due. Plenty of time to get
ready.
First he went around the house, watering plants and filling the automatic
feeders on the fish tanks. His packing had already been done. For days he'd
been slipping a few of his things over to the Morganthalls' house every time
he went to water their plants. The neighbors wouldn't have noticed since he'd
been plant-sitting there for months while the Morganthalls were in Europe. All
he had to do now was get his station here ready, and wait.
Unhooking the little slatted doors, he let them swing shut in front of the
breakfast nook. Like miniature saloon doors, they cut off the built-in table
and its wraparound bench from the rest of the kitchen. Then he set about
gathering quilts and making a nest for himself at the back of the horseshoe
where he could peer out the kitchen window through the half-open slats of the
Venetian blinds.
Jason looked out now. His deliberate calm squeezed away. They were out there,
his fellow conspirators, already in place and waiting. Up until now it had
just been a plan, almost a game. But now people besides himself were acting on
those plans. It was almost five P.M. Carlos Alvarez was parked across the
street, and Jerry Barns and several others would be parked farther up. At a
signal from him . . .
Signal! Jason jumped up, ran into his bedroom, and grabbed the flashlight. He
checked the batteries. Good. Heading back through the kitchen he stopped for a
moment and eyed the chocolate cake his mother had baked for that night.
Regretfully he turned aside and grabbed
54
some cookies and a couple of apples instead. The oven timer had turned on, and
the smell of pot roast was already tantalizing.
Settling into his nest, Jason arranged himself so that if someone of Tsorian
height should casually look over the swinging doors, he'd be hidden by the
overhang of the table. If he were seen, well, then he'd say that he'd meant to
leave for a friend's house earlier but had fallen asleep doing homework. He
had an algebra book there as a prop, but was much too tense to even think of
equations.
Instead he rehearsed their plans again and again, imagining what he'd do in
every possible contingency. He was so absorbed in this that the sudden click
of the front-door key sounded like a gunshot. Fear and excitement exploded
through him, and he scrunched down into the quilt, straining to hear over the
hammering blood in his ears.
"Well, this is it," he heard his mother say in the other room. "A reasonably
typical human home. Must look pretty primitive to you."
To Jason, the harsh Tsorian accent seemed jarringly alien here. "Not primitive
necessarily, but certainly different."

"Yes. Well, have a seat, won't you? That couch is fairly comfortable. What are
your houses like, then? Built along the same lines as your Headquarters?"
"Somewhat. We like open spaces, few angles and confining walls."
"Then this place must feel like a cave to you."
The Tsorian commander laughed. "Ah, but your ancestors used to live in caves,
didn't they? Ours preferred plains and open hilltops."
"Hmm. Then I'm surprised you didn't set up your main headquarters hi Kansas or
someplace like that."
55
"Yes, but we're incorrigibly fond of oceans as well."
There was silence, then a slight tinkling of glass. "What would you like to
drink, Commander Rogav? We don't have any of that blue stuff you served, I'm
afraid."
"Quite all right. That was a synthesized batch. Not very good. I'll have some
of what you call brandy, if you have any. I've enjoyed that before."
Jason tuned out the small talk about drinks. The conspirators had thought
about trying to drug Rogav's drink, but they didn't know enough about Tsorian
physiology. They couldn't risk poisoning him. So they'd fallen back on this
other plan. Just wait until he seemed relaxed and unsuspecting enough, then
burst in and grab him.
But Jason didn't like it. He was supposed to wait at least until the two had
started eating, but he didn't like that at all. He didn't like their using his
mother as bait. He didn't like being the one to decide when to spring the
trap. They ought to have drugged the drink.
In the front room, the conversation had drifted back to homes. "They can tell
you so much about the species that inhabit them," Rogav was saying. "On
Aerulj, family is everything, and their homes are just a cluster of clay pods
that expand with the family. Or look at this place. There are plants
everywhere, sitting on furniture and shelves, hanging from the ceiling. And
most of that wall is given over to fish. It wouldn't occur to a Tsorian to
share his home with such things."
"From which you conclude we are a pack of barbarian savages."
"Not at all." Rogav paused. "Well, actually, some probably would conclude
that. But it's just that your species is among those with a more unitary view
of life, tending to view yourselves as part of a whole. Oh, I know your writ56
ings say you don't do enough of that, but the fact that this bothers you shows
that it is a real value for you. Tsorians in general are more
compartmentalized, more structured and goal oriented. Even arts and philosophy
are very orderly. It all makes for efficient empire building, but we do miss
some of the riches which Imperial contacts could offer."
Jason could hear his mother's voice soften. She should have gone into acting.
She was very convincing. "Obviously you're not like that yourself, Rogav, or
you wouldn't be sitting here making that observation."
Again a gruff Tsorian laugh. "True. But like you, we are diverse. Generalities
stretch a lot."
"So, I'll bet you have a secret room in your home full of hanging plants and
goldfish."
"Not likely!" His chuckle trailed off. "Actually, I don't have a home, except
maybe my cabin aboard the Fleet's flagship. Many Tsorians do adopt a
homeworld, of course, after leaving their nursery planet, but not the
military."
"Umm. I suppose military life is about the same anywhere. A girl in every port
and so forth."
Instantly, Jason wished his mother had not said that. The Tsorian seemed
amused.
"In most of the ports I've been to, you can't even recognize which are the
females—if they have them at all."
"Well, at least you military Tsorians have each other. Your ratio of men and
women seems about equal."

"True, but that doesn't make much difference when you're at the rank I am. I
might as well be isolated on a planet of my own, for all the social contact
I'm permitted—with other Tsorians."
Jason did not like the direction this conversation was taking. Apparently
neither did his mother. She excused
57
herself to go check on how dinner was doing hi the kitchen. Jason half
expected her to nod over the breakfast nook door that he should signal the
others. But she only clattered about with things in the refrigerator for a
moment, then returned to the front room.
This was definitely a dumb plan, Jason decided. There must have been some
other way to lure this guy into a trap. What did they know about Tsorians
anyway? What exactly would this fast-talking Fleet Commander expect from a
"date" with a native female? What would he think she expected?
Jason was half tempted to signal the others now. Instead he sat up and
listened tensely to the renewed conversation.
"You know, Marilyn, our species are really quite similar in more ways than
general physiology." Jason bristled at that presumptuous alien using his
mother's first name.
"Oh, are we?"
"Yes. There's something of a shared spirit. I can see why as a whole you don't
take kindly to being conquered. We wouldn't. And yet you have individuals who
even though they may not like a situation are willing to work within it and
make things better."
"Are you describing yourself, Rogav?"
"Perhaps, but I was intending to describe you. That must be why I find myself
so attracted to you, Marilyn. We're the same type of people, despite the
unimportant differences."
The answer was too soft for Jason to catch. He strained to hear what was going
on in the near silence, all the while blushing at having to do so. This was
awful! He was deliberately eavesdropping on his mother and a date on the
couch. But the thought of what might be happening in
58
there was worse. He couldn't bear thinking of that alien even touching his
mother. Plan or no plan ...
Jason grabbed the flashlight from the table and desperately began flashing the
beam on and off through the Venetian blinds. In a moment he saw an answering
flash, and several dark figures flitted across the dusk-dimmed street. Jason
held his breath, not wanting to hear or think. Suddenly the silence in the
next room was broken by the crash of the front door bursting open.
"All right, Tsorian," Jerry's voice boomed. "Get your filthy claws off that
woman or I'll slaughter you right now!"
A rustling silence. "That's better. Now, put all the little gadgets on your
belt down on that table—carefully—no tricks. I don't want to ruin Marilyn's
lovely carpet by splattering your miserable purple blood all over it."
By now Jason was at the kitchen door taking in the scene. Incongruously it
reminded him of a second-rate gangster show. Jerry Barns, standing bearded and
belligerent in the open doorway, was certainly playing up to the part. His
big, ugly pistol was aimed squarely at Rogav. On one side stood Carlos Alvarez
and on the other a fellow named Bill. The latter cautiously moved to gather up
the items Rogav had just placed on the coffee table.
Jason looked at his mother as she walked to the far wall, self-consciously
straightening her hah1. She glanced briefly at Jason, then looked away, her
expression tense and unhappy.
If that monster's hurt her, Jason thought, just forget about the ransom, I'll
beat him to a pulp.
Carlos stepped in swiftly and tied Rogav's hands behind his back, while Jerry
gave Jason's mother a mock salute.
59
"Good job, Marilyn. Above and beyond the call of duty. We'll take him off your

hands now."
Jason was confused by the look of anger she shot Jerry in return. Well, she
had a right to be angry, having been put through that. Then he saw the
Tsorian's expression as he looked at Marilyn. A look of naked pain and shock.
In moments, Rogav's face hardened and he turned to address Jerry. "You are
putting yourself and others in great jeopardy with this action. I advise you
to cease it immediately."
"Well, I suppose you do. But let me tell you, buddy, the only one who's in
jeopardy around here is you. There's a van parked outside. You're going to
walk with us and get into the back of the van. And do it quietly. Your
stinking purple blood wouldn't look any better on Marilyn's flower beds than
it would on her rug."
His mother brushed past Jason as she hurried through the kitchen door. There'd
been tears on her face. Worried, he returned to the kitchen and walked to
where she was leaning against the sink.
"Mother, are you all right?"
"Yes, it's just that I didn't know that it would hurt so much."
"Did he hurt-"
"No! Not him. It's what / did. What I had to do. I just didn't realize ...
Never mind. We're in this too deep now to look back. You go with the others in
the van. I'll drive our car and meet you at the warehouse." Without even
grabbing a coat, she hurried out the back door.
Frowning, Jason returned to the other room in time to see the three men
bustling their captive out the front door. The big gun was pressed into the
folds of the Tsorian's
60
green-lined cape. In the streetlight glow, Jason could make out a gray van
with someone seated behind the wheel.
He closed the door behind him and, with a sudden sense of finality, locked it.
Don't even try to think about the future, he told himself as he hurried down
the flagstone path. The present was more than enough.
Jason reached the van just as Jerry shoved their prisoner inside. Rogav landed
heavily on his side, but despite having his arms bound behind him, he quickly
rolled over and sat up.
"Don't try any fancy escapes," Jerry warned him. "Despite what I said in
there, I'd love an excuse to kill you."
Jerry and Carlos climbed into the van, gesturing for Jason to join them. Bill
slammed the door shut and went to join the other person in the cab. Moments
later they were rumbling down the street, the three humans seated near the
door on the jolting floor of the van, the Tsorian crouched against the metal
wall at the front. Jason could read only cold disdain in his expression now.
"You realize, of course," Rogav said, "that this is an extremely foolish act;
the retaliation will be horrendous. But it is still not too late. If you
release me, retribution can be kept to the minimum."
"Shut up, Tsorian," Jerry growled. "You're not in charge here. We are."
'There is no way you can benefit from this."
"Don't give us that, freak! We know all about you and what you're supposedly
worth. Inside information, remember?" The look that flashed across Rogav's
face made Jason wish he were somewhere else.
After long minutes of tense silence, the van came to a halt and the back door
was flung open. Jason gratefully stepped out into the cold. The parking lot
was just begin61
ning to lose itself in fog. Behind the warehouse there were a far greater
number of cars than he'd seen there before.
He followed the others as they hustled their captive through the back door and
down the maze of bleak corridors and stairways to the same windowless room he
had been in before. The chairs and table had been pushed back, and the room
was crowded with people, most of whom Jason had never seen. His mother stood a
little apart from the rest, looking pale and strained.

The muttered conversation in the room died as Rogav was led in. Jason perked
up a little at the looks of admiration that the crowd gave them all—the daring
group that had pulled off the capture.
Beardsley beamed. "Well, the conquering heroes return. And with the prize
properly bound and humbled, I see."
The look Rogav raked them with seemed anything but humble. "This action is a
very serious mistake on your part. You will reap nothing but extensive
retaliation for it."
"We have reason to believe otherwise, Tsorian," Beardsley said confidently.
"They won't risk retaliating and forcing us to kill you, because of your
stupid little space wars. They'll want you back, and we intend to squeeze all
that we can out of it."
"What happens if they don't want him back?" someone from the crowd asked.
"Then we'll have the great pleasure of killing him. But it is on the
assumption that this will not happen that you're all here this evening. You've
all lost a lot and risked a lot with the Resistance over the years. And not
all of the people you've been fighting for have appreciated you nearly enough.
The least you deserve is a chance to see one of these beasts at our mercy for
once."
62
Rogav's icy glare swept over the crowd again, stopped briefly at one figure,
then moved on. "I'm afraid your understanding of our people is somewhat
incomplete. True, as an individual, I am of some value to the Empire. But
Tsorian policy never places the worth of one individual above the needs of the
whole."
A short, stocky man stepped out of the crowd, his face contorted with barely
suppressed rage. "That's right. Individuals never have counted for much with
you people, have they? Like when you made an example of Resisters in San Jose
by wiping out whole city blocks. My wife and daughter were shopping there.
Just a couple of the unimportant individuals you dealt with."
Rogav looked at the man. "True, many of those deaths were regrettable—"
"Regrettable? Oh, I'll give you regrettable!" In one move the man lunged
forward and brought an empty bottle down on the side of Rogav's face. The
Tsorian staggered, and with a groan he sank to his knees.
In the stunned silence, the only sound was the dripping of blood, alien purple
blood, onto the concrete floor.
Suddenly, with animal growls, several others crowded forward and began kicking
and hitting their fallen enemy. Years of pent-up hatred were released. At
last, one of their omnipotent conquerors would bleed and suffer.
The room erupted in pandemonium. Everyone yelling and shouting and jostling
forward, some trying to join the attackers, others trying to stop them. Jason
glimpsed his mother forcing her way through.
"No!" she cried. "You can't! We need him!" She and Professor Ackerman threw
themselves in front of the attackers, trying to ward off the blows.
Jason wanted to kick and smash as well. But his mother
63
was there, and probably right, trying to save the creep. He had to help.
Jason jumped in, pulling people away, yelling for them to stop. Eventually the
frenzy died into awkward silence. The only sounds were the faint groans from
the creature on the floor.
Marilyn was kneeling beside him, his bleeding head in her lap. Jason reached
out and clasped her hand, then pulled back. His own hand was now smeared with
dark purple blood.
64
1
8
h
t
WITHOUT SEEING A THING, ARYL STOOD STARING THROUGH the transparent wall. She
was concentrating on remaining calm and in control, as was expected of anyone
of command rank. As long as her bond-parent lived, she would continue to share
his rank. As long as he lived! She shuddered, then struggled to clamp down on

her thoughts. Think only about staying calm.
She felt a touch on her shoulder and spun around to see First Adjutant Theelk
smiling wanly at her. Poor Theelk, he was very attached to her father too.
They all were. Well, almost all.
Theelk gestured toward the room where they were to meet, a meeting that her
rank entitled her to attend. The others gave her encouraging smiles along with
their salutes. She could feel it thick in the room. They too wanted her father
back.
Quickly the senior Tsorian officers filed in and took up seats around the
central desk, Governor Oimog Vak's desk. Aryl studied the Governor and noticed
that her blank look of importance couldn't quite conceal a glint of triumph.
If there was one person in this comer of the universe who hated Rogav Jy and
who would like to see
65
him stay a captive, or worse, it was Governor Oimog. And that same person was
now chief Tsorian official on the scene.
"As you know," the Governor said, suddenly quelling the room into silence, "it
has been two days now since Fleet Commander Rogav Jy was reported missing.
Naturally we have all been very active since then, and it is time for another
briefing to pool what we have learned. Could we begin with a report from the
chief of security?"
The stocky security chief stood up and gruffly cleared his throat. "As you
know, Commander Rogav was last seen in the company of a native employee
named... eh, Marilyn Sikes. The two departed the Headquarters in the native's
ground car, and we understand"—the man glanced briefly at Aryl, then
away—"that the Commander intended to dine at the native's home. Upon receipt
of this information we proceeded immediately to that dwelling. A meal had
apparently been prepared in the cooking area but was never served nor eaten.
We could confirm, however, that the Fleet Commander had been there and
consumed part of a drink."
There were whispers in the crowd, but the security chief raised his voice
slightly and continued. "Let me emphasize that there was no indication of any
drugs or poison in the drink. The neighbors were questioned, of course, but
gave no information other than the fact that an unfamiliar gray van had parked
in front of the Sikes residence during the evening."
"These natives are naturally uncooperative," the Governor commented. "I'll see
to it that they pay adequately once this matter is settled. Though, of course,
we dare not move against that neighborhood until the Commander's
66
location is determined. Now, have we any report from the Intelligence
Department?"
The intelligence chief stood, nervously running a claw along the bridge of her
nose. "Sir, as you know, our intelligence network among the natives is very
rudimentary."
"I am fully aware of your opinions, Glyr, regarding the administration of this
occupation and its intelligence gathering. Please confine yourself to the
report."
The intelligence officer lowered her eyes. "Yes, Governor. We examined all the
information we could on the native employee Marilyn Sikes, but could find no
clear indication of any involvement in Resister activities, though reportedly
there are several Resister cells operating in the East Bay area. We are
following all leads, and I expect another report momentarily."
Oimog dismissed the intelligence chief with a curt nod and turned to another
officer. "Anything further on the Resisters' demands?"
An elderly Tsorian rose to his feet. "The demands seem to have been
transmitted from a vehicle-based radio to several native radio stations where
they were broadcast as news. You are all no doubt aware of them by now. In
essence they offer to return the Fleet Commander in exchange for our
abandoning occupation of this planet."
"A patently absurd suggestion," Governor Oimog said blandly.

Aryl's claws tightened into a painful fist, but she tried to look cool and
impassive. Beside her, she felt Theelk stir uneasily.
"Governor," he asked, "has Imperial Command been informed of the situation?"
"They will be informed through normal reporting channels, but there is no need
for any emergency communica67
tion. As governor of this Occupied Planet, I am now in command here, and this
has become an internal occupation matter and not a military concern."
Aryl felt like breaking all propriety and shrieking her protest. The others in
the room shifted uneasily, and finally the Fleet Engineer spoke up.
"Governor, with all respect, I should point out that the abduction of a
fleet's commanding officer just prior to an anticipated attack is legitimately
a military concern."
Oimog smiled grimly. "If you consult the regulations, Seg, you will see that
in this circumstance it is not. I understand your personal concern, of course.
We all admire Commander Rogav." She gave Aryl a smile sweet enough to turn her
stomach. "But we cannot let the future of this occupation be jeopardized by
emotionalism or by the irresponsible actions of a single fleet officer, no
matter how respected."
The murmuring protests were cut short by the sudden entry of an aide who
walked swiftly to the chief of intelligence and whispered something in her
ear. The officer studied an information printout for a moment, then cleared
her throat.
"If I may interrupt, it appears that one of our efforts has produced some
information."
In the waiting silence, she continued, "We have discovered the location where
Commander Rogav was taken, probably shortly after the abduction. A gray van,
matching the description of the one in front of the Sikes residence, was found
behind a deserted warehouse in the same city. Analysis shows that a Tsorian,
probably the Commander, was recently carried in it."
The officer looked briefly at Aryl, then lowered her eyes. "In a basement room
in this warehouse, there had clearly
68
been a recent gathering of natives. And an area of the floor was stained with
Tsorian blood."
Aryl felt her body squeeze in on itself. Beside her, Theelk briefly touched
her arm and said, "And the blood was analyzed?"
"Of course. It was the Commander's. But I hasten to point out that the
quantity of blood was not large enough in itself to suggest a fatal wound."
Dizzily Aryl listened to Oimog's reply. "But it does, however, suggest that we
would be ill-advised even to consider negotiating with these barbarians. We
cannot trust that we would recover the Commander unharmed or even alive were
we to accept their demands."
"Wait a moment, though," Fleet Engineer Seg protested. "If we accept the
demands and the natives do not live up to their part of the bargain by
returning the Commander in a fit condition, then we need not live up to our
part either."
The Governor stood up and glared around the room. "Perhaps, out of deference
to everyone's sensibilities, I have not made myself clear. We will not bargain
with these hoodlums! If Tsorian occupation forces around the galaxy gave in to
every whining demand or act of terrorism, we would never have an empire.
Maintaining Imperial honor and policy may, at times, be unpopular and even
painful, but I intend to see that it is done."
Engineer Seg was on his feet now too. "But the military situation—"
"—is well in hand," Oimog concluded for him. "Sub-commander Hlon is already on
his way to the Qvi-Nars Corridor with the Fleet vanguard. That is as it should
be, following the order of command and proper procedure. And if we have due
confidence in the ability of our mili69
tary, there should be no further questions. Your absurd faith in the abilities

of one undisciplined, renegade officer borders on the superstitious. I will
not let it undermine the success of my Occupation."
"Then you intend to leave Commander Rogav in the hands of these Resisters?"
Theelk blurted out.
"We will continue our efforts to locate and free him, of course. But I have no
intention of negotiating with terrorists."
Aryl glanced nervously at Theelk, then steeled herself to speak up. "But
Governor Oimog, surely that is the same as condemning my father to death."
The Governor lavished a cloying look of sympathy on Aryl. "We have no
guarantee that he is alive even as it is. But rest assured, I will not
actually reject their offer; I will simply refuse to respond to it. Our
silence may force them to lower their demands until eventually they propose
something we can accept.
"Now," the Governor continued as she gazed sternly around the room, "we have
spent more than enough time on this vexing matter. Let us return to our
duties. I will call you again if there are further developments."
Aryl stalked out of the room, trying to ignore even the sympathy of the
others. She was so angry, she wasn't sure she could trust herself to speak to
anyone. She wasn't even sure who made her the most angry: the fanatic,
deceitful natives, or the arrogant, small-minded Governor. They deserved each
other. If only her father and the fleet had never come near this place.
The thought of her father blurred her vision, and she was startled at suddenly
feeling a hand on her arm.
She turned to see Theelk standing beside her. Tall and slim with slick black
hair, he was quite a contrast to her
70
father's confident sturdiness, and as a stickler for propriety he'd seemed
perpetually pained by the Commander's un-conventionality. Yet he was Rogav's
adjutant, and Aryl knew he was deeply devoted to him.
"Don't let Oimog's needling get to you, Aryl. Your father is almost certainly
still alive. If he weren't, the Resisters would not be attempting to bargain."
Aryl managed a smile. "Thank you, Theelk. I just can't help feeling that Oimog
is enjoying this situation immensely."
"She is, which shows what a petty, vindictive mind she has. It seems that your
father made a far more dangerous enemy in her than he realized. And I'm afraid
this waiting game of hers could be far more dangerous than she realizes. While
we're waiting for our silence to unnerve the Resisters, the Hykzoi attack is
almost certainly drawing nearer. Which all goes to show the weakness of using
political rather than military appointees in situations like this. Oimog's
grasp of strategy is bureaucratic. She sees no reason why the next in command
can't perform in a perfectly interchangeable way. Of course, Subcommander Hlon
is a very well-meaning fellow, but he has nowhere near the military experience
or intuition that your father has. And with the forces assigned here being
already inadequate ..."
"I know," Aryl said dejectedly, leaning against the smooth transparent wall.
"Not only was my father quite convinced that a Hykzoi attack is coining, he
was very worried about the outcome."
"Well, you needn't take that worry on yourself. You have quite enough as it
is. And rest assured, Glyr and I will see that Oimog's people really do keep
up the search for the Commander. We all need him back."
71
Aryl nodded, dismissed the First Adjutant, then turned to the alien landscape
spread below her. Hateful barbarian world. It was not only costing her her
father, it might cost the Empire this entire sector of the galaxy. Angrily she
flexed her claws. She had a violent urge to be as primitive as they, to grab
some native and tear it to shreds.
With a scowl Jason grabbed the TV remote control and jabbed the off button.
The smiling sports announcer shimmered into grayness. The evening news had
told him about the upcoming primary elections, the death of a famous actor
he'd never heard of, financial problems in Italy, and miners caught in a

cave-in. Then it had gone on to weather and sports. Absolutely nothing about
the Tsorian abduction.
There had been coverage that first day, of course, when the Resisters had
contacted the radio stations and all the media had run with the story. Then
the Tsorian authorities had cracked down, and there had been no further
coverage. The one station that had defied the ban had had its transmitter
melted, along with its broadcasting studio and staff.
So here he was, Jason thought bitterly, as much in the dark as anyone else.
Well, almost. He did know they were holding the hostage at Uncle Carl's cabin
on Lake Tahoe. But a lot of good that did him if he himself was hiding safe
and sound in the Morganthalls' house some two hundred miles away. That had
been the price his mother had extracted for allowing him to be in on the
actual abduction, being kept out of the rest. She was worried about the danger
if the Tsorians should track them down. Still, danger or not, that's where the
action was, and that's where he ought to be.
72
Of course, the Tsorians had swarmed about his own house a couple of blocks
from here right after the abduction. They'd probably even visited his school
to ask about him. At least that had surely boosted his prestige there, but he
dared not go back and enjoy it. He had to stay in hiding, riving off food he'd
stockpiled, only venturing out after dark, and then just for a walk down to
Indian Rock to get some air.
He hadn't even heard from his mother or the others since they'd patched up
their battered captive and a group of five had set off with him for the
mountains in a second van.
Then suddenly Jason had been on his own. He'd felt rather like a professional
spy, attaching the phony license plate to his mother's car and giving part of
it a quick spray-on paint job. But the drive back to the Morganthalls' house
had not been as grand as he'd expected. He'd only just gotten his learner's
permit and was so nervous about making a mistake and getting hauled in by the
police that he'd failed to enjoy the freedom of it all.
Now that had been almost two weeks ago, and since then nothing had happened,
not even a telephone call. He was left with reading, watching TV, and
rerunning that night over and over again in his mind.
His mother had been awfully upset after the Tsorian was attacked. Rogav had
finally regained consciousness though, and they'd managed to stop most of the
bleeding, but he seemed to be in a lot of pain, as if he'd had some ribs
broken—if Tsorians had ribs. And he coughed a lot.
Before leaving in the other van, his mother had taken Jason aside and tried to
give him instructions, but halfway through she'd broken into tears and gone on
about how she felt like a louse. Rogav had trusted her and even liked
73
her and she'd betrayed him, and now he was hurt and maybe would die, and she
had led him to it like a Judas goat.
Then Jason had really blown up, yelling that it was her people who mattered,
not that arrogant alien, and if she went soft over him, she'd be betraying
them. She ought to be proud of what she'd done, not whine about it.
Instead of yelling back at him, she just looked as if he'd slapped her or
something, then turned and joined the others at the van. She'd driven off
without Jason's getting to speak to her again. Two weeks, and he hadn't even
been able to say he was sorry.
It hadn't been her fault, all that nonsense she'd babbled. She'd had to
shoulder so much of this on her own. All those years working among the
Tsorians could drive anyone to a breakdown, even someone as committed as his
mom.
No, if there was any fault here, he decided firmly, it was with the Tsorians.
They'd been the ones to force themselves on this world, meddle in its affairs,
and divide its people against themselves. The sooner they were driven out, the
better. And if it took deception, battery, and even killing a Tsorian leader
to do it, then all right, he thought defiantly, he was proud to be part of it.

He smashed a fist into the couch as if it were the whole Tsorian race.
74
nine
WITH A SCREAM, THE SEA GULL DOVE AT SOMETHING IN THE
water, then swooped up, a glint of silver squirming in its beak. Other birds
chased after it, crying raucous demands.
Aryl watched, disgusted, but glad to fill her mind with something besides the
anxiety of the last few weeks. She could, of course, go up to her quarters and
study, but everything she was studying made her think of her father. She felt
as if a part of her had been torn away and would keep on bleeding forever.
She turned from the loathsome birds and watched this world's bland yellow sun
rise above the distant hills. Something seemed to move through the glare, and
she shifted her gaze to see Theelk hurrying toward her.
"Aryl," he said, saluting as he approached, then running a claw nervously
through his lank black hair. "There's news of sorts, but it's not good."
Aryl stiffened, but Theelk hastily added, "No, not about your father. Nothing
there, except the Resisters issuing another reduced set of ransom demands. I
doubt they'll ever be reduced enough for Oimog. But she called a meeting. It
just let out."
"And I wasn't invited," Aryl said flatly.
75
Uncomfortably, Theelk looked away. "We mentioned this, of course, but in her
own mind she's convinced that your father is as good as dead, so she is
considering you to be rankless and unbonded."
It was Aryl's turn to look away. That hurt like a double blow. Rankless and
unbonded, a sorry fate for any Tsorian. But to have known such a bonding, with
such a fine person as Rogav Jy, and then to have lost it... But no. That was
not so! Not yet. She wouldn't let it be!
Angrily she turned back to Theelk. "And so what did this gloating Governor of
ours say at her meeting?"
"She gave us a military update. It's bad. The Hykzoi attack must have been
launched at nearly the same time our vanguard was dispatched. Subcommander
Hlon and his forces were overwhelmed hi the Qvi-Nars Corridor. Apparently the
Hykzoi fleet is far more massive than anyone expected—except perhaps your
father. Reports are very sketchy, but it seems our remaining vanguard ships
are retreating here with a hoard of Hykzoi right after them. The body of the
fleet is assembling near the Mars base. All ships attached to our base here
are being deployed into orbit to protect our holdings on Earth. And the
Governor has ordered all nonessential occupation personnel on this planet
evacuated to Mars. At least she can recognize reality when it stares her in
the face."
Grimly Aryl glanced at the derricks and could see they were already preparing
for a massive launch. "And Oimog won't consider trading for my father even
now?"
"She considers reliance on him to be illogical and, at the moment, irrelevant.
Even some of his strongest supporters are admitting that it might be too late
for even Rogav to make a difference."
Aryl nodded. "Yes, maybe so. But surely it's worth the
76
try. There's so much to lose. Have... have there been any indirect efforts to
contact the Resisters?"
Theelk looked down. "There's been talk of it, but you know how we Tsorians are
about defying direct orders. It probably wouldn't do any good anyway. The
Resisters are as stubborn and narrow-minded as Oimog."
"But they're as much at risk as we are if withholding our Commander loses this
battle for us."
"True, but even if we could reach them outside of channels, we could never get
them to believe that."
Maybe not, Aryl thought, as she watched the first of their blue triangles
uncoiling from the derrick, but someone ought to try.

Theelk excused himself and hurried off about his duties. Aryl was about to do
the same when the full impact of what he had said hit her. If it was
officially accepted that her father was dead, then she had no duties.
Eventually she'd be reassigned, shunted off to some rankless career. But for
now she was simply useless.
Her shock slid into anger, then slowly hardened into resolution. All right, if
the system was rejecting her, she'd just move outside it. Other duties still
held her, even beyond her former rank.
Before doubt could slow her down, Aryl hurried to her quarters, snapped a
hand-held blaster onto her belt, then headed back to the lift tubes. She rode
one to the bottom floor and took the exit for the native parking lot. Striding
between parked cars, she ignored the startled native employees arriving for
work. The shuttle bus had just pulled in. Aryl stood aside until the native
workers had aU filed out, then climbed in and asked the surprised driver if he
was returning to the nearest native town.
"Yes, eh ... miss, yes, I am," he stammered. This was
77
the first Tsorian he'd seen close up and certainly the first he'd had on his
bus. "I'll be returning to Sausalito to pick up another batch of employees."
"Good, then I'll ride with you." She shook a strand of pale hair out of her
eyes and took a seat halfway back.
Nervously the driver started up the engine and got underway, not daring to ask
her for the fare.
Aryl stared out the smudgy window at the scenery jouncing by. She'd been out
of Headquarters before, but always with her father and always in a
smooth-riding Tsorian ground/air car, nothing like this bone-jarring native
bus. And always before they'd gone into the big native town of San Francisco.
She wasn't exactly sure where this Sausalito was or how to get from there to
where she was going. A venture with this many unknowns certainly wasn't one
she would have chosen—if there had really been any choice.
The bus shuddered to a halt, and Aryl's attention snapped back as the driver
hurriedly opened the door and said, "This is where you get out, miss." The
natives about to board stepped quickly aside as she climbed down. She kept her
eyes straight forward but could feel their startled stares. They'd probably
noticed her green cape. Should she discard it? Would it make her a target for
violence? No, she was obviously armed, with the silvery blaster gleaming
prominently at her hip. And somehow the green cape made her feel closer to her
father.
People on the sidewalk kept staring at her until she took to staring back at
them. Then they hurriedly looked away. Finally she decided just to ignore them
and turn attention to her surroundings.
On her right, the sidewalk bordered a bank of rough white stones that sloped
steeply down to the waters of the
78
bay. Waves sloshed against the stones and steadily rocked the boats moored to
jutting piers. The air smelled strongly of salt and decaying life, the pungent
alien odor of this world's seas.
Wrinkling her nose, Aryl looked across the street to where odd angular
buildings crowded hi beside each other. They were such a variety of colors,
styles, and materials, it almost hurt her eyes to look at them. Obviously
simplicity was not something these people prized.
She noticed one sign in a particular shop window, and waiting for a break in
the ground-car traffic, she dashed across for a better look.
TSORIAN SOUVENIRS, the sign proclaimed. ITEMS EXCLUSIVE TO SAUSALITO, HOME OF
THE SPACE PEOPLE. Incredulous, Aryl studied the little Tsorian figures in
plastic and metal and wood; the model Tsorian towers; and all the shirts,
banners, plates, and other unidentifiable items adorned with pictures of the
same. Cheap, tawdry stuff. These unscrupulous natives were turning her people
into a tourist attraction! Exploiting them for financial gain!
Indignation surged through her and nearly brought her fist through the shop

window. But at the sight of a little green-caped figure, she thought of her
father. What would he say at this outrage? To be honest, he'd probably laugh,
and say the natives might as well get some benefit out of the Tsorians'
presence.
Well, if she worked on it, maybe she could come to see it the same way. Though
she couldn't manage the laugh. Instead, she glared at the shopkeeper, staring
nervously out of his window, and turned away.
Anyway, she thought, she wasn't here to sightsee. As far as she could figure
out from what she knew of the area, she had to get across the bay to the town
of Berkeley. Her
79
knowledge of written English was pretty good, thanks to her father's
insistence, but she couldn't see any sign mentioning Berkeley. This wasn't for
want of signs, though. The place bristled with them, telling her where not to
park, how fast to drive, and where she could do everything from eating to
having her hair redone. What an odd idea. Aryl shook her head in bewilderment.
Obviously she'd have to ask a native. Scanning the crowds, she finally picked
out a dark-skinned native who seemed to be wearing some sort of uniform. She
hesitated a moment, then strode toward him, deciding she wouldn't get anywhere
if she acted as timid as she felt. After all, she was one of this planet's
conquerors—even if she'd never been alone on an alien planet in her life.
"Sir, I need to know what transport to take to the town of Berkeley."
The man had watched her approach warily, hand resting nervously on the weapon
at his belt. But eyeing her blaster, he quickly slid his hand away, using it
to punctuate a complicated description of bus stops, transfers, and long
delays. When Aryl complained, he suggested she try something called a taxi and
pointed to some passing ones before hurrying away.
Anxiously Aryl watched the traffic and studied the method natives used to
attract the services of these vehicles. Awfully primitive, dangerous too. But
finally she worked up courage enough to step from the curb as one passed and
yell, "Taxi!"
The first two sped by, though she was sure they carried no other passengers,
but finally one pulled to the curb and the driver looked at her skeptically.
"Could your taxi take me to the town of Berkeley, driver?"
80
"It could if you have the fare."
That left her stunned. "But I ... I haven't got any of your currency."
"Then you haven't got a ride to Berkeley either."
The arrogant fool, Aryl thought. Clearly he had no idea of the significance of
a green cape. That gave her an idea. "Wait!" she called as he started to pull
back into traffic. "Wait. I have no native money, but I can give you a Tsorian
souvenir much better than that tawdry stuff in the shops. An authentic Tsorian
cape, command rank." She reached up, unfastened it from her shoulders, and
swirled it over to him.
"Hmm," the driver said. "Yeah, my son'd like this. 'Be the first kid on your
block to have a real space cape.' Hah! Okay, get in."
The vehicle was smelly and uncomfortable, but at least she was on her way. She
regretted the loss of her cape, but if this scheme didn't work, it wouldn't
matter anyway. A lot wouldn't matter.
She was gambling everything on one scrap of conversation and on the knowledge
of these natives her father had drummed into her. But even this brief
excursion on her own was showing how inadequate that knowledge was. Still, she
did know that among natives there was one important distinction that was
almost meaningless to Tsori-ans. Age.
This Marilyn Sikes person, having been central to the abduction and being
probably the native most familiar with Tsorians, was now almost certainly
wherever Rogav was being held. But she also had a son. Were they Tsorians, it
would automatically be assumed that he would be with his parent. But these
natives had a peculiar attitude toward such things. If danger were involved,
no matter

81
how important the activity, the parent would try to separate the child from
it. So, if Marilyn Sikes were with Rogav, Jason Sikes almost certainly was
not.
From that point on, Aryl realized, her deductions were a bit shakier. Natives
would probably assume that having him stay with extended family (another
important native relationship) would be too obvious. Yet they also seemed to
have a particular attachment for geographic location. So while he would
certainly not risk going back to his own home (people being primitive did not
mean they were stupid), he might still be in the same neighborhood.
The taxi driver looked over his shoulder, interrupting Aryl's thoughts. "We're
coming up on Berkeley now. Just where do you want to go?"
Frowning, Aryl tried to recall the maps they'd studied during the briefings
about the abduction. "Eh ... there's a long straight street, fairly steep, I
think, that runs east-west. At its foot, it forms a circle. Do you know it?"
"Sounds like Marin."
"Let me off at that circle."
The driver nodded, and before long he had pulled up to a curb. "Hope you have
enough spare clothing to get back," he quipped as he drove away.
That remark had probably been rude, but she ignored it. Getting back was the
least of her worries. She looked around in bewilderment. Even more plants than
in San Francisco. All shapes, all colors, they nearly buried the houses. She
tried to concentrate instead on the streets.
A number of streets, each with its name sign, jutted out at odd angles from
the circle. From the map, she remembered the pattern better than the
unpronounceable names. Finally, she decided on one, and still missing the
weight of
82
the cape on her shoulders, Aryl began trudging purposefully along it, trying
not to show the tension she felt.
She shouldn't really be in any danger. The policy of massive retaliation,
wiping out several surrounding blocks for harming a Tsorian, had discouraged
many attacks. And without her cape, the blaster was even more visible on her
belt. Still, she found this a very nerve-racking walk.
It was midmorning now, and there were not many natives about; those who saw
her simply stared. She couldn't tell if these were stares of hatred or
curiosity. She didn't care.
As she passed one flower-bordered garden, what appeared to be a very young
female was playing in the grass. It looked up and trilled, "Hi! You're a
purple space person, aren't you? I like your hair. It looks like my grandma's.
It's funny."
Aryl was trying to think what to reply when an adult female came rushing from
the house and whisked the giggling girl away. Frowning, Aryl continued up the
street. The color wasn't purple anyway, it was maroon.
Still, that was the first native who hadn't looked as if it feared or hated
her. It was probably too young to have learned that yet.
83
ten
AFTER ANOTHER LONG, BORING DAY IT WAS FINALLY GET-ting dark. At last it ought
to be safe to go out. Jason felt like some sort of skulking vampire, cowering
indoors by day and only venturing forth at night.
It had been such wonderful weather too, taunting him from outside the drawn
curtains. And soon school would be out, the school he hadn't been to in weeks.
His schoolmates, including those supposed Resisters he'd been so anxious to
impress, they'd all start enjoying summer just as if some history-shaking
event weren't taking place,
And maybe it wasn't. Maybe his fellows hiding out in the mountains would get
tired of being ignored and just kill the Tsorian. Then probably someplace or
other would get blown up in retaliation, and everything would be back to
normal. And he'd have missed out on just about all of it. Some heroic

adventure.
Pulling his jacket collar up and his hat way down, Jason slipped out the
basement door, quietly locking it behind him. Dusk was fairly deep now; all of
the neighborhood kids had been called hi from play. Behind the warmly lighted
windows, families were having dinner, or kids were doing homework—or more
likely watching TV. He could
84
see the cool flickering glow behind several windows. Someone was practicing
the piano, Kara Weisner probably. She was getting pretty good. Jason felt like
a ghost, slipping by unobserved, watching the world of the living.
Ahead loomed the dark bulk of Indian Rock. A comforting friend, always there
to put things into the right scale. Not for the first time, he wished he
hadn't mentioned the Rock to that awful alien girl, even if it had been meant
to shock her. It was something too fine, too Earthly, for one of them even to
hear about. Still, he suspected the Rock was strong enough to withstand even
that besmirching.
Tonight Jason made his way to the hidden cave in the back, the hideout where
he and Ken and Todd had been Robin Hood's outlaws or powerful wizards brewing
up spells to defeat the Lords of Dark.
By the well-remembered route, he threaded his way up to the tent-shaped cave,
then settled down among the tumbled rocks in front. Their rough surfaces gave
back the last of the day's warmth. Looking over the roofs and backyards of the
houses down the slope, he could see the darkening bay and the sky, its edge
still holding a last tinge of pink. Doves called into the soft evening air,
and traffic rumbled distantly. In the coolness around him hung the tangy smell
of laurel and eucalyptus, and a faint trickle of honeysuckle.
Somehow it was easier to think here. But really, he had already made up his
mind. If he didn't hear from anyone soon, say two days, he'd get into his
mother's car and drive up to Uncle Carl's place. He hadn't done it earlier for
fear that the Tsorians might have found him out and been waiting for a chance
to follow him.
But he'd seen no indication of anything like that, and he
S5
was getting dreadfully anxious about what was going on in that cabin. He
definitely didn't like his mother being shut up with that alien even if there
were others there to keep an eye on him. Of course, the Tsorian probably had
been too battered to cause much trouble, but his mother had seemed to be
getting a little soft on the guy. Not that he was really all that bad for a
Tsorian, but... No, Tsorians were bad, and that was that. He simply didn't
want his mother to have to deal with them anymore.
The only drawback to his plan was that he really wasn't sure about driving the
car. He'd only gone out with his mom a few times after getting his learner's
permit. He'd been scheduled to take driving classes, but that was out now, of
course. Still, it oughtn't to be too tough. Not if he didn't try it on a
weekend.
A dry trickling of pebbles behind him. Quickly he looked around. The cave was
dark and quiet. No, there was something there, darker than dark. Slowly it was
moving down from the upper cave, way in the back. Wild animals! He'd always
imagined they lurked here at night. But this was big.
"Jason Sikes," a voice said from the darkness, "is that you?"
The voice was chillingly accented. He stood up. "Who's there?"
A figure stepped out into the dusky light. Fear rippled through him, and he
turned to run.
"Don't!" the Tsorian voice commanded, but Jason was already pelting like a
goat down the rocky draw.
Suddenly the air flared blue in front of him. When he could see again, the
rocks and bushes that had been there were only smoking ash. In shock he turned
around. Light
from a distant streetlight glinted in Aryl's black eyes and on the silvery
weapon in her hand.

"You must not run off. I need to talk with you."
"Just because you thugs have found me, doesn't mean I'll tell you anything or
lead you anywhere." Jason was surprised at how little his voice was quavering.
"Go ahead, call the others and haul me away if you want. It won't do you any
good."
"Stop chattering, and come back up here and sit down. It's I who have to talk
to you, and there aren't any others."
"Sure. You came here by yourself for a friendly personal chat." He tried to
sound jaunty and defiant, but all the same he walked up and sat down where she
pointed. It helped hide the fact that his legs were shaking. There was nothing
left of those bushes but blowing ash.
"I've come to tell you that your people must release my father."
"Ho hum."
"Do not make fun! You have no idea, you myopic troublemakers, what a disaster
you are causing."
"So, comply with our demands and the disaster is over."
"No, that's what I am trying to tell you, you thickheaded barbarian! We cannot
comply with those demands. We have no power to."
"Then get the power."
"Idiot! You've jumped into a political situation you don't understand in the
least, and now you've made a mess of everything."
"If you mean that Hykzoi thing, we understand that all right. You've got a war
on your hands. So if you want your wonder-working general back badly enough,
you'll trade for him."
Aryl stomped her booted foot, and irrelevantly Jason
87
found himself wondering if they had claws on their feet too. "No, fool! I mean
internal politics. Factions! In the absence of the Fleet Commander and the
Subcommander, the Governor is in charge, and Governor Oimog hates my father.
She wouldn't trade a claw-paring for him."
"So what about this big Hykzoi attack, then?"
"Oimog doesn't know the first thing about military strategy. All she
understands is keeping her claws on political power. Besides, she doesn't
believe my father can make any difference in the war."
"So maybe he can't."
Aryl snorted derisively, then after a moment lowered her voice. "Maybe, maybe
not, but we've got to try everything." Agitatedly she paced the narrow floor
of the cave. Jason eyed her weapon, judging his chances of grabbing it from
her. Not as good as in the movies, he figured. Suddenly she turned on him.
"There's no point in keeping it from you. The Hykzoi have already launched
their attack. They've defeated our vanguard and are headed here. Even now they
might be engaging the rest of our fleet—right here in this peaceful little
solar system of yours. You might be days away from becoming part of the Hykzoi
Empire!"
"So big deal! What difference does it make whose slaves we are?"
"Oh! You deserve to find out just what difference it would make!"
Jason was begining to feel a little braver now. He hadn't been hauled away for
interrogation yet. No gfrastly torture devices. Maybe she was alone after all.
"So now that you have delivered your message and I have stated our reply, may
I go?*'
"You cannot fool me that easily. You are a child, and
88
I know enough about your culture to know that you have no authority to accept
messages or make decisions. You will take me to where the others are holding
my father, and I will speak with them."
Jason tried to look cool, casually stretching his legs. "As you say, I have no
authority. So I also have no authority to take you there. They haven't been in
contact. I can't even be positive where they are now." Humiliating to admit,
but conveniently it was true.
"Can you tell me nothing of their hostage's condition?"

"What do you mean?"
"Don't play dumb! We found that warehouse where you'd taken him, and we also
found his blood on the floor. Tell me, is he hurt? Is he ... is he dead?"
He'd been about to snap back a defiant answer, but her tone on that last
question had suddenly changed. The guy was her father, after all. "I don't
know that either. I guess he's alive. He was when I saw him last."
"You were there? Was he beaten, tortured?" She gripped her blaster with
renewed ferocity.
"Calm down! It wasn't planned. Some people just lost their cool and battered
him around some. We didn't want him killed. What good would a dead hostage do
us?"
"Ah." She relaxed and looked away a moment. Jason tensed, then struck at her
like a snake, grabbing her wrist and smashing it against a rock. The blaster
described a high silver arch through the air and disappeared into a tangle of
honeysuckle.
Screaming with rage, Aryl raked her free hand across Jason's face, gouging
three red clawmarks down his cheek. He yelped, then punched her in the
stomach. Doubling up, she suddenly twisted aside, wrenching her other hand
free.
For a moment Aryl leaned against the cave wall, pant89
ing and glaring at Jason. Then she launched herself at him again, claws
extended. Desperately he jumped aside, feeling one claw gouge his shoulder.
Spinning angrily around, he aimed a blow at her head. She dodged and hooked a
leg behind his, sending him sprawling to the ground. Before he regained his
breath, she leaped on him like a lion. Frantically he grabbed her wrists
before she could shred him any further.
Over and over they rolled in the dust outside the cave until finally he had
her pinned flat on her back. She struggled to get a foot up to kick him. He
was doubly glad she wore boots. All he could think about was the way
neighborhood cats disemboweled squirrels.
Her black eyes blazed up angrily at him. Suddenly they widened, and her
expression moved from hatred into astonishment and fear. It was just a trick,
he knew. He tightened his grip.
But she seemed to have forgotten he was there. "Look! They're here. Already.
Oh, please no!"
Jason was tempted to look around at the sky too, but he didn't budge. "Cut it
out! I'm not that much of a fool."
Her gaze shifted to him again. "Oh, but you are. You've let the Hykzoi in."
A distinct thrumming from overhead finally made him crane back. There were
lights hi the sky that weren't stars or airplanes.
Violently his captive jabbed a knee in his stomach and twisted free. But she
did not run. When the pain subsided, Jason looked up. The Tsorian was standing
only a few feet away from him, looking with horror at the sky. He stood
shakily and followed her gaze.
90
even
THE NIGHT ABOUT THEM WAS STREAKED WITH LIGHT, RED
light Glowing red objects darted about or hung suspended in the sky like
exotic fish in a huge aquarium. Only they were shaped like rings, rings of red
light with thick crossbars across the middle. They were appearing out of the
east, a dozen, then more.
"Look!" Jason heard Aryl exclaim. He turned around to see her pointing to the
west, across the Bay toward Sausalito. Tiny blue triangles were swarming there
like angry bees. "Is there somewhere we can see, away from this wretched
vegetation?"
Jason didn't bother to defend his planet's trees. He too wanted to see. "This
way!"
He darted along a narrow cleft between two rock walls, scrambled over a
boulder, then crawled up one of the more treacherous cliff routes to the top.

He didn't know how wen Tsorians climbed rocks. If she fell or got lost, tough.
He hadn't been standing a moment on the bare rock summit, however, when Aryl
was beside him. If she'd intended a comment on the route, it was obscured by
the sudden sizzling from above.
A stretch of night sky seemed to quiver like air over a
91
candle, and one of the distant blue specks flared into orange. Then the whole
sky was in turmoil. Rippling waves pulsed back and forth. Blue and red ships
wove a frenzied pattern through the sky, while here and there the pattern was
torn with flames and the fall of fiery debris into the Bay or the sprawling
cities below.
Both Jason and Aryl were soon cowering down on the rock, frightfully exposed
yet unable to take their eyes from the sky.
They said nothing, watching as the blue specks became fewer and fewer in
number. Suddenly a wail seemed to hit them, a concussion of sound and force
that rolled across the Bay like an impossible tidal wave. It flattened them to
the rock like fallen leaves. When, among a litter of roof shingles and broken
tree branches, they struggled to sit up, a tall column of fire was rising from
the darkness north of the Golden Gate. It climbed higher and higher into the
night, a colossal pillar of billowing flame.
Aryl's breathing was sharp and ragged. The Tsorian Headquarters. Jason had a
crazy urge to put an arm around her shoulder and offer comfort. He resisted.
They'd brought this on themselves. How different was this from the time he and
his father had watched the Tsorians destroy Earth's meager forces? The
fortunes of war, kid.
It seemed, however, that the ill fortune was expanding. The blue ships had now
totally vanished from the sky, and in a ragged swarm the red ones were
spreading southward over the sparkling city of San Francisco. Where they
passed, the air quivered and flame began to rise. Within minutes most of the
city seemed ablaze.
Jason watched, aghast. "They're destroying the City! They're destroying San
Francisco! Why? Why are they doing that?"
92
From the darkness beside him, Aryl's voice was harsh. "They're Hykzoi."
"But... but we're not Tsorian!*'
"Doesn't matter. Any client of their enemy is their enemy. Their policy is to
make graphic examples of what happens to enemies."
She was silent a moment, then breathed in sharply. "San Francisco! Is that
where you're holding my father?"
"No," Jason replied dully. "It's farther away."
"Then we must go there. He might still be able to get to the Fleet—if there's
anything left of it."
"Shut up about your father, wifl you! What does he matter compared to this?
Besides, I'm not allowed to take you."
She spun around and grabbed his shoulders, her claws just etching his skin.
"Idiot! Can't you see how meaningless your games are now? What they're doing
to that city, the Hykzoi could do to your whole world without a qualm."
"But I can't—"
"You must! Besides, those ships will very likely be here in a few minutes,
giving this town the same treatment."
Jason looked again at the inferno across the Bay. Without a word, he turned
and hurried down off the rocks, taking the easier route. Aryl kept close
behind him. Up and down the street, people stood in front of their houses
pointing and crying out.
Jason raced along the pavement Any moment those horrified observers would
realize what the Tsorian girl had just suggested. There'd be incredible panic
and traffic jams.
He reached his mother's Chevy, parked innocently in front of the MorganthaUs'
house. Hurriedly he felt his pockets. No keys!
93

"Stay here!" he shouted to his unwelcome companion and sprinted up the stone
stairs to the house. He hoped that in the streetlights, the neighbors wouldn't
see the nature of that companion.
Once inside he charged upstairs to the room he'd been sleeping in and rummaged
through several pants pockets until he found the keys. Next he ran into
Professor Mor-ganthall's study and grabbed the Colt .45 off the wall. It was
the only weapon he'd seen in the house and was really only for display. He'd
never seen any ammunition. But it looked the part, and no one need know it
wasn't loaded. Good thing that Tsorian had lost her zapper, though he wished
he'd gotten hold of it. No, he'd probably have ended up disintegrating
himself.
He jammed the heavy gun into his jacket pocket, then bolted downstairs again,
pausing only to grab a corner of the Indian-print tablecloth and tug, sending
candlesticks and wooden fruit flying. Trailing the cloth behind him, he pelted
back down to the car.
At first he thought Aryi had gone, but she was just standing in the shadow of
a bush. Jason fumbled with the keys, opened the driver's side, and jumped in.
He could drive off now and leave her on the sidewalk. But... well, maybe she
could be useful.
He leaned across and unlocked the passenger door. As Aryl scrambled inside, he
shoved the tablecloth at her. "Here, wrap up in this. Like a sari. If anyone
sees you, maybe they'll think you're Indian or something."
"Why should I want to look Indian?"
Jason glared at her. "Because if you look like a Tsorian, people might tear
you to pieces. Our world's getting blown apart, and your people brought it on
us."
"The Hykzoi—"
94
"—wouldn't be here if it weren't for you! Now shut up, I've got to drive this
thing."
He didn't want to mention that this was only the second time he'd driven
alone. He jammed in the ignition key, turned it, and nothing happened. Then he
remembered, grabbed the gear handle, and shifted into neutral. Again the key,
and it started.
Slowly he moved down the street, trying to avoid the knots of terrified
skygazers. Already, despite the hour, there were a growing number of cars on
the roads. Soon there'd be panic, and if those red ships did move across the
Bay, frenzied evacuation. Better avoid the main roads, he thought as he headed
for the park route over the hills.
For a while they drove in silence, Jason concentrating on how the tree-hemmed
road twisted and curved in the sweep of his headlights. Aryl just stared out
at the steep slopes and the dark tangle of bushes and trees that reached out
as they passed, almost trying to claw them from the road.
"How far is this place we're going?" she asked at last.
"About two hundred miles, maybe four hours' driving. We'll have to stop for
gas somewhere."
Minutes more of silence went by. This was ridiculous, Jason thought. Here he
was being forced to ride with this hateful alien, and he felt awkward about
not keeping up a conversation. Still, he was a Resister agent. Maybe he could
learn something useful. Besides, conversation would keep him from thinking
about what he'd just seen.
"Did any of the others know you were coming here?"
"No." She kept looking out the window. "I don't matter much anymore. Oimog
declared my father dead, and that stripped me of rank. I was a nonperson, but
I had to try something."
95
Jason hadn't understood all of that, but he suspected she'd done something
rather gutsy. "And you knew where to look for me because of what I'd said over
dinner that time?"
"It was a wild gamble. I'd been hiding there since midday yesterday. I think I

terrified a couple of little children who found me by accident. I was about
ready to give up when you came."
The mountain road joined a freeway already filling with traffic. Conversation
lapsed again. Jason wished it wouldn't. Pictures of the last hours kept
rerunning through his head. Even the unfamiliarity of driving couldn't keep
them away. He had stood on Indian Rock and in a few minutes watched the
destruction of San Francisco. The City. How many times had he been there,
visiting the zoo and museums, exploring Chinatown or shopping with his mother?
How could it be gone? How could those hundreds of thousands of people be dead?
He wouldn't let himself get angry. If he did, he'd drive off the road, and he
was having a hard enough tune avoiding that as it was. Carefully taking one
hand from the wheel, he switched on the radio and scanned the channels. Maybe
there'd be music. But there was only static and hysterical announcers.
Everything on both sides of the Golden Gate was gone. San Francisco, Daly
City, Sausalito, San Rafael. And of course, the Tsorian Headquarters had been
blown away. Red ships sighted in various spots. Panic in East Bay cities, the
governor of California appealing for calm. Calm, ha! The freeway was getting
more crowded every moment.
"Those places they mentioned," Aryl said suddenly, "are they anywhere near—"
"No! Your precious father is perfectly safe! It's just a
96
few more of my cities that have been wiped out. Only a few hundred thousand
more natives. Nothing important!"
"Oh, stop it! My base was destroyed too, you know, and my friends."
"But you're at war with those Hykzoi—we're not. They wouldn't be here at all
if you hadn't tried to grab this planet for yourselves."
"Maybe that's so, but it can't be helped now. That's in the past. It's the
future I'm worried about."
"Oh, so now San Francisco and the rest are just history and can be dismissed
so you can get on with conquering other worlds."
"Don't be—"
"Tsorian, if you say one more word, I'm going to stop this car and throw you
out. And you lost your fancy little gun, so I can do it too."
Aryl glared at him but said nothing more. Jason stared at the road. His cheek
still smarted from the gashes she'd left there, and he wasn't at all sure he
could actually manage to throw her out. But he did have his Colt .45. A bit
primitive, maybe, but it could probably kill Tsorians well enough. If it were
loaded.
They continued driving east with only the radio talking. Tsorian
establishments around the world were being destroyed. Jason felt almost like
cheering on the Hykzoi, except that nearby human towns were going at the same
time. And besides, he had to admit to himself, what Aryl said was probably
true. The Hykzoi seemed even worse than the Tsorians. At least the first lot
of conquerors had never wiped out whole cities. Maybe they were slightly
better devils. He kept his thoughts firmly to himself and drove.
The valley towns they drove through were obviously
97
awake, but here at least there was no mass panic. The stream of traffic they
were flowing with was the first wave from the East Bay, and though most
probably didn't know where they were going, they'd seen enough to want to go.
Jason's hands ached from gripping the wheel, and his eyes burned from staring
at the monotonous headlight-framed road.
They had crossed through the Central Valley and were climbing into the
foothills when he decided they'd have to stop for gas. Normally most places
would be closed at this hour, but there were lights on at Frank's Gas and
Groceries and several cars parked out front. Jason pulled up to the self-serve
pump and spoke to Aryl for the first time in miles.
"Wrap up in that tablecloth, will you? I don't want it to look like I'm
transporting the enemy."
Jason got out and stuck the gas nozzle into the car's tank. The bells dinged

steadily behind him. He glanced in the window to see Aryl flailing around with
the tablecloth. She'd obviously never seen an Indian sari. She looked more
like a paisley ghost.
When the tank was filled, Jason walked into the store to pay, glad his mother
had left him the credit card and a wad of cash. Maybe he'd better buy
something to eat while he was at it. He hadn't even realized he was hungry
until he saw the rows of junk food. What sort of snacks did Tsori-ans eat?
Well, she'd eat what he bought or go hungry.
Hurriedly he picked out a bag of potato chips, two cans of root beer, and a
bunch of bananas. Then his eye fell on one of those mosquito nets campers wear
over their heads when the bugs get really bad. That might help his passenger's
disguise.
He approached the checkout counter where a group of
98
men were huddled around a sputtering radio and trading rumors.
"Well, I'm surprised that if things are that bad, we haven't had more folks
through here by now," the checkout man was saying as he rang up Jason's
purchases. "You'd think everyone in the Bay Area would hightail it for the
mountains."
"Give'em another half hour," another man commented. "Though why the
mountains'll be any safer I don't know."
"Hell, man, it's obvious," said another. "It's big cities they're picking off.
Cities here, a couple in Europe, one even in China, I heard."
"They can have those places, but San Francisco—well, that's something else."
"And San Jose. I heard that's gone, too. If I could just get my hands on those
purple bastards!"
"I thought it was some other bunch."
"Nah. They're all the same."
Jason had to fight not to join in and straighten them out. But hadn't he been
saying pretty much the same thing to Aryl? Better just get going.
He grabbed up his bag of groceries and stutfed the mosquito net into his
pocket. Suddenly there was a commotion from outside, and everyone's head
turned to the door. A burly man forced his way through struggling with a
snarling creature in a paisley cloth. Black eyes flashed angrily under a
tousle of pale gray hair.
99
twelve
ARYL HAD ONLY STEPPED our OF THE CAR FOR A MINUTE. She'd finally given up
trying to wrap herself in that ridiculous cloth while sitting inside a cramped
metal box. Struggling to check her costuming in the side mirror, she'd just
gotten the shroud to look reasonable, though she'd make no guarantees about
authenticity, when a native thug grabbed her out of the darkness. He started
shouting rude things at her and dragging her toward the building. After she'd
nearly ripped his eye out with her free hand, he wrenched both arms behind her
back and pushed her roughly through the door.
"Boys, look what I caught!" he bawled as he struggled to keep hold of her
wrists. "One of those murdering purple devils was actually skulking around in
the parking lot. Nearly gouged my eye out, but I caught it."
Aryl stared about the murderous looking crowd and saw Jason standing in the
back looking stunned and ashen faced. No help there. Suddenly someone yanked
away most of the enveloping cloth and whistled, "And a female, too!"
"Well, isn't that nice." Another man placed a meaty hand on her shoulder, and
Aryl promptly sank her needle100
sharp teeth into it. He howled with rage and raised his good hand to strike
her.
"Hold on!" someone else said. "Maybe we can find out from her why all this is
happening."
"Who cares why" came a reply. "It's what that counts. They've killed thousands
of human beings."

"They have not!" Jason pushed forward, suddenly, surprised to find himself
staring at a ring of angry faces. He avoided even glancing at Aryl but forged
ahead. "Her people haven't done it; it's those people in the red ships. The
Hykzoi. They're the Tsorians' enemies too."
"So how come you know so much about these space people, kid?" said the man
with the bleeding hand. "You a collaborator?"
"No! I'm not. I just don't like to see someone blamed for something they
haven't done."
"Red ships, blue ships, what's the difference? Her people have enough to
answer for anyway."
The man who was holding Aryl now peered around at Jason. "Hey, you came with
her in that green Chevy, didn't you?"
Aryl stared as Jason slid a hand into his pocket and pulled out a large,
evil-looking native weapon. "Yes, I did. And I'm going to leave with her in it
right now."
Apparently, Aryl realized, this was a weapon to take seriously, because
everyone stepped back a pace or two. With one more vicious twist, the man
holding Aryl suddenly let go. She'd begun rubbing her sore wrists when Jason
firmly grabbed her arm and started backing through the door.
The screen had barely slammed behind them when they both turned and raced for
the car.
Aryl caught part of the still-trailing tablecloth in the
101
door but just left it hanging out as Jason gunned the engine and they lurched
out of the parking lot. She twisted around to look out the window and saw men
pouring out of the building and into cars. Then the rear window shattered.
With a sharp crack something seemed to strike into it.
"Jeez, they're shooting at us!" Jason exclaimed as he pushed down the
accelerator even harder.
"That was a gunshot?" she asked incredulously, then an angry frown crossed her
face. "Well, hand me that weapon of yours. I'll see if I can shoot them back."
Jason shook his head. "Can't! It's not loaded."
She stared at him. "You threatened all those people with a nonfunctional
weapon?"
"They didn't know that." He shot an anxious look at the side mirror. "Scrunch
down below the seat, will you? It looks like the whole posse is after us."
Aryl did as he suggested, glad that this way she couldn't see the bends they
were veering around. Jason was driving like a lunatic, and there seemed to be
an awfully steep drop on the right side.
What sounded like another shot whizzed past them. She inched over and peered
out at the side mirror. A chain of headlights was speeding along after them.
These people were all lunatics. Another shot seemed to miss them too.
Suddenly Jason began struggling with the wheel. "A flat! They must have hit a
tire!" His next comment turned into a startled yell as the car suddenly veered
sideways, bucked off the road, and began careening down the slope.
Aryl stared in openmouthed horror at the trees bouncing by them. Right in the
path of their jolting headlights one very large tree was coming closer and
closer.
Frantically she fought with the door until it burst open.
102
Then she sank a set of claws into Jason's shoulder, yanked him out from behind
the wheel, and hurled herself and him out of the car.
The ground was hard and covered with sharp jabbing things, but eventually it
seemed to stop moving. She lay on it listening to the receding crashing sounds
until they were replaced by a tearing thud, then an explosion. She threw an
arm over her face to ward off the light. A wave of heat singed her hair and
skin.
Slowly the inferno died into a mere fire, and cautiously Aryl sat up. Jason
was lying on his stomach a few feet from her.
"Thanks," he said through a mouthful of dirt. "I needed that." Then to her

surprise he actually laughed. "Do you realize you still have that tablecloth
attached to you?"
She looked down and saw one end of the offending cloth still tucked into her
belt. The rest splayed over the slope behind her. She tried to dislodge it,
but Jason, who was just sitting up, said, "No, keep it. You obviously need all
the disguise you can get."
Very shakily he stood up. "If you can walk, we'd better split before the
highway patrol or someone comes to investigate. Our pursuers have obviously
decided they weren't involved."
Aryl figured he was talking so much because he was surprised to be alive, but
she was still so shaken she wasn't sure she could talk at all. She wanted to
say something scathing about primitive native cars, but stopped as she
remembered seeing a number of her own advanced strike-ships shot down just a
few hours earlier.
In silence she stumbled to her feet, checked that everything still seemed to
be working, and followed Jason down the steep slope. It was slippery with a
carpet of long, thin,
103
almost needlelike leaves that must have fallen from this forest of trees. She
kept tripping over the wretched trailing cloth until she stopped and looped it
around an arm.
The only light came from the still-burning car, and gradually it too fell
behind. She had to walk carefully to avoid smashing into the rough trunks of
trees. They were everywhere, dark and hostile. Only the downward slope and the
sound of Jason crashing on ahead gave her any sense of where she was going.
Suddenly the horrid trees were behind her and she found herself stumbling onto
a flat, hard surface. She stood still, trying to orient herself in the dark.
"Where is this?"
"A road. Hey, maybe it's the old highway!"
"Is that good?"
"Yeah. We ought to be able to follow it north until it joins with the new
highway. There were some stretches where there wasn't a better route for
building the new one."
"So which way is north?"
"Look at the stars."
She did. Over the road, with the trees cleared back, there was a stretch of
open sky. But the stars were few and meaningless. Apparently, however, they
were not meaningless to her companion.
"There's the Big Dipper, so that other must be the North Star. This way,"
Jason announced.
Aryl turned and tromped after him, her boots making a far more decisive sound
on the hard surface than his soft native shoes. She felt far from decisive.
The excitement of their escape was dying away, and she was tired, cold, and
hungry. The only thing she could do about any of that was to wrap the thin
tablecloth around her like a cloak and keep going. She was determined not to
be the first to stop.
104
Several times they had to duck behind trees or scramble up rocky banks to hide
from approaching cars. But at least the jouncing headlights gave them plenty
of warning.
Mostly they trudged in silence, though once Jason muttered, "Wish I hadn't
lost all the food I bought. All I got out of that stop was a new mosquito net
and enough gas to immolate my mother's car."
Aryl at least shared his first wish. She could have eaten anything, no matter
what planet it grew on.
Above them, the tree-bordered ribbon of sky began to lighten, until not even
the brightest of the unfamiliar stars could be seen. Aryl plodded on, vaguely
surprised that her feet, which had long since become too cold to feel, could
still move. Then, a chink of light appeared through the tall, straight tree
trunks to her right. The planet's sun, a bright, warm, golden light. Maybe she

wouldn't die of cold after all.
She walked on almost in a trance, aware only of the sun's growing warmth.
Suddenly she ran right into Jason. He had stopped in the middle of the road in
front of her.
He grunted but didn't even object. "It's no good. I've got to stop and get
some rest. I'm a walking zombie."
Aryl didn't know what that was but figured it probably described her as well.
She wasn't even up to pretending that Tsorians could endure more than humans.
"Let's find someplace hidden off the road," he said, pointing vaguely up a
forested slope, "and take a nap. Just a short one." Jason scrambled up the
bank, and fighting bushes, Aryl stumbled along behind. She found him again
standing in a clump of small young trees and one tall, daunting one, which
together screened a rocky hollow from the road.
Aryl chose a spot less rocky than others and gratefully
105
sank to the ground. It was covered with those strange pointy leaves. Their
odor was pungent and highly alien, but at this point she hardly cared. She
rustled around, trying to make herself comfortable, then after a moment's
hesitation, unwrapped the tablecloth from her shoulders and offered half of it
to Jason. Sleepily he nodded and tugged a portion over himself.
The last thing Aryl remembered before sinking into sleep was the harsh call of
some native animal in the trees above her. She hoped it wasn't large and
carnivorous, because she was far too exhausted to fight it off.
106
thirteen
JASON AWAKENED TO THE NOISE OF FURIOUS CHATTERING.
He opened his eyes and stared into black, beady ones. Not a Tsorian, a
squirrel. It hung upside down on a tree trunk not five feet from him, waving
its bushy tail and regaling him with a torrent of abuse.
He heard a rustling beside him in the thicket. Aryl was curled up tightly,
studying the squirrel. "Is it dangerous, or just nasty tempered?"
"Just telling us that this is its patch of trees. We earth-Ungs are very
territorial, you know."
She didn't answer. Giving the squirrel an unmistakably rude gesture, she sat
up and began brushing pine needles off herself. Jason turned away, then forced
himself to say what he knew he had to. "I really didn't thank you properly for
pulling me out of that car last night."
"Then we're even. I didn't thank you for getting me away from those vicious
maniacs."
Jason felt he had to defend his fellow humans. "Oh, they probably weren't all
that bad a bunch—if they hadn't been dealing with a Tsorian. You people have
built up a lot of resentment for yourselves, you know, even if most humans
aren't actively involved in the Resistance."
107
Aryl opened her mouth then closed it again. She looked down at her hands.
"Yes, my father's told me how poorly this occupation was being run."
"And like a good Tsorian, you believe that, because your daddy says it, it's
true."
"No!" she snapped. "I believe it because it seems to be true. And don't you
ridicule the parent/child relationship. You haven't the faintest concept of
what that should be." Jason's anger flared, though he knew his comment hadn't
been very fair. "I do too, so shut up! Do you think I'd be going through ah1
this just to take you to your precious father? Even if he could turn this war
of yours around? You forget, my mother's up there too."
Aryl began an angry reply, then stopped herself. She turned away with what
Jason thought was almost a laugh. "And if she's as thick-headed as you,
they've probably been spending the last few weeks yelling at each other just
like this. Let's get going."
The sun was well up now, though it still seemed to be morning, and the cold
had been replaced by a dry, dusty heat. Scraggly manzanita and sagebrush

shared the slopes with tall pines and with rounded granite boulders, their
rough surfaces glinting with flecks of mica. A fine day for a mountain hike,
Jason thought, though he was hardly in the mood for one. He wanted to be at
that cabin now. In the meantime, he wouldn't mind something to eat or drink.
It seemed that Tsorian bodies worked much like human bodies. In a few minutes
Aryl said, "I don't suppose any of this stuff growing around here is good to
eat?"
"Not for humans, for deer maybe. I don't know about Tsorians. But why don't we
stop at the next cabin we see and beg some food? After all, we are refugees."
He looked
108
at her, noting that the dust had only slightly lightened her maroon
complexion. "I'll do the begging."
There were few cars to dodge on the road that morning, but it wasn't long
before they saw a cabin tucked back in the woods. Jason had Aryl wait behind a
boulder while he walked up the dusty drive and knocked at the door. There was
no answer. Then he noticed that the windows were all shuttered and pine
needles and cones were scattered thickly over the porch. A summer cabin still
closed up. Discouraged, he turned back to see that Aryl had come up behind
him.
"What's the matter? No one at home?"
"The place hasn't been opened for the season yet."
"Maybe they left some food behind."
"Well, maybe some canned things. But I'm not going to break in and—"
"You don't have to. I'm the evil conqueror, remember? And I'm also starving."
She pushed past him and examined the doorknob and lock. Spreading out her
three fingers, she slid claws in at the appropriate places and tugged. There
was a rending crack, and in moments the whole assembladge was wrenched free of
the door.
Jason was impressed and couldn't hide it. "Doesn't hurt to have your
ever-ready tool kit along."
The door had just swung open into cool darkness when a sound from above drew
their attention back outside. They looked up through the pine branches, then
instantly flattened themselves against the outside wall. Three glowing red
rings disappeared over the trees. Gradually the thrumming in the air faded.
"Where would they be heading?" Aryl asked tensely.
"Unless they're into casino gambling, there's not much
109
to attract them up that way. No cities or anything, unless
»
"Unless?"
Jason couldn't miss the anguish in her face. "Unless maybe they've found out
where they can pick up an enemy commander."
Like a shot, Aryl was off the porch and running along the road in the
direction the ships had taken. Jason forgot about being hungry. "Hey, wait!
You can't run all that way. We've still got to make it to the new highway.
Then we can try to hitch a ride."
When he finally caught up with her, Aryl's face was even more powdered with
dust, but she still looked far from human. "Stop a moment, will you? If we're
going to hitch, you've got to do the foreign student routine again."
"I will not wrap up in that beastly cloth!"
"Do you want another reception like the one at the gas station?"
She scowled, but unslung the cloth from her shoulders and started enshrouding
herself in it. Jason couldn't believe the mess she was making. He had to help.
Finally she was wrapped to Jason's satisfaction. With the addition of the
mosquito netting over her face, he thought she looked a little like those
ladies in the National Geographic from Yemen or someplace.
The two set off again with the occasional grumble from Aryl about how hot,
dusty, and blind she was. When, after an hour's hike, they at last reached the
intersection of the old and new highways, Jason said, "Now remember, keep your

face down and your hands tucked in the cloth. You're supposed to be a
submissive female." He could almost feel the laser glare from her veiled black
eyes.
From where they stood on a wide shoulder of the road,
110
they could see that the traffic was much heavier now as refugees streamed into
the mountains. But even as they watched, it seemed that traffic flowing the
other way was picking up as well.
Jason walked closer to the pavement, stood firmly, and began waving his thumb
at passing cars. Nobody stopped. He felt extremely uncomfortable doing what a
lifetime of admonitions had warned him not to. But then, he thought wryly, if
some mugger picked them up, Aryl could tear his face off.
Glancing at his companion, he saw with alarm that she was imitating his
hitchhiking gesture. "Hey, leave this to me!" he shouted over the rumble of
traffic. "Someone might notice your purple thumb."
Grumbling, Aryl folded her arms in her paisley robes and went back to standing
with downcast face the way Jason imagined some demure Yemeni might. He would
have laughed if he weren't afraid of setting off her temper again.
It seemed they'd been standing there begging for hours when a big semi slowed
and pulled over. The driver leaned toward the open window on the passenger's
side. "Where you two headed?"
"Lake Tahoe," Jason replied eagerly.
"East side or west?"
"Eh ... east."
"Well, I'm going up the west side, but I can take you as far as the 'Y.' Hop
in."
They scrambled up into the high cab, Jason deliberately placing himself next
to the driver. 'Thanks a lot. It didn't look as if anyone was going to stop."
"Yeah, they've all got their wind up about the space people. As I see it, you
can't second-guess what those
ill
creatures'll do, so you might as well go about your business as usual. You two
Bay Area refugees?"
Jason nodded and decided he'd try to be as truthful as he could. "Yes. My
friend and I were heading up to my uncle's cabin when we had a flat on the old
highway and drove off the road. The car's totaled, so we decided to try and
hitch. Eh... she's from Yemen, an exchange student."
"I wondered. Don't normally pick up hitchhikers, but you two looked too
interesting to pass up."
As the truck's radio droned through the pause, Jason hoped this guy wouldn't
find out how right he was. Suddenly Aryl spoke up. Jason tensed, but decided
the driver probably couldn't tell a Yemeni accent from a Tsorian one.
"Your radio, has it mentioned any spaceships up ahead?"
"Yep. It reported something going on around Stateline. Think you're heading
from the frying pan to the fire, eh?"
Cold fear spread through Jason. Uncle Carl's cabin wasn't too far from
Stateline.
"So, anyway," the driver said around the wad of gum he was chewing, "did you
two see what happened in the Bay Area? Tell me about it. I was coming up
through Fresno."
Jason didn't want to think about it, much less talk about it. Still, this was
a way to pay for the lift. He tried to report like a passive observer, but
putting it into words was like reliving the whole thing. All those cities, he
thought to himself, all those people, destroyed in a callous instant by these
new invaders. Somehow he didn't think there'd be any point to joining a
Resistance against them. He wondered if there had really been any even against
the Tsori-ans. What good had all their meetings and planning and little
rebellions done except make life harder or shorter for
112
some people and make the Resisters imagine that they weren't quite as

powerless as they really were? Finally his account to the driver, minus all
the personal stuff, ran down.
For a minute the man said nothing, then he let out his breath in a throaty
sigh. "That must've been something to see—and have lived through. It's hard to
believe. Frisco. I was just there last week. Whew! I sure as hell hope those
little red ships haven't been at this everywhere. Though the stuff I've been
getting over the radio's so garbled I can't tell what's happening."
Aryl spoke quietly, her voice muffled by the netting. "Surely there is only a
danger near where Tsorians have facilities."
"Well, maybe. But in that case there must've been some of those purple guys up
ahead doing the casinos. Notice how the traffic coming this way has picked up?
Everybody's driving like they're crazy scared too."
Jason felt as if he'd been shaken awake. For the first time in nearly an hour,
he noticed things going on outside his head. Traffic was pelting down from the
direction they were heading, and some of their own stream of traffic seemed to
be turning around. Everywhere there was honking, swerving chaos.
"You're not turning back, are you?" he asked in alarm.
"Nan. Got to be in Denver in twenty-four hours. But I can't say I like this.
Hey, miss." The driver leaned forward and peered at Aryl. "You see many of
these space people in Yemen?"
"I have seen a great many of them, yes."
"Never thought much about them really, not after they first forced their way
in, that is. Oh, I'd as soon they'd left us alone or at least done something
helpful if they was set
113
on meddling. But I just figured they was here to stay, so I might as well
accept it. Didn't affect me none anyhow. But now... Well, if this's how our
future's going to be, I don't much care for it."
"Neither do I," she said quietly. "I truly hope it is not."
Finally, like fish swimming upstream, they made their way to the highway
junction. The truck driver let them out with admonitions to take care. Jason
watched him drive off, feeling suddenly very much alone.
"Guess we walk from here," he said gruffly. "It's not too many more miles, and
it sure doesn't look like we'll catch many lifts going this way."
They began trudging mechanically along the highway, past pine trees mingled
with shopping centers, fast-food places, and motels. Some of those spots had
been meadows or woods when Jason had first started coming to Uncle Carl's
cabin in the summer. Those had been golden times that he'd treasured year
after year. And always the drive up had been filled with anticipation, each
special landmark showing they were a little closer: a certain rock formation
that looked like a face, a waterfall you had to crane your neck to see, an old
rustic restaurant with plastic gnomes in front. This trip, his mind had been
so torn up he hadn't noticed any of them.
But what he did notice now was that the passing traffic was lessening. The
parking lots of the motels were almost empty. Everywhere there was an eerie
Sunday-morning quiet. He tried not to see these ominous signs and instead
watched as he always had for the occasional flash of blue through the trees on
his left as the highway ran closer and closer to the lake. That great sheet of
water looked calm and untroubled. He wished he could absorb some of that.
Suddenly they were there. On the left, the shops and
114
motels ended, replaced by a Cyclone fence that protected an old enclave of
summer cabins. He stopped so suddenly at the gate that Aryl bumped into him,
blurting out what sounded like a Tsorian curse. He'd heard quite a few as
she'd stumbled along in her entangling tablecloth.
"In here," he said, heading down the rutted dirt road. The gate, usually
latched, was swinging wide open. A few yards inside, and the trees engulfed
them in quiet. Dark, tall trees, unbearably heavy with the tang of pine.
Everything seemed unchanged.
Here and there, drives branched off to cabins in the woods. Mailboxes were

marked with family names, and he knew each one. Browning, Clark, Effingham,
Gish. All part of the summer lore. Baseball games, campfires, fearless
explorations in the woods.
The band of trees came to an end, and he hesitated to step from their calming
shade. Before him stretched the meadow, tall grass, wind-rippled and gleaming
in the late-afternoon sun. Insects hummed in the air and the occasional
blackbird rose with a warbling call and a flash of ebony and scarlet. It
almost seemed normal. Almost.
Something unsettling hung in the air, an odd metallic stench. And there was no
one about. It was early in the season, but still there should be a few
vacationers and certainly some of the year-round residents.
Fearfully Jason walked forward, Aryl close and silent behind him. Here the
dirt road was thick with the usual soft, pale dust. It plopped up around his
feet. Automatically Jason sidestepped around a run-over frog left flat in the
road, thin and dry as paper. He used to think these things were neat, but now
he ignored it just as he ignored the live frogs plishing through the grasses
into the swampy
115
water. His eyes were on a hazy pall in the air ahead. The stench was getting
stronger.
Finally he saw what was different. The haze hung over a large patch of meadow
where green had been turned to scorched black. Fear mounted as he hurried
forward.
On the far side of the meadow stretched the trees and cabins that bordered the
lake. Only the usual picture was broken. Two clumps of trees stood like black,
naked skeletons. In a wide space between them, there was nothing. There should
have been more trees, there should have been a cabin. But there was nothing.
Only a clear, unobstructed view of the lake, as if something huge had come
along and chomped out a section of shoreline. The section where Uncle Carl's
cabin had stood.
Jason just stood and stared, while behind him, Aryl started to say something,
then stopped. Slowly she unwrapped herself from her disguise and let it fall
into the dust. She turned away and looked toward the blue, pine-clad
mountains.
Jason's stupor was ripped by a voice. "Heaven above! Jason Sikes! Why, that's
you, isn't it? Come on over here!"
Jason stared and couldn't believe what he saw. One of the Bentson sisters.
Gertrude he thought; yes, the thin one. The two batty old ladies lived there
all year round next to his uncle's cabin—or former cabin. Were they still
there, with this happening next door?
Slowly he walked toward the beckoning figure, her flowery peasant dress draped
with turquoise necklaces.
"Jason, dear dear boy," she said, giving him a quick bony hug as soon as he
was within reach. "Rather a poor start to a vacation this year, isn't it?"
"Eh, yes... Miss Gertrude ..."
The woman's eyes widened under her tousled mop of
116
gray hair as she looked over Jason's shoulder. "And you've brought a
girlfriend this year, how nice. One of them I see, but no matter. Times
change, times change. How do you do, dear. I'm Gertrude Bentson. And you
are... ?"
"Oh. I am Aryl."
"A nice name, really. Why don't you two come inside. Emily will be back soon.
She drove out to the store, and also to spy around a little and see what's
cooking, I dare say. Quite a to-do."
Jason felt totally bemused as he followed Miss Bentson into the front room of
the little cabin. Briefly he looked around at the familiar knotty-pine walls,
the Indian rugs, the shelves of china birds and pinecone art. "Miss Gertrude,"
he ventured, "could you tell us what happened next door?"
"Yes, yes. Have a seat," she said, pointing to a couple of rattan rockers by

the fireplace. She plumped up a pillow on another chair and settled into it.
"It was really quite something. Just a few hours ago, and it all happened so
fast. Emily and I could scarcely believe it. A bad business all around."
"Yes, but what happened?"
"Well, we were hanging out our washing. We'd spent most of the morning doing
it and had two baskets full. The people in your uncle's cabin were puttering
about as usual. Been there several weeks, they had, and I hadn't seen most of
them before, except your mother, of course, Jason. Didn't see much of her,
though, this visit, but then they had that special guest, so I expect she was
busy."
"Special guest?" Aryl said tensely.
The woman smiled at her. "Yes, do you know him? One of your people, I believe.
Such a handsome man, once you
117
get used to the skin color, and such striking gray hair. Emily says I'm always
a pushover for distinguished-looking gray hair. She likes blonds, Emily does.
But we didn't really get a chance to meet him. Kept inside most of the time he
did, except that recently in the evenings some of them would go out and sit on
the beach."
"But what about this morning?" Jason prompted impatiently.
"Oh, yes, this morning. It was awful, really. We were hanging out the laundry,
Emily and I, when this great big red belt buckle came dropping out of the sky.
It wasn't a belt buckle, of course, just shaped like one, a red one. But it
was making this awful kind of a noise that gets into your ears and wants to
burst right out again. It came down out of the sky and landed right in the
meadow. Shocking thing! It could have started a big fire if the grasses hadn't
been so wet."
"And then . . . ?" Jason urged, but the sound of a car engine interrupted.
"Oh, good, there's Emily back from the store. She's much better at telling
things than I am." As the sputtering motor came to a stop, Gertrude bustled
out, and Aryl leaned toward Jason.
"Is this woman quite normal?"
"Not in the least, but she's harmless. Her sister's the less batty of the two,
so maybe we can get some answers."
Chattering happily, Gertrude, now clutching a bag of groceries, ushered her
sister in. "Isn't it nice they could come and visit, Emily? I've been telling
them about this morning, but you're so much better at this sort of thing. Why
don't you try? I'd just gotten to where the belt buckle landed in the meadow.
What a mess, too. All that scorched grass won't grow back for a year."
118
After effusively greeting her guests, plump, white-haired Emily plunked
herself down on a worn flower-patterned couch and took up the tale.
"Of course Gertrude and I were somewhat alarmed, so we hid behind the
boathouse and watched. And I tell you, the things that came out of there were
worth being alarmed about. They looked sort of like big jackknives with lots
of blades.
"Well, it was all crazy after that. People in the cabin were shooting at them,
and the jackknives were shooting back, only they didn't use bullets. They had
flashlight things, but the light made people fall down as good as bullets."
Aryl drew in her breath. "What color was the light ... eh, Miss Emily?"
"Red, dear, like Christmas."
"Yes, but could you tell me what shade of red? It's very important."
"Well, now, you're right. Red's a lot of different colors, isn't it? Now let's
see. Help me, Gertrude, what shade of red was it?"
"It wasn't really a fire-engine red, not a fuchsia either. Really more like
salmon, I'd say."
"Yes"—Emily nodded—"or coral."
Aryl looked completely baffled. Anxiously, Jason stood up and walked to a
sideboard. "Maybe you could point out the color here. There's lots of
different shades in this china."

"What a clever boy! Yes, indeed." Emily popped up and waddled to the
sideboard. "Let's see, I'd say it was like this."
"More like on the pitcher, I'd say, Emily." 119
"Yes, Gertrude's right. Just the shade of this petunia here."
Aryl looked at the soft orange-pink of the flower and let out a sigh of
relief. "Then they didn't mean to kill them."
"I don't know what they meant to do, but I'm sure they did kill at least one
of them."
Aryl and Jason tensed up, simultaneously asking, "Who?"
"The one with the big belly and the brown beard. I don't know his name, but
he'd been staying there the whole time. As soon as those jackknives showed up,
he ran outside and began shouting that he was the one who'd contacted them and
they should... what was it he said... ? Ah, yes, they should negotiate with
him. He had helped them win their war, and now he had some demands. Strange,
wasn't it?"
"Jerry Barns," Jason said, understanding slowly falling into place.
"What?" Aryl whispered.
"Jerry Barns. He was always arguing that we should sell Rogav to the Hykzoi in
exchange for a better deal from their empire."
"Oh, dear," Emily interrupted, "I hope he wasn't a friend of yours, because
the jackknives turned their flashlights on him. A very dark red that time."
"Yes," Gertrude put in. "Almost fuchsia."
"And it blew him quite apart."
They all were silent a moment, then Aryl whispered, "And what happened to the
others in the cabin?"
"Well, I'm not sure how many there were in the first place. But three of them
were dragged out and put in the red round thing. A spaceship, I guess it was."
"Which three?" Jason asked.
"Your mother was one, dear, and there was a man I
120
didn't know, the bald one. And then there was the space gentleman Gertrude was
so taken with. Then all the jack-knives scurried back on board, and the thing
zipped way up in the air and shot a big bright flashlight beam down on the
cabin. It just went up in a puff. Never seen anything like it. Just left some
charred ground and a few dead trees. I must say, it dried our laundry quick as
anything."
Jason rocked back on his chair, a little dazed. "And then what happened?"
"Oh, it joined two other red ring things. They shot off north and disappeared.
Aryl sighed like a punctured balloon. Her voice quavered. "Well, that's the
end, then."
"Not really," Gertrude added. "They didn't go very far. When I was out at the
store, there was quite a fuss because those spaceships had flown over
Statetine and landed among those new condominiums up by the cove. Everybody
was tearing out of there. I mean, spaceships landing in your front yard is not
what you expect when you buy into a place like that, At Stateline people were
pouring out of the casinos too and just taking off. The place was in an
uproar. The police, poor things, were way over their heads."
"They landed by some condominiums?" Jason asked incredulously.
"Yes, you know, the big, expensive new ones four or five miles beyond
Stateline. The ones with the putting green in the middle. What's it called?
Lake something. That's no good; they're all called Lake something around here.
Lake View Retreat. That's it."
Jason jumped up. "Then there's still a chance! Come on, Aryl, we've got to go
there."
"Oh, you can't go there, dear," Emily said. "The police have got it all
cordoned off. Not that anyone wants to go
121
there. There was talk about how those red ship people had turned beams on some
of the residents there, and they just blew apart like the poor fellow here."
"But still, we do have to go there," Aryl said as she stood up.

"Oh, dear," Gertrude said, wringing her hands. "Whyever for? It sounds
terribly dangerous to me."
"Don't be silly, Gertrude," her sister snapped. "They want to try to rescue
those poor people. But it would be terribly dangerous to go by road, even if
you could get past the police."
Jason frowned. "Then . .. then we'll go by water. Do you still have that old
wooden canoe I used to borrow?"
"The Lady of the Laker Gertrude said, jumping up and clapping her hands. "Yes,
we do, and they could borrow it, couldn't they, Emily? A rescue mission, how
exciting! But you really should wait until after dark. It's almost sunset now,
see!" She bustled to the crocheted curtains and pulled them back. The sun was
hanging heavy and gold just above the purpled mountains on the far side of the
lake. The fiat, glassy water rippled a golden path across its surface to wash
up wave by wave on the sand.
"Yes, you should wait," Emily said, standing up. "And what's more, I want you
to have a good meal before you go, and a little rest. I can see that you both
look absolutely done in."
Jason chafed at the delay, but the mention of food suddenly reminded him of
how hungry he was. And he couldn't deny that he was feeling all swimmy headed
from lack of sleep. He looked at Aryl, and she nodded wearily.
"All right, we'll wait a little. But I want to be off before midnight."
"Midnight!" Gertrude breathed. "Oh, how exciting!"
122
fourteen
ARYL WAS SURE SHE'D NEVER GET ANY SLEEP. NOT AFTER all she'd just heard and
all that heavy alien food. And certainly not in this uncomfortable alien bed,
with those two bizarre women about. But the next thing she knew, one of those
women was shaking her out of a profound, exhausted sleep.
"Nearly midnight, dearie, time to get up!" Gertrude said cheerily. "My, I
think you do have lovely hair. It's really a splendid idea to have young
people with gray hair. That would get rid of a lot of ageism, don't you
think?"
Aryl mumbled something groggily as she climbed out of the too soft bed. She
was fully dressed; she'd been too tired even to take off tier boots.
"And your eyes," the woman continued as she bustled around the room. "They
look like the eyes of those little chipmunks who come visit us when we have
breakfast on the patio. It's too bad you'll be leaving before they arrive. Fm
certain you'd get along splendidly."
Aryl was far less certain about that. What had Jason called these women?
Batty? She didn't know the term, but its meaning was becoming more and more
clear.
While they'd slept, the ladies had prepared a huge picnic 123
hamper, which they now thrust on the two children. Then they all four tromped
out to the boat shed and dragged out the long, white canoe.
Aryl stared at it, aghast. It didn't look as if it could even float, let alone
take them anywhere.
Jason was also shaking his head. "I don't know if a white canoe is the best
vehicle for stealth."
"Nonsense, dear," Emily replied. "It'll blend in with the moonlight on the
water. Besides, those jackknife people probably won't be expecting an
amphibious assault, so to speak."
"One if by land and two if by sea!" Gertrude intoned happily.
With difficulty the four of them hauled the heavy wooden boat down to the
water. Finally they had its prow edged into the silver-fringed wavelets that
rippled onto the wet sand.
"Now, Jason," Emily said, "better take off your sneakers before you wade out
there. Your mother'd never forgive me if I let you go running about rescuing
her in wet shoes. You'd better take yours off too, dear. Those are such nice
boots."
Aryl didn't feel like arguing. Besides, her feet had been screaming to get out

of those boots for hours. Struggling to pull them off, she tossed them into
the boat. The sand curling up between her clawed toes was cool and wonderfully
soft. She sighed with relief.
Then she noticed Jason staring at her feet and would have been offended if she
hadn't been so busy staring at his. Ugly, pale, stubby-looking things. And
with five toes!
The women didn't seem to be paying attention to either set of feet. "I'll just
put the hamper in the center of the
124
boat," Emily said. "And you both must wear your life jackets, you know. It's
one of our little rules."
Jason deftly fastened the straps on his own jacket then helped Aryl as she was
struggling with hers. "Do you know how to swim?" he whispered.
"Of course!" Her objection lost some of its indignation at the first slap of
stinging cold water against her bare feet. She'd always enjoyed swimming, but
in water a good deal wanner. This was liquid ice.
Jason waded out, pulling the prow of the boat partway into the water. "All
right, you climb in and walk carefully to the front. Sit facing outward.
Careful! Stay in the center or you'll tip the whole thing over."
The boat rocked violently under her as Aryl tried to walk its length. What an
impossible way to travel! Finally she stepped over the little woven seat and,
causing one last lurch, sat facing out into the lake.
Jason gave a final push. The stern ground over the sand, then suddenly was
floating free. Quickly Jason hopped aboard. He called and waved farewells to
the Bentson sisters as the boat shot smoothly into the dark lake.
Aryl felt sudden panic—and exhilaration. She was completely exposed. Overhead
stretched the vastness of the universe. It gleamed with cold and silence and
with frightening alien stars. Beneath her and on all sides stretched a
life-queuing emptiness almost as awesome. And yet she, in this frail shell of
a boat, had the audacity to venture between them. She felt small and
insignificant—a very un-Tsorian sensation.
Her reverie was shattered as something jabbed into her back. "Here's your
paddle. I'm not propelling a pleasure barge, you know."
"You're not expected to," she said, indignantly grab125
bing the wooden device and digging it into the water. The boat rocked
violently.
"Wait! Let me show you. Put one hand on top. No, the other one. Right. Now
grip the shaft farther down with the other hand. Hmm, your arms don't seem to
bend in quite the right way. Well, it ought to work. Then dip the blade in.
No, so it's at an angle to the boat's side. That's right, dip and pull it back
through the water. Lift it out and bring it forward. Good. Again."
The instruction continued, with Aryl surprised at how swiftly words produced a
pattern, a pattern that worked and propelled them smoothly forward. When, with
her paddling in front and Jason behind, she finally felt comfortable enough to
look away from the rhythmic motion of her paddle, she was astonished to see
how far they'd come. The cabin they'd left was only a tiny speck of light on a
dark, receding shore.
Again she felt the yawning emptiness, but it was tempered by beauty. To her
left, the planet's waxing moon cast a glimmering, rippling path of silver. It
sloshed right up against the boat, and when she paddled on that side, the
water dripping from the raised blade looked like jewels. The noise of that
splashing and the gentle slap of water on the prow were the only sounds in a
vast silence.
She hated to break that silence. But they were on a mission. "All right, I'm
paddling. Where do we go?"
"That's not your problem, the steering's done back here. This old-fashioned
wooden canoe weighs a ton, but it handles really well in the water—as long as
novices don't gyrate around too much."
"Well, I've never been in a craft as primitive as this before."

"Don't knock it. It's getting us where we're going, isn't
126
it?" He was quiet a moment, then said more softly, "Aryl, do you ... do you
think they're still alive?"
She fought down fear before she could answer. "They must be. A beam of that
shade would only have incapacitated them. Hykzoi usually don't take prisoners,
but my father's value to them is obvious, either as a hostage or ... or as
someone to extract information from. If natives were found near a Tsorian
commander, the Hykzoi would probably assume they had some significance as
well. They obviously know little of the local situation."
In the darkness, Jason scowled at the arrogance of that remark, then he
shrugged. "But why would they take them only as far as Lake View Retreat?"
"The only thing I can think of is that there's still a battle raging out
there." Aryl gestured at the star-sprinkled blackness overhead. "They may
think it's not safe yet to transfer important prisoners to one of their
battleships. But we don't know how long that will last. We must hurry."
"If you can paddle faster, do."
Aryl stiffled a groan. Her shoulder muscles were already telling her that this
sort of movement was something she was not designed for. But in a moment, her
attention was fixed elsewhere.
"What's that? Are we nearing our goal?"
"That glow there? Heck no, that's just Stateline. I can't believe they're
still at it. Space marauders camped a few miles away, and those neon-lit
casinos are still going full tilt."
"What are casinos?"
"Places where people go to gamble. You know, putting out money for the chance
of making more. It's legal in
127
Nevada but not in California, so where the states join, a lot of casinos are
built to lure California gamblers."
"Then that makes sense."
"What?"
"Those people staying around with the Hykzoi nearby. It's just another form of
gambling."
The ruddy glow of the casinos lit the sky and trees like a stationary forest
fire. But gradually this fell behind them, and the lights that shone along the
lakeshore were fewer and more furtive. Occasionally Jason grumbled that at
night it was hard to tell one cove from another. But in any case, he said,
they still had a ways to go.
Once Aryl stopped to pull her boots back on, but that didn't help much against
the numbing cold or the little trough of icy water that kept sloshing back and
forth in the bottom of the canoe. The world seemed to be composed of cold and
dark and the hypnotic swing and dtp of the paddles.
Slowly, slowly, Aryl began to see a change in the sky, or at least something
seemed to be getting dimmer—either her eyes or the strange star patterns
overhead. In the east, the velvet black looked a little faded. "Is dawn
coming, do you think?" she said at last.
Jason's voice behind her sounded as if he'd just awakened, though his paddle
had never stopped. "Yes, I think it is. And we don't have much farther to go.
Let's move closer into shore."
With a few smooth backstrokes, he sent them angling inward to where the pines
now showed as a dark fringe against a slightly lighter sky.
In the west the moon was almost touching the dark chain of mountains. Its
light had changed from a bright,
128
clear silver to a mellow gold, and by it Aryl suddenly saw a shape humping out
of the dark water ahead.
"There's something in the way!"
Jason dug his paddle into frantic backstrokes. "Rocks! Paddle on the other
side!"

The hulking shape skimmed by on the right side with only one quiver of
contact.
"Rocks creep way out into the water around those points," Jason said in a
slightly shaky voice. "This cove isn't the right one, the trees come too close
to the water's edge. But I think the next one might be it."
When, at a more cautious distance, they rounded the next point, Aryl thought
this cove looked much like the others. But the ghostly moonlight did show
trees shrinking back from the shore, exposing flat land that stretched some
distance back. Jason brought them in close enough to hear the steady rasping
slap of waves against sand.
"Let's pull in here," Jason said at last. "I'm pretty sure it's the right
cove. But we may have overshot it in the dark, so I don't want to go any
farther." With a few strokes he turned the prow toward the pale curve of
beach. "Now paddle hard!"
Muscles protesting, Aryl redoubled her efforts. The boat knifed toward the
shore, then, after a grating thump, slid far up onto the sand.
"Now hop out," Jason ordered, "and pull it up a little farther."
Numbly Aryl stepped over the side and stumbled onto the suddenly steady
ground. She grabbed at the wooden gunwale and tugged the canoe up another
couple of feet. Then, slumping to the cool sand in an exhausted heap, she
completely ignored Jason's suggestion, when he'd joined
129
her on the beach, that they pull the boat still farther above the waterline.
"Well, all right, we'll leave it," he conceded, plopping down beside her with
the wicker hamper. "Let's eat some of these sandwiches while we wait for it to
get light enough to see where we are."
Soon, through an energy-reviving jam sandwich, Aryl said, "Those two certainly
were interesting."
Jason chuckled. "The Bentson sisters? Yeah. Most human beings don't have quite
their ability for taking things in stride."
"I suppose if one has an unusual enough mind, nothing outside can appear too
unusual."
"No amount of craziness can outcrazy them, you mean?"
"Well, perhaps—"
"Hush! Do you hear that?"
"I don't hear anything."
"That's what I mean. A second ago that whole swamp back there was chirping
with frogs. They've all stopped."
Aryl strained her ears and realized that the silence was vibrating. Like a
subtle pain it slowly formed into a familiar throbbing sound.
Together they shifted around and looked over the dark, shapeless swamp. One,
then another, glowing red ring rose above the distant trees and shot into the
graying sky.
As the ships sped over head, Aryl flattened herself into the cold, gritty
sand. Then numbly she rolled over and watched the red specks retreat and
vanish. After all this effort, it was over. They had arrived too late.
130
f i
f
t
e e n
THE SKY AND LAKE WERE FLAT AND GRAY WITH MORNING.
Fish were jumping after low-skimming insects, sending widening circles over
the mirror-calm water. But Jason didn't notice. He was aware only of the
emptiness inside him, and of one surprising irrelevant fact: Tsorians cry when
they are unhappy. He wondered if Aryl was surprised to have learned the same
thing about humans.
She was curled up on the sand, but he was afraid to do the same, almost as if
his heaviness would turn him into stone. Though that might be better. He
forced his mind away from the pain toward petty details.
Where would they go now? Back to the Bentson sisters, of course, at least to
return the canoe, but they could hardly stay there. For all he knew, there was

nothing left of the Bay Area. His Uncle Carl, his father's brother, had not,
it seemed, been at the cabin. So maybe he could go to his place in Red Bluff.
But what about Aryl? She might be the only Tsorian left on Earth. And Earth
wouldn't be a healthy place for her, not with the Hykzoi in charge. It
probably wouldn't be very healthy for any of them.
Suddenly Aryl jerked upright. "Jason," she said in a
131
low, tense voice, "When that old lady described the Hyk-zoi attack on the
cabin, what did she say about the ship leaving?"
"Huh? I don't remember exactly. She said it looked like a red belt buckle, and
then there was talk about the color of the weapon beams. Then she said that
once the captives were hauled aboard, they took off."
"Yes, but it didn't fly away alone, did it?"
"No, there was another ship, I think. Or was it two?"
"I seem to remember two."
"So?"
"So, if there were three ships in all, three ships might have landed at those
condominiums. But we only saw two take off."
His chest tightened with so much hope it frightened him. "But another could
have taken off earlier."
"It could have, right away or while we were sleeping, but once we were on the
lake, under that great empty sky, we would surely have seen it."
Jason jumped up so suddenly that a gull foraging on the beach took off with an
indignant squawk. "Then they could both still be prisoners back there!"
"It's possible there's still a battle going on, and all spare Hykzoi ships
were called in. But one ship might have been left to guard the prisoners.
After all, the natives don't look like much of a threat."
"Well, here's one native who plans to be. Let's go!"
Aryl joined him as Jason forged off eastward.
Behind the beach, the sand was dotted with gray-green sage, which gave way to
feeble-looking willows and then to rustling grass. Tall green blades rose from
dry brown ones, meshing together into a springy, crackling carpet. Occa132
sionally their steps brought an upwelling of brown water or loosed a startled
volley of insects or tiny green frogs.
They headed east toward a shoulder of mountain, still dark against the
backdrop of a nearly risen sun. Pines flowed down the mountain's steep slope
and then westward toward the lake. Where the trees met the marshy meadows,
there stood a crescent of modern-looking buildings, windows gleaming dully in
the predawn light.
Their route took them over a grassy hummock, and from there they could see to
the base of the distant buildings. Squatting on a patch of unnaturally lush
greenery was the dull red of a Hykzoi ship. The two looked at each other and
grinned.
Suddenly Aryl's expression changed to alarm. She shot out a clawed hand,
flattening Jason beside her onto the brittle grass. "If we can see them, they
can see us. They could be watching from the windows of that building."
Jason splayed himself so low to the ground he felt like one of those run-over
frogs. "Then let's get over to those trees and work our way back through the
woods. They don't have X-ray vision, do they?"
"Not that I know of."
Crawling back down, they crouched low beneath the quavering reeds and scuttled
toward the dark spur of pine trees that jutted lakeward. Jason noticed that
Aryl flinched at the occasional bird or striped water snake that hurried out
of her way, but she kept quiet. They had quit trying to keep to the drier
grounds, and their feet, squelching into brown water, stirred up a stench of
rot and decay.
The sun broke clear of the mountain just as they reached the sheltering band
of trees. With relief they both straightened up and leaned against the rough
bark of the pines.

133
Suddenly Aryl pulled her hand away and said, "What is this stuff?"
Sunlight glowed innocently on the amber drops smeared all over her hand. Jason
grinned maliciously. "It's pitch. Smells nice, doesn't it?"
"Nasty sticky stuff! How do I get it off?"
"Rub it in the dirt, that'll make it less sticky. Now, let's move. Stay
several trees deep into the woods and keep an eye on those buildings."
They hurried as quietly as they could over the forest floor, but it seemed to
be booby-trapped with cracking twigs and pinecones to stumble over. To make
matters worse, a couple of crows took loud, cawing exception to their
intrusion. Jason just hoped these Hykzoi were not attentive woodsmen.
At last they were as close to the buildings as the trees would take them.
Crouching down, they peered through the leaves of a low, scraggly bush.
Two many-windowed buildings rose seven stories into the air, curving
protectively around a carpet of closely cropped green. Near one edge crouched
the Hykzoi ship. From this angle, Jason could clearly see what appeared to be
the body of the ship, the thick rectangular bar that hung below the thin, more
fragile-looking ring. He glanced at Aryl, but her attention seemed focused on
the grass.
"Why is the ground so different there?"
"Uh? Oh, it's a putting green. They grow it that way to play golf, a dumb game
where people swat at balls with sticks."
"Doesn't sound any dumber than a lot of the games my father's described from
around the universe." The thought seemed to send her mind off on another
track. "Those
134
ships taking off may be a good sign. This war might not be over yet."
So who cares about your stupid wars, Jason thought with automatic scorn. But
suddenly he realized his reaction didn't spring from real feeling anymore.
Maybe he did care about their wars—a little. He frowned. "Do you think they're
holding the captives in the ship or the buildings?"
"The buildings probably. That's why they landed here, I guess. Those
strikeships aren't very roomy. The crew has probably moved in temporarily as
well. I don't see anyone about."
Jason would as soon he never did. The Bentson sisters' description of these
new aliens made him distinctly uneasy. "There're no windows on the narrow ends
of the buildings. We can sneak up to them that way."
Getting down nearly on all fours, they darted behind sagebrush until this gave
way to ornamental shrubs. Jason tried not to look at his companion. In this
stance, her differently articulated limbs made her appear startlingly alien
again.
Any second he expected to hear a Hyk/oi guard call out, though what a Hykzoi
warning call sounded like, he couldn't guess. Maybe they didn't warn. Maybe
they just zapped first and asked questions later. If it weren't his mom in
there ...
Finally, they were leaning up against the blind end of the building. "Couldn't
they be in the other building as easily as this one?" Jason said, trying to
calm his breathing.
"Maybe, but their ship's parked closer to this one. And anyway, didn't you
notice something funny about some of the windows?"
"No."
"On this building, one whole floor looked kind of
135
blanked out like something was stretched over the windows. The fifth floor up,
I think."
"So what does that mean?"
"I don't know. You're the native here. That's unusual, though, isn't it?"
"Yeah, I guess. So we've just got to sneak into a building that could be
crawling with Hykzoi and take a squint at the fifth floor. Simple."
The first part did prove simple. At their end, an unlocked door led into the

basement. A single bare lightbulb lit a large space filled with the odor of
cleaning supplies and rot.
"Whew," Jason said. "Smells like no one dared pick up the garbage today."
At the sound of his voice, there was a raspy snuffing at the far end of the
room. Something was working at what was apparently an open fuse box. It turned
and Jason recognized it immediately. A huge, animated Swiss army knife. Its
body was flat and elongated, and various-shaped appendages were moving in and
out of slots in its side.
"Down!" Aryl squeaked as one appendage raised toward them. Jason dove for the
concrete floor. The air above him crackled and fizzed.
Beside him, he glimpsed Aryl dart away as the lawn mower she'd been crouching
behind twisted in a beam of deepest red.
In panic, Jason rolled behind a jutting piece of wall. Another red beam
clipped off a chink above him, but most of the sizzling attack was focused
elsewhere. The creature seemed to be after the Tsorian threat, not the
inconsequential native.
Jason peered around the comer. Still standing by the fuse box, the Hykzoi had
turned its flat body sideways as
136
it followed Aryl's flight. Obviously whatever it used for eyes were traveling
that way too. An appendage shot out another scarlet beam, and under cover of
the crackling sound, Jason slipped out of hiding and looked frantically for
some weapon. Grabbing a large rake from against the wall, he rushed at the
creature.
The Hykzoi flipped around and aimed at Jason just as the metal prongs of the
rake smashed into its middle. Flailing, the thing staggered back, one pronged
appendage jabbing into the fuse box.
Suddenly the whole alien arced and crackled with electricity. The room's
single light bulb blinked out, and Jason finally heard what a Hykzoi sounded
like. A high grating cry sawed through his skull. It must have alerted the
entire world.
137
S
1
x t e e n
WHEN THE SCREAM HAD DIED, ARYL SLOWLY GOT UP FROM behind the crates where
she'd huddled. One side of her leg was singed raw, but fear overwhelmed the
pain. Cautiously she peered out into the large silent room.
To her astonishment, Jason was alive and standing. At his feet sprawled the
crumpled, charred body of the Hyk-zoi. Jason turned toward her, his stunned
look changing to one of relief. "Oh. It didn't fry you."
"Not from want of trying. You really killed it?"
"Well, it sort of did that itself."
She looked at the rake still clutched hi Jason's hand. "Not voluntarily, I
suspect. What'll we do with it?"
"We could haul it into a broom closet," he said, his lip curling. Obviously he
felt about that dead charred thing the same way she did.
"No, let's leave it. If anyone comes to investigate, they'll think it just
electrocuted itself accidentally."
"Good, then let's split! There ought to be stairs somewhere."
Aryl wasn't sure that the scream had been loud enough to summon help, but she
didn't want to stick around to see. Anxiously she followed Jason as, after
several false
136
turns, he lead them to the base of a concrete and metal staircase.
"Definitely not the posh route for the rich tenants," he commented, "but it'll
get us up."
As they passed the door for the second floor, they heard faint grating chirps
and whistles from the other side.
"Hykzoi," Aryl whispered, and they practically flew up the next three flights.
Finally, heart pounding and out of breath, she slumped down beside Jason, just

outside the door marked FIVE.
But immediately her relief vanished. Frowning, she got up and examined the
edge of the door. It seemed to be covered with some sort of gray, gummy
material. Gingerly she poked at it. It felt hard and slick. Her claws couldn't
begin to pry it away.
"Weird stuff," Jason said as he joined her. "But I guess it shows that they're
in there, all right."
'This must have been what I saw on the windows. They've got the whole floor
sealed. Saves the bother of guarding prisoners, I guess."
Jason frowned. "Yeah, and it shoots my idea of lowering ourselves from a
window on the floor above."
"Maybe we could find some sort of tool in the basement that'd cut through this
stuff," Aryl suggested.
"Garbage!"
Aryl scowled. She hadn't thought her idea was that bad.
Jason grinned. "I bet the Hykzoi don't know about garbage chutes."
"About what?"
"See? You don't either. They've got them in posh places like this. Shafts in
the central hallways where you can dump your garbage so you don't have to haul
it downstairs. They connect every floor!"
139
Slowly Aryl smiled as the picture fell into place. "So if we go up to the next
floor ..."
"Right!" Jason was already on his way.
He was waiting by the door, watching as she limped up the last few steps.
"Hey, you didn't tell me you were badly hurt."
"That's because I'm not," she snapped, trying not to cringe as movement pulled
at the seared skin on her leg. "Let's get on with it."
Shrugging, Jason cautiously opened the door. Peering over his shoulder, Aryl
thought the hallway not only looked empty, it felt empty. She followed him
inside. The carpet, thick and springy under her boots, had a nauseating
pattern in purple and pink.
The muffled sound of their footsteps only accentuated the utter silence around
them. Doors ranged symmetrically on either side of the hall. Most were closed,
but some had been left gaping open. Aryl hoped they wouldn't stumble across
the charred remains of residents who hadn't made it out in time.
"Ah-ha!" Jason whispered, and Aryl flinched. He was looking at a large metal
flap set into the wall of the hallway and painted the same pinkish color.
Pushing it open, he looked down. Even from where she stood, Aryl caught the
wiff of garbage. "Whew!" Jason said. "Guess that's what we want, all
right."
"And we're supposed to just crawl down it?" "I don't know about you, but I'll
need a rope. Maybe I can find what we need in one of these apartments.
Obviously not everyone stopped to lock up."
He disappeared through one of the open doors, returning a few minutes later
with an assortment of cords clearly
140
meant for purposes other than climbing. Soon, however, they'd tied them
together into a fifteen-foot length. Then, dragging a gilded table from one
apartment, they placed it in front of the shaft and tied one end of the cord
around a leg.
"I hope this antique is up to this," Jason said doubtfully as he climbed on
top. The table creaked but stayed in one piece.
He dropped the rest of the cord down the shaft. "When I'm safe on the next
floor, I'll give the rope a couple of tugs and you follow me. You're not
claustrophobic, are you?"
"What's that?"
"Afraid of tight places."
"Of course not," she snorted, glad that Tsorian complexions didn't betray
emotions as easily as some human complexions seemed to.

"Good." He lifted the flap, stuck one foot in while holding the metal frame,
then awkwardly swung in the other leg. Grabbing the rope, he started lowering
himself down. Aryl held the metal flap to keep it from clanging shut, then
lowered it gently on the taut, occasionally twitching rope.
Aryl definitely did not want to go down there. Yet somehow standing alone in
this abandoned native dwelling seemed almost worse. Almost. There was no
question about it: Tsorians did not like tight, enclosed places. That's why so
many of their walls, even on board ship, were transparent. Still, if her
father was down there ...
The table jerked as the rope tugged twice. Before panic could immobilize her,
Aryl crawled onto the table and wriggled her legs into the metal shaft. She
grabbed the rope and for an awful moment thought that she'd stick half in and
half out. Then she twisted around to a better
141
angle and lowered herself down. The stench of rotting meat and vegetation
wafted up, nearly choking her. She forced herself to lower her body into it.
With a clang the metal flap shut her into the tight, foul darkness. Somehow
she kept herself from scrambling back up. Escape was there below her too, she
told herself desperately. All she had to do was climb down to it.
One hand fumbling past the other, she moved down and down. All sides of the
cold metal shaft were slick with rot. They pressed in as if they wanted to
crush her. She could feel the weight of the building focusing in on this one
spot.
She had to find the way out! Frantically in the total darkness, her feet
groped along the confining walls. They all felt the same. Had she passed the
exit already? No, it might seem as if she'd been in here forever, but probably
she hadn't moved very far. Lowering herself farther, she concentrated on the
exit. At last, her boots tapped against a different type of metal. A few more
feet, and she could see a thin square outline of light. With one hand she
pushed open the flap. Then, letting go of the rope, she hoisted herself out,
hardly caring whether she tumbled onto a rug or a whole nest of Hykzoi.
When she sat up, blinking, her panic had seeped away. She was alone again in a
hallway similar to the one above. Except she could hear subdued voices coming
from a room at the far end. Human voices, and Jason's was among them. She
sprinted down the corridor and careened into the room.
It was strangely dark. The electricity was out, and the gray seal over the
windows was only slightly transparent. Still, she could see several figures.
One was a native male with no hair on his head, and nearby, Jason was standing
with arms around his mother. A Tsorian was lying on a
142
couch. His eyes were open, and he was talking with the others.
She ran to him, then remembering propriety, skidded into an awkward salute.
"Aryl!" Rogav said hoarsely, and smiled. Forgetting everything, she dropped
down beside him and fell against his chest, relishing his strong, gentle hug.
"I didn't really think any Hykzoi could break this bonding," he said softly.
"But maybe you'd better not crush me, now that I'm just getting my body to
function again."
Flustered, she helped him sit up, then noticed how wet his head and shoulders
seemed to be. Marilyn, standing above them, laughed and put down the bowl and
cloth she'd been holding.
"I've been daubing gallons of ice water over him, but he seems to be fully
back with us now. I think the Hykzoi upped their beam on him a little. The
professor and I came around a lot sooner."
For the first time Aryl really focused on the bald human, presumably "the
professor," standing behind the couch. She nodded at him, then looked back at
her father, noticing the half-healed scar across his forehead and cheek.
"Father, are you all right? Are you hurt?"
"Well, the Hykzoi have left me feeling like an imploded star, but otherwise
I'm fine."
"But.. ."

"That," he said, gingerly touching the scar, "is ancient history." Briefly he
looked at Marilyn and smiled. "We've all been through a lot together, and for
the moment it's left us firmly on the same side."
"I hate to break up this multiple reunion," Professor Ackerman said, "but
maybe we ought to get out of here."
"Agreed," Rogav answered, command slipping easily
143
into his voice, "but there are some things I need to know first. You and Jason
go gather some more ropes for his ingenious escape hatch."
The two hurried off, joined after a moment by Marilyn. Aryl sat beside her
father on the couch.
"We followed events on the radio in the cabin," Rogav said. "But those were
native reporters. What's your assessment? Are we two the only Tsorians left on
the planet?"
"Possibly. It sounds as if most of our minor planetary posts are gone.
Certainly the Headquarters is, though I think most of the personnel had left
by then and certainly most of the ships had. The body of the fleet was
planning to deploy near Mars, so if any holdings were defended, that base
would have been."
"Ah. And you've no idea how they fared?"
"No, I don't. But enough of our fleet must remain to be giving the Hykzoi some
sort of resistance. If they'd had a clear victory, they probably wouldn't have
bothered to keep you around."
"Exactly what I was thinking. Definitely the professor's right, we ought to
get going."
"I'd better warn you," she whispered. "You're not going to like the way out."
"Is it worse than staying with the Hykzoi?"
"Not quite."
"Then show me to it."
With Aryl's help, Rogav got unsteadily to his feet and began walking around,
trying to work the paralysis out of his legs.
Professor Ackerman returned, beaming. "We're in luck. The former denizens of
this place seem to have been water-skiers. There was some good strong nylon
rope in the
144
closet. We eked it out with other stuff, but it ought to hold."
They were just at the apartment door when a gargled hooting rose from outside.
"What's that?" Marilyn and the professor said together.
"Sounds Hykzoi," Rogav commented.
Aryl nodded while trying to hurry the others along. "They've probably just
found the fellow downstairs. Jason killed him." She was slightly surprised at
the tone of pride in her voice.
"It was more of an accident really," Jason said, an unmistakable blush
creeping over his face. "We ran into him in the basement where I think he was
trying to patch up the electricity. He started shooting, at Aryl mainly, and I
kind of pushed him into the fuse box. Electrocuted."
Marilyn stopped dead in the hall and hugged her son. "Good night, Jason, I've
gotten you into the most ghastly things."
"Hey, Mom, you didn't get me into them, /got me into them. And right now, I
think we all ought to get out of them."
They hurried down the long hall to the garbage chute where Professor Ackerman
tied one end of the rope to a sturdy metal vacuum cleaner wand and jammed it
across the chute's mouth. The howling wails outside were now rising from
several voices.
"Ritual shock and mourning," Rogav interpreted. "Usually preparatory to
vengeance. We're all right as long as they don't connect that death with us."
"And if they do?" Marilyn asked.
"Then we have a very few minutes to live."
145
seventeen

JASON CLOSED THE FLAP DOWN ON THE ROPE, GETTING A last glimpse of Aryl's pale
hair disappearing like smoke into the darkness. He suspected she was a tad
more claustrophobic than she'd admitted. Not that he was looking forward to
this trip himself, but it beat standing there waiting for the Hykzoi to
suddenly burst in.
Professor Ackerman had gone down first to see if ail was clear. He'd been
followed by Jason's mother and then by Rogav. Aryl and Jason had a major
squabble over who should be next, but finally he'd persuaded her to follow her
father. Now, impatiently, he awaited his turn. If only these places had
multiple garbage chutes the way Tsorians had banks of lift tubes.
The wailing had died down outside. He wondered what sort of weird death
rituals these things engaged in. Maybe they liked to immolate bystanders on
the deceased's funeral pyre. Maybe they'd come bursting up here any second
demanding a life for a life. Maybe first, though, they'd practice dreadful
tortures on him. They probably had various ghastly appendages specialized for
that sort of thing.
He yelped when the rope jerked and went slack. In an instant he grabbed it and
wormed his way into the chute.
146
He was well on his way down before he remembered how much he hated this. Still
it was lots better than waiting to be dismembered by an animated jackknife.
After a seemingly endless descent, his feet clumped against a slant in the
chute. He must have reached bottom. He was just fumbling for the flap when he
heard noises in the room outside. Like chickens clucking from the bottom of a
well. Hykzoi talking.
Jason shuddered and clung tighter to the rope. Had they captured the others?
He didn't hear any human or Tsorian voices. Maybe they'd just come back to
view the scene of the "accident."
For minutes, Jason half hung, half crouched in the cramped, smelly darkness.
Then the sounds faded away. Cautiously he lifted the metal flap and, crouching
down, peered out. In the dim light, the basement was empty and silent. The
charred wreck by the fuse box had been removed.
He stepped out into a bin of garbage. Cursing, he extricated himself, then
began tiptoeing toward the door. Where could the others have gone? They hadn't
planned this part.
Suddenly something snaked out from the wall, grabbed him around the mouth, and
pulled him into a utility closet crammed with warm, anxious bodies, human and
Tsorian.
"Can you still hear them?" the professor whispered in his ear.
"Just a distant babble," Jason said with incredible relief.
Behind him, Rogav's rough Tsorian voice whispered, "Then they won't be all the
way to the front yet. We'd better wait until they are."
For several minutes the five of them waited in the tiny closet. Giddily Jason
wondered if they were breaking some
147
sort of Guinness world record: largest number of humans and Tsorians in a
single closet.
When the voices finally faded, the five unpacked themselves from each other
and headed cautiously for the outside door. The professor slipped out, then
motioned for the others to follow. Crouching low, they scuttled across an
empty stretch of lawn toward a screen of trees.
Jason expected to be blown to cinders any second, but at last they were all
huddled at a spot where a giant tree had fallen over, raising roots and dirt
as a welcome shield against the occupied building behind them.
"Well, where now?" Marilyn said between puffs for breath.
"Stateline's not far from here, is it?" the professor asked.
Jason nodded in reply, pointing vaguely south through the trees. "Four or five
miles that way."
"Okay," Marilyn said. "But if we go to Stateline, then what? There'd be
transportation and communications and such, but I suspect some of us wouldn't

get a very good reception. And if those Hykzoi find us gone, that's probably
the first place they'll think of searching—or burning. I think we'd be better
off away from any settlements."
"Marilyn's right," Rogav said, running a hand over his haggard face. "But only
for you three. I have to try to get in touch with my fleet, if there's
anything left of it. Possibly I could use some sort of native radio device,
but I don't know if I could find one strong enough. The only communicator I
can count on to do that is in that Hykzoi ship, which means we're going to
have to sneak aboard it. But you three had better clear out. This is our war,
after all, even if you are the victims."
148
Jason felt an unexpected wrench inside. He glanced at Aryl, but she was
looking down at a patch of dirt.
Marilyn cleared her throat. "Rogav, there you go again being all dictatorial.
This may have started out as your war, but the choice of battlefields has made
it ours too. You'll have a hard time capturing that ship with only two of
you."
Before the Tsorian commander could reply, the professor added, "It's like I've
been telling him for these last few weeks. The problem with imperialists is
that they never let their wards make their own decisions. Like a bunch of
overprotective parents. You agree, Jason?"
With astonishment, Jason looked at these two "Resis-ters." Those weeks in the
cabin had clearly changed their personal attitudes toward their captive, and
apparently these last few days had altered some of their political views as
well. But then, he didn't exactly feel untouched himself. He nodded. "Sure. I
wouldn't want to miss the last thrilling episode."
Aryl grinned at him.
"Well, then," Rogav said, not looking the least displeased, "we need a plan.
Aryl, were there any guards on that ship when you came?"
"Not that I saw."
"I didn't see any either," Jason said. "But it's parked pretty close to the
building. Maybe they consider that security enough."
"Yes, that's the problem," Rogav said, lapsing into thought.
"Obviously we need to draw their attention somewhere else for a bit," the
professor suggested. "You know, create a diversion."
"That, Professor, is probably the oldest tactic in the
149
universe. Of course, the reason it's still around is that it keeps working.
What do you suggest?"
"The three of us attack from the far side while you two run for the ship."
"Attack with what?" Jason asked. "Rocks and pine-cones?"
"How about blowing something up?" Marilyn suggested.
"You could blow up those automobiles," Aryl said, pointing to the parking lot.
"That one of yours, Jason, blew up splendidly."
Jason's mother shot him a look but didn't say anything.
The professor nodded. "Yes, matches in the gas tank."
"That would blow us up too," Jason objected.
"Couldn't we put in some sort of fuse?" his mother asked.
The professor slapped his hands together. "That's it, then. We three sneak
over to the parking lot, stick strips torn from our clothing into some gas
tanks, light them, and run like hell for the trees."
"While Aryl and I run for the ship," Rogav added. "You ought to have been a
soldier, Professor."
"Up until recently, I preferred theorizing to acting." Ackerman stood up.
"Well, let's deploy."
Cautiously the five crept back toward the outer fringe of trees. For a moment,
Rogav and Marilyn stepped aside and spoke quietly to each other. Jason looked
at Aryl, noticing suddenly how the clear mountain light made her hair glow
like mist. He slowly turned red and tried to force out the right words. "Aryl,
I'm sorry about... everything. Well, almost everything, I guess. Now that I've

gotten to know you, I mean."
To Jason's surprise, Aryl, always glib of tongue, seemed
150
to be having as much difficulty as he. "I'm the one who should be apologizing,
for a lot of things. I guess I should be thanking you too."
"Come on, everyone, no time for teary farewells," the professor said. "Though
I've got to admit, I'll miss all those late-night discussions of Tsorian
astrophysics. It helped make up for ten years of academic frustration." He
started toward the parking lot, then looked back. "Good luck, you purple
imperialists."
Jason's sight seemed oddly blurred as he began running behind the first rank
of trees. But gradually fear took over. He felt that every dark window in
those buildings was concealing an armed Hykzoi staring at him. Yet no beams of
red light shot out. He could hear his mother running less than silently just
behind him.
Out of breath, the three humans finally reached the spot where the asphalt
parking lot came closest to the encircling trees. They were still about a
hundred feet of scrubby grassland away, however. Peering out, Jason could see
several Hykzoi moving in and out of the building's lobby. He couldn't tell
what they were doing. Hopefully they didn't have enough compassion for their
prisoners to bring them food or check on how they were.
At the far end of the putting green, the Hykzoi ship waited innocently. Jason
could see that something was dangling down from the thick, shoeboxlike
crossbar. It might be a rope ladder if it weren't so oddly arranged. He didn't
see anything else, though. No sneaking movement of maroon and black shapes.
Good. Maybe if he couldn't see them, the Hykzoi couldn't either.
Jason jumped as the professor touched his shoulder. He'd taken off his shirt
and torn it into shreds. Ceremoniously he handed several to Jason and to his
mother along
151
with a packet of matches each. "Knew there was a good reason for not giving up
smoking," he whispered. Then, getting on all fours, he began skittering across
the grass toward the nearest of the parked cars.
Jason looked at his matchbook: "Starlight Mortuary, a Future of Eternal
Peace." Great. He dropped it into his pocket. His mother turned to him and
gave him a quick, teary hug. Then she walked west a ways through the trees and
anally crept across the open space to the far end of the parking lot. Sighing,
Jason crouched down into the tall, prickly grass and headed for a spot midway
between the other two.
The scrubby stretch ended at a feeble bank of ornamental shrubbery. Jason
squinted through the leaves, and seeing that the other two had already moved
in, he scuttled like a crab across the asphalt.
The first car he tried had a firmly locked gas cap. So did the second. But the
third twisted off easily. Just then a very poor imitation of an owl call
floated over the parking lot. One of the saboteurs was ready. Jason hoped the
Hykzoi didn't know anything about native birds. He looked at the strips of
cloth in his hand, doubled one over, then stuck it into the mouth of the gas
tank. Good thing Ackerman had decided to tear up his own shirt, Jason thought,
since the particular T-shirt he was wearing had his favorite rock group on it.
Nervously pulling the matchbook from his pocket, he made his own owl call.
Sure were a lot of owls about in broad daylight. A minute later a third call
rose from another part of the parking lot. The two Tsorians had better be
ready, because here comes the diversion, he thought grimly.
Shakily Jason struck a match. It failed. He lit another
152
and applied the wavering flame to the cloth. Nothing happened, and the match
sputtered out. He tried again. Was the blasted material flame-retardant or
something? He tried yet again, and this time it caught, smoldering at one end
of the cloth in a feeble worm of flame. Then with a sudden whoosh, the cloth
flared up.

In a panic Jason leaped back and began running for the trees. At one end of
the parking lot there was a swoosh, then a loud explosion. He looked back and
saw the professor running like a madman. Behind Jason, his own car exploded
with a deafening roar almost obscuring the third explosion to his right.
Heat smashed him from behind like a fist. He staggered, caught his foot in a
hole, and sprawled facedown in the stickery grass. He was elbowing himself up
when he saw a dark-red beam slice through the air and catch the professor in
midstride. Arms and legs suddenly aflame, the man cartwheeled through the air
like some horrible firework. His screams were sharp and short.
With a surprising pang, Aryl watched the three natives slipping away through
the trees. This shouldn't hurt, she told herself. These were aliens on an
alien world. But somehow that word didn't have quite the same meaning anymore.
She looked at her father and saw that he was also watching the retreating
forms. Then he straightened up and with a gesture to her began walking in the
opposite direction. Aryl followed, trying to keep up and walk quietly at the
same time, but the ground seemed littered with all manner of things that
cracked.
Finally they worked their way around to where the short-cropped patch of grass
came closest to the trees. Not
153
far from its edge sat the Hykzoi ship. Aryl shuddered, fascinated and
horrified. She'd never seen one this close. And now she had to do more than
look at it, she had to get into it.
Following Rogav's lead, Aryl crouched behind a bush and prepared to wait. The
dusty-green leaves smelled sharp and medicinal in the late-morning sun.
Through the screen they created, she studied the ship and the strange tangled
cords that hung from it.
"What's that?" she whispered.
"That's the Hykzoi equivalent of an entry ramp. It fits their odd assortment
of legs."
Almost as if on cue, the kinked and twisted cords began to jiggle, and a
multilegged Hykzoi scrambled down to the ground. From there it scuttled off
toward the building.
"What was it doing there?" Aryl wondered.
"Could be anything. Making repairs, using the communicator, even using the
sanitary facilities for all I know. But it better not come back before our
friends start then-diversion. I feel awfully vulnerable without any weapon."
Aryl looked about, then slipped from her hiding place into the trees. In
moments she'd returned with two fallen branches. "How about clubs?"
Rogav chuckled. "Nothing like going native."
"Come on, things here aren't as primitive as all that."
Her father nodded. "I know, Daughter. But they may well be pushed back to that
state if we don't succeed in this. So hand over my redoubtable weapon."
For ages, it seemed, they crouched behind the bush. The sun, the exotic
smells, the droning insects, had almost lulled Aryl to sleep when a loud
explosion tore the air at the far side of the buildings.
She and Rogav tensed as a second and then a third
154
explosion followed, and Hykzoi burst from the building and started running in
that direction.
Like missiles, the two Tsorians darted toward the waiting ship. Everywhere
there was noise and frenzy. Several adjacent cars seemed to have blown up as
well, and Aryl saw a red energy beam slash through the air. A flaming body
spiraled upward. Instantly she felt ill. Jason was agile and quick, but...
Rogav, several strides ahead of her, reached the dangling cords and began
pulling himself up—just as a Hykzoi appeared at the top and began scrambling
down. In startled confusion, they met halfway. Rogav tried to grab the other's
slicing limbs as it struggled to bring out and aim its weapon.
For a moment, the climbing frame rocked violently, sounds of the conflict
obscured by the noise elsewhere. Then with a sudden jerk, the Hykzoi

somersaulted to the ground, landed upright, and aimed its weapon. Aryl leaped
forward and brought down her club. Pieces of wood splintered away as the
Hykzoi staggered and clattered to the ground.
"Hail primitivisni!" Rogav called. "Hurry!"
Leaping over their fallen opponent, Aryl sprang for the climbing frame, and as
it swayed and bucked, she scrambled up its awkwardly spaced rungs into the
ship.
Once inside, she remained crouching on the floor staring at the very
alien-looking interior. Everything seemed oddly angular, and the yellow-green
light made her edgy.
Her father's difficulties with the ship were more practical. "In theory I know
how to work their equipment, but I don't want to set off any alarms along with
the communicator. See if you can find a way to close that hatch-quietly."
155
Aryl started looking around for controls when suddenly out of the opening she
saw a Hykzoi running toward them. It seemed to notice its fallen comrade;
then, increasing its speed, it pulled out a weapon.
"Father, they've seen us! We'd better lift off!"
"We can try."
For a moment nothing happened, except that the Hykzoi was getting closer. Then
the air began throbbing with noise, and Aryl could see through the overhead
view-panels that the encircling red ring, the propulsion unit, was beginning
to glow. Suddenly the deck shuddered and she found herself lying on it with
the ship now several hundred feet in the air.
Below she could see the burning cars and two natives galloping over open
grasslands toward the lake. Running clumsily after them, a couple of Hykzoi
were having difficulty aiming their weapons, but the air was still
crisscrossed with their beams.
"We've got to help them!" Aryl insisted. Her father, frowning out through a
view screen, growled, "The native phrase is 'easier said than done.'"
Before he'd even finished his sentence, however, the twisting of one prismatic
dial dropped the ship nearly to the ground. Then they began gliding toward the
lake. The pursuit was right before them.
Aryl braced herself and peered out the open hatch. Below were meadow grasses,
then suddenly they swept low over two cowering Hykzoi. With a shudder, the
ship slowed. The climbing frame, still hanging down, just brushed the tops of
bushes.
Suddenly Jason and his mother were below. From where they crouched in the
grass, their wide eyes stared up into hers. "Grab the frame!" she yelled over
the thrum156
ming of the energy ring. A moment's hesitation, then Jason lunged for the end
that was erratically bobbing up and down.
"Keep it steady!" Aryl called over her shoulder.
"Aye, Captain," came her father's dry reply, but the ship did stabilize. In a
moment, Marilyn was climbing upward while Jason tried to hold the frame steady
for her. When she'd reached the top, he grabbed the lurching cords himself and
began following.
Suddenly energy bolts were bursting around him. Some came from the earlier
pursuers and some from reinforcements carrying a larger weapon, now aimed
directly at the ship.
Vigorously Rogav worked the controls, and the ship shot forward. Below it, the
frame swayed wildly. A last energy bolt sliced into a section above and beside
Jason, snapping connecting links.
157
eighteen
AS THE AIR STOPPED CRACKLING AROUND HIM, JASON CLUNG
fiercely to the remaining rungs. He opened his eyes to see grass whipping by a
few feet below him. Beyond stretched the blue of the lake.
In moments they were skimming over the water, the bottom of the climbing frame

slapping wildly at the white-capped waves. Jason was afraid to loosen his
grip, but was even more afraid that the ship would take another erratic dip.
Above the shrieking wind, he could hear voices urging him to climb. Taking his
eyes from the inky-blue water, he did. Doggedly he pulled himself up, hand
over hand, until other hands grabbed him and pulled him on board.
He rolled over on the metal deck, for a minute too dizzy even to sit up. Then
his mother and Aryl helped him onto what was apparently a Hykzoi seat, a
shattered-looking prismatic pillar. He leaned against the jagged back and
stared out a view screen.
They seemed to be flying over the water like a skipped pebble, less than a
dozen feet from the surface. Jason caught a glimpse of an appalled-looking
water-skier before they shot over his head. Probably didn't do his form any
good, Jason thought, trying to ignore the rapidly ap158
preaching far shore with its trees, buildings, and mountains.
Aryl was less reserved, however. "Father, you have noticed those rather
high-looking mountains ahead?"
Rogav's only reply was an annoyed grunt, but moments later the ship veered
upward. Abruptly Jason slid from the jagged seat. Rolling across the deck, he
suddenly found himself staring out the open hatch. His fingers desperately
gripped the edge. He had a swirling glimpse of houses and trees before someone
hauled him back by his feet.
"Rogav," said his mother's taut voice behind him, "could we please shut this
hatch?"
"Perhaps, if you can find the controls."
Avoiding the yawning opening in the middle of the cabin, the three of them set
about searching. One control Jason found didn't do anything but dim the
lights. Another set off a frantic whirling of vinegar-scented air through the
cabin. Finally Aryl discovered a small projection near the hatch itself.
Pushing it caused the climbing frame to rattle upward and the hatch to swirl
closed like a camera lens. Jason sighed with relief.
Only then did he turn back to the view screen. He was astonished at how high
they were, although "height" hardly seemed the right term anymore. Below was a
whole relief map of northern California. Directly beneath them, the Sierras
were piled up like a crumpled blanket. Then this smoothed into the hazy sweep
of the Central Valley and ended in the distant purple of the Coast Ranges.
Beyond that, the gray smear of the Pacific Ocean was becoming more visible by
the second.
Given the speed at which they were rising, Jason was surprised he didn't feel
as if he were on some super eleva159
tor—with his stomach left on the ground floor. He wondered how this ship
counteracted that.
Beside him, his mother apparently was also noticing the technology. "Poor
Professor Ackerman," she said softly. "How he would have loved to see one of
these ships on the inside."
Jason nodded but couldn't say anything. The picture of that horrible death was
still too vivid. To drive it away, he turned his attention to the control
panels.
Aryl had joined her father, and the two Tsorians were puzzling over the
unfamiliar controls. Suddenly the sight of them, with his native state rapidly
receding hi the background, brought the whole thing into focus. Six months ago
he'd been down there somewhere, leading a reasonably normal life. Even when he
had gotten involved with the Resistance, it had been almost a game. That
creature standing there had been the arch-villain, Rogav Jy, the enemy
commander. Everything had been clear and impersonal.
And now in a few days the picture had been torn apart and reassembled. The
enemy wasn't the enemy; the arch-villain was the father of someone he almost
considered a friend; the world he'd grown up in had been blown away; he'd just
seen a good man give up his life for people he'd tried to defeat; and now he,

Jason Sikes, was escaping truly ghastly creatures in a stolen spaceship.
Dizzily he leaned back. But at least there was one fixed point in his life. He
had his mother again. Not that she was your average mother, he admitted, but
he wouldn't trade all the normality hi the world for what they had together.
He smiled toward her where she sat on another pillar seat, eyes on the view
screen. He didn't totally understand this
160
Tsorian bonding business Aryl kept talking about, but it couldn't be all that
different
At the moment, however, Tsorian father and daughter were looking more worried
than sentimental. Rogav turned and frowned at the two humans, adding new
shadows to his seamed and craggy face. "I'm afraid we have taken you—what is
the native phrase—'from the pot into the oven.'"
"Try 'out of the frying pan into the fire,'" Marilyn suggested.
"Whatever. But you might have been better off if we'd left you running through
that swamp dodging blaster fire. Professor Ackerman could be the lucky one. If
the Hykzoi back there manage to inform others of our escape, we could be
intercepted at any moment."
"Can't you contact your own ships?" Marilyn asked. "If there are any around,
that is."
'That's the problem, or one of them. Obviously there's no exclusive Tsorian
band on this Hykzoi communication device, and not knowing where our ships
might be, I'll have to send a pretty broad spectrum appeal."
"But if you broadcast the coordinates where they can meet us," Marilyn pointed
out, "mightn't the Hykzoi pick that up too?"
"Maybe, but I think I know a few codes they haven't broken yet." With a few
more adjustments on one set of controls, he leaned forward and launched into
harsh, guttural Tsorian, repeating the short message over and over.
Jason had switched his attention back to the view screen when Aryl came up
behind him. "Jason, come look at this."
He followed to where a large hexagonal frame was set into the floor. She
crouched down, pressed a metal stud in
161
the frame, and suddenly that section of floor turned transparent; another
twist and it looked like metal again.
"Not bad!" he said, twisting the stud himself. The land below was green and
brown with occasional cloud shadows rolling over it. Roads crisscrossed in
seemingly random patterns until they converged in geometric splotches that
must be cities.
"Look!" Jason said, pointing to a glint of silver moving through the sky below
them. He wondered if the passengers were pointing up at the spaceship.
"Looks like a commercial airliner," his mother commented, coming up behind
them.
"I'm surprised," Aryl said, "with all this happening that they're still
running flights."
Marilyn shook her head. "I'm not. When you first invaded, we stopped
everything. But when the world didn't come to an end, we started up our lives
almost as if nothing had changed. We've gotten pretty good at pretending
that." She was silent a moment then added, "I used to think that was
cowardly." She turned and walked over to join Rogav.
For a moment, Jason watched them. The Tsorian was huddled intently over the
console while the human stood behind him, a hand casually on his shoulder.
Jason turned back to the view below him, but he kept thinking about his
mother's last sentence. Maybe it was not adapting to reality that was
cowardly. He needed to think about that; he needed to think about a lot of
things.
But there wasn't time now. Rogav interrupted his steady broadcast with a sharp
exclamation Jason recognized as a Tsorian curse. The Commander grabbed the
controls and abruptly the ship jolted into a violent turn, then an evasive
swoop to the north. Jason found himself lying facedown in

162
the middle of the viewport, the landscape lurching sicken-ingly below him.
With a whimper he reached up and twisted the stud.
"Whew!" He rolled over on the now solid-seeming floor. "What happened?"
"That!" Aryl said, sitting up and pointing out the front view screen.
Two glowing red rings were bearing down on them from above. A burst of
squealing language blared from the communicator, followed in moments by a red
flare from one of the ships. Rogav was now working the controls intently. The
ship half flipped over and then shot sideways. An energy burst passed them in
a glittering shimmer. Then the ship shuddered as Rogav got off an attack of
his own.
Their attackers launched a new volley as Rogav sent the ship rocketing upward
while firing several more shots. One of the red ships suddenly blossomed into
flame. Flaring bits shot off like fireworks, then the whole fireball plummeted
downward.
Aryl, Jason, and his mother let out a cheer. Jauntily, Rogav saluted them,
then turned back to the screen.
Their elation was short-lived. The remaining ship launched a new attack,
which, despite their stomach-wrenching evasions, filled the view screens with
spinning red sparks. The next shot hit them.
For a moment the world was soundless and blindingly red. Then it exploded with
sound. Jason was flung against some metal surface. They were tumbling so much
he couldn't tell if it was a floor, ceiling, or wall.
Slowly, like a fever, the red glow and the sound faded. Jason opened his eyes.
The violent twisting had subsided into a lazy spiral; the ship was more or
less upright.
Amazed that he could, Jason sat up. His mother and
163
Rogav were sprawled over the controls like a couple of rag dolls. The air at
that end of the cabin was fuzzy with a violet haze. He smelled a thick sweet
odor vaguely like licorice. Dizzily he stood up.
"Don't! Stay away from there!" Aryl croaked in a weak voice. She staggered to
her feet beside him. "That's althon gas—the coils must have ruptured."
"Will it kill them?"
"It could, and us too. Where's that air clearer?"
For a moment, Jason's mind was a blank. The smell of licorice was getting
worse. Feeling weak and dizzy, he staggered over to a control knob he thought
he had tried earlier. Was this the one, or would it blow up the ship? Didn't
much matter. He pressed it and hung on to the wall, wondering if he would
throw up or pass out first.
Slowly he realized that there was air whipping about him as if he were
standing on a sailboat. The cabin now smelled more of pickles than licorice.
The combination didn't do his stomach any good, but his head was clearing.
Unsteadily he walked toward the controls. Aryl was already there, gently
turning her father over. The old scar on his forehead was now supplemented by
a large bruise, showing midnight blue against the maroon of his skin.
"Let's lay them down on the deck," she said. "If the althon gas were going to
kill them, it would have done it already. So they should be all right once
they come out of this. Good thing our deflectors held as long as they did, or
we'd all be cinders by now."
Jason hoisted up his mother and moved her to the floor, trying to make her as
comfortable as possible. That gas leak hadn't been the only damage. One side
of her face was singed, and smoke was rising from some of the controls.
Standing up again, Jason saw Aryl gazing fearfully
164
through the upper view screen. The red ring hung way above them now.
"I don't think the controls are totally shot," she said. "But if I try
fiddling with them and this ship shows any signs of life, they'll be after us
in a moment."
"And these deflector things are out of commission?"

"We couldn't withstand someone throwing rocks at us."
For a while they stood in silence, but the ship's steady downward spiral was
making Jason dizzy again. He leaned against a pillar seat and closed his eyes.
"If we keep going down like this," he ventured at last, "we'll smash up in
somebody's pasture."
"And if I fiddle with the controls too soon, we'll be blown apart first."
"Well, just don't wait too long." Jason crouched miserably on the deck.
Perversely he reached across and flicked the view screen to clear again. It
wasn't really pastures they'd smash into, he realized. It was a city, or at
least some sort of suburban sprawl. Roads, housing developments, shopping
malls, all were spinning closer and closer toward him. "Hey, if you can slow
this thing down, you'd better do it!"
"Okay, but our sensors are out. I can't tell if that Hyk-zoi ship is still
around or not. How close are we?"
"Close enough! I can see cars and little dots where people are in swimming
pools."
"Maybe this'll do it." She tried something, but nothing happened.
"Better try something else, Aryl."
She tugged and twisted some more, but the spiraling drop continued.
"I can see people standing around pointing at us. God, I can see their faces.
Do something!"
165
Frantically, Aryl jabbed and poked and hit the controls. Suddenly the ship
fluttered, dropped like a stone for a moment, then stopped. Lazily it rocked
back and forth not forty feet from the ground.
When Jason opened his eyes again, he saw that they were hanging directly over
a parking lot, a parking lot for a school. The playground equipment gave that
away. So did all of the faces plastered against the windows on his side of the
building.
Guess that's a good way to enliven the school day, he thought crazily. We
couldn't finish our spelling test today, Mommy, because a crippled spaceship
fell down into our parking lot.
"Well, at least we're not going down anymore," Aryl said in a slightly quavery
voice. "But I'm not at all sure how to make us go in any other direction. So
many of the controls seem to be fused."
"Aren't there any backups?" Jason asked. Below, a little kid was standing in
the playground throwing rocks at them. He waved at the kid just as a woman ran
out of the building and snatched him away,
"There ought to be, and I'd know where they were on a Tsorian ship. I can
guess, but maybe we'd better lie low a bit in case that Hykzoi is still
about."
Lie low, Jason thought, how appropriate. Stretching out on his stomach, he
looked out the viewport. Now it seemed the kids were actually evacuating the
school. In panicky groups, they were being herded into buses and cars. He felt
he should try to send a message that no one was planning to disintegrate the
place. Maybe he should write "we come in peace" across the viewport. But why
bother? Those kids were getting a day off school. He wouldn't mind going home
for a nap himself.
166
* * *
He woke up, astonished that he'd been able to sleep. His cheek felt flat and
cold from having been pressed against the viewport. It must have been the
lingering effects of that gas. Below him the shadows of the playground and
school had lengthened into late afternoon. The parking lot was all but
deserted. Except for a military jeep with guys in it.
Startled, he opened his eyes wide and craned around to see more of the scene
below. That jeep was being joined by a large truck covered with drab-green
canvas. It parked, and soldiers bristling with rifles poured out.
"Aryl," he called, "can rifles do anything to our ship in this condition?"
No answer. He turned to see Aryl slumped in sleep over the console.

Getting up, Jason saw that Rogav and his mother were still out too. But at
least their breathing was less ragged. In his sleep, the Tsorian had thrown an
arm around Marilyn's waist. Jason figured he should feel indignant, but he
couldn't manage it. Just being alive seemed precious enough. He didn't feel
like quibbling over the details.
He walked to Aryl and shook her shoulder. "Hey, wake up! There are a bunch of
soldiers down there with rifles. Can bullets damage the ship when it's like
this?"
"Huh? Oh. Let me see." She ran a hand through her pale tousled hair and
stumbled over to the viewport. Kneeling down, she peered out.
"No, I don't think projectile weapons like that could do much, even with our
deflectors out. But ... that now ... that is something else."
Confused, Jason knelt beside her and followed her gaze
167
to the far edge of the scene. A large truck had just driven into view, and it
carried a very mean-looking piece of artillery. Even as he watched, the truck
backed up, pointing the barrel of the gun directly at them.
168
nineteen
ARYL LOOKED FROM THE GUN TO JASON, WHOSE PALE COM-plexion had become suddenly
paler.
"We could write a message on the view screen saying we're not Hykzoi," he
suggested.
"No good. These windows are only transparent one way." Standing up, she rushed
over to where Rogav was lying and began shaking his shoulders. "Father, wake
up, we need you!" She got nothing but a faint groan. "Please wake up. Hey,
I've only been bonded a year. I don't know how to fly a Hykzoi ship, not even
one that works!"
Finally she stood up again, trying to control her trembling. "It's no use.
With althon gas they won't come to till they're ready. I don't even have any
medical supplies!"
"Aryl," Jason said from his post by the viewport, "it does really look like
they're getting ready to fire that thing."
"All right, all right, I'll try again!" She plunked herself down at the
console and began struggling with what she hoped were the right controls.
Finally one broke loose, but nothing happened beyond a shower of sparks. She
tried another and another. Suddenly the ship quivered and dropped another ten
feet.
169
"Wrong direction!" Jason gasped. "But that did shake up some soldiers."
Angrily Aryl tugged at a frozen lever. "I don't understand why this
doesn't..." Abruptly their ship shot forward, skimming just above several
buildings.
"Look out!" Jason yelled as he glanced toward the forward view screen. A tall
apartment building loomed in their path. With a squeal, Aryl yanked at another
lever and the ship veered with only seconds to spare.
"Try to get that pink knob to move!" she yelled to Jason, at the same time
struggling to steer clear of onrush-ing buildings. "I think it's the vertical
control, and it's jammed."
Jason tugged valiantly at the thing while Aryl kept her fear-widened eyes on
the screen. If only she could slow things down a little.
"Here, you steer. I'll see if I can do something about the speed."
"But," Jason protested as he reluctantly grabbed the steering levers, "I don't
even have my driver's license yet!"
"You expect your police to stop and arrest you? Just steer."
Jason sank into the seat and looked with horror at the buildings ahead.
Jerkily he steered around one, but they seemed to be getting taller in this
part of town. Aryl had better move fast.
Throwing herself on her back, Aryl crawled under the control console and
tugged at a metal plate. Nothing happened. Then she stuck her claws around the

edges and yanked with all her strength. The plate came away, revealing a
complex of wires and instruments that only vaguely resembled diagrams she had
studied. Still, it was clear that some things were not as they should be.
Those fused wires,
170
for instance, or this toggle dangling loose from this connection. Hesitantly
she reached hi and reconnected the two, her three claws working like delicate
instruments. She repeated the process with several other mangled-looking bits.
Then she called to her companion.
"There's a green sliding dial on your right. Try moving it now."
At the moment, Jason was absorbed in veering around a multistory parking
garage, shooting down a building-lined street, then dodging a church spire.
But when they sailed over a park and ornamental lake, he had a chance to
locate the green dial and slide it an experimental inch.
Abruptly they plumeted downward. Aryl rolled out from under the panels to see
the view screen darkened with green water and a few flashes that might have
been terrified fish. "Other way!"
Already Jason was ramming the dial in the other direction. They erupted in a
cloud of spray and continued shooting skyward.
Aryl tried not to giggle, not knowing how sensitive humans were to being
laughed at. Then she knew she needn't have worried.
Jason's tense shoulders relaxed with spasms of laughter. "Good thing the
driving examiner isn't along on this trip. He might ask me to parallel park on
Main Street."
"No," she said between laughing gasps, "he'd have his hands clamped over his
eyes all the way."
Aryl went back to tugging at the pink control, which suddenly moved fairly
easily. Their speed immediately slowed. "Well, I got the acceleration and
vertical controls reversed, but at least they both work now."
"So where do we go?" Jason said, finally recovering himself.
171
"Well, I know the coordinates Father transmitted, but we don't know if any
Tsorians ever received them."
"So if that radio thing still works, we'll have to start broadcasting again."
"But I don't know the code. It's a matter of very subtle inflection."
"Hmm. And if you broadcast in straight Tsorian, the Hykzoi are sure to pick it
up and meet us there."
"Should we try English?" Aryl suggested.
"Better not. That slime Jerry Barns got through to the Hykzoi hi English. They
must have done at least that much homework before invading this place."
"Right." She frowned a moment then looked specula-lively at Jason. "But a
number of our people learned other Earth languages besides the official one.
Some collect languages as a hobby, to pass the time on diiferent assignments.
Do you know any?"
"Other languages?" Jason paled again, then blushed. Aryl marveled at the
versatility of his complexion. "Well, I... er... I've studied a little Spanish
in school. But I'm only in the second year. Senora Cortez thinks I really
don't 'apply' myself. She's right."
Aryl grinned. "Well, now's your chance. I'll tell you what to say, and you
translate it into Spanish."
"But my grammar's awful! And I don't have much vocabulary."
"Nobody's going to grade you on it! All we need is something that no Hykzoi is
likely to know and some Tsorian might."
Jason turned to the communication console. "I just
hope Senora Cortez isn't listening on a CB," he muttered.
Aryl outlined the basic message, and Jason, with much
grumbling, finally came up with a translation and started
172
repeating it into the communicator. Pretty soon he seemed to have slipped into
a confident rhythm, and Aryl turned her attention to the two adults still

lying on the deck. The human was whimpering slightly and seemed to be coming
out of it. Aryl waved Jason back to his broadcasting and said she'd take care
of them.
Gently she raised Marilyn's head onto her lap and began rubbing her temples.
She wasn't sure this helped with humans, but it probably wouldn't hurt. Now
that she really looked at her, Aryl had to admit this woman was not
unattractive. Her skin, of course, was much too soft and the wrong shade. And
her nose was too short for beauty. But her hair, unorthodox color that it
might me, was striking, almost the color of sunsets around here. And politics
aside, she seemed a nice enough person, and certainly close to her son, even
without bonding. Aryl sighed. She really couldn't blame her father ...
Her thoughts were interrupted by a new voice, bursting from the communicator.
"Buenos dias, senor," said an obviously Tsorian voice. Haltingly it continued,
leaving Aryl furious that she couldn't understand. As soon as the voice signed
off, she blurted out, "What did he say?"
"He said they're coming. Loosely translated, that is. His accent was even
worse than mine."
"Who is coming?" a weak voice asked.
Aryl looked down into Marilyn's open blue eyes. "How are you feeling?" she
asked anxiously.
"I have a splitting headache. I kept dreaming I was back in school and Jason
was trying to teach me Spanish. Who did you say was coming?" She struggled to
sit up. "Where's Rogav?"
"Here," a hoarse voice said beside them. "Wishing I 173
weren't. My head's exploding. But to repeat the question, who is coming?"
"Your people are, sir/' Jason answered. "They just replied that they'll meet
us at the coordinates you set."
Rogav looked surprised. "They responded to the broadcast I sent?"
Aryl smiled. "No, to the one Jason sent. He's been broadcasting in Spanish,
figuring no Hykzoi would know it."
"Good work, Jason," Rogav said, cautiously sitting up. "If you were part of
our forces, I'd give you some sort of commendation."
Aryl watched a blush steal over Jason's face again. She wondered whether it
was pride, embarrassment, or a confusing mix of both. She knew that last well
enough.
Helping the other two into seats, Aryl and Jason briefly described their
difficulties with the Hykzoi, the U.S. Army, and the ship's controls. After a
while, Rogav commented, "That phrase was very apt. 'Out of the frying pan,
into the fire.' Have I got it right now?"
"Yes," Marilyn said distractedly, "and it is apt since there're some more of
those red ships coming."
Immediately they all crowded around the floor viewport to watch a large
cluster of red rings rising toward them from the night-darkened planet. Aryl's
heart sank. "Did they know Spanish after all?"
"I think not," Rogav said, hurrying back to the control console. "They've
probably been tracking this ship since it cleared the planet's surface. You
said our external sensors are out?"
"None are registering. We didn't try the weapons again."
"Well, if they work, we can go down fighting, but with
174
no deflectors the battle won't last long. Are we near those rescue coordinates
yet?"
"Probably," Jason said. "But we weren't too sure about the setting. Hey,
look!"
Quickly Aryl joined him at the front view screen. For a flashing moment she
felt as if she were back on her nursery world, swimming in a quiet lagoon and
looking up at the sun glinting on the surface. She'd push off and rise through
a shoal of glittering blue fish. There they were, blue triangular lights, a
shoal of them! Coming closer and closer.
"The Fleet," Rogav sighed. "Or what's left of it."

When they turned their attention back to the bottom screen, however, it was
clear that the Hykzoi weren't giving up their quarry without a fight. Aryl saw
an energy bolt rising toward them almost in slow motion. In moments, red light
had engulfed them.
She huddled on the lurching deck, arms thrown over her head. Incongruously she
thought of the times as a little girl when she'd run inside at every meteor
shower, fearfully wrapping herself in her sleeping mat. She longed for that
mat now, something protective and safe.
Someone was huddling close beside her, but there was nothing to see besides
bursts of red and blue. She could feel whimpering in her throat, but the only
sounds were the shrieking explosions.
Aryl awoke to utter silence. And darkness. She was a jettisoned body, floating
alone in space, drifting forever between the stars. Then she knew she must be
alive. Her lungs were laboring to draw in thin, cold air. It was the ship that
was floating derelict in space. And the silence was not total. Somewhere there
was breathing other than her
own.
175
But there was no mechanical noise. The ship sounded dead. It felt dead. It had
none of that almost undetectable sense of working engines and life-support
systems. In a few minutes the air would be gone, and they would die with the
ship.
"Aryl?" Her father's voice came from above her. Reaching up, she gripped his
hand, then swayed to her feet as Rogav held her to him, fighting back the
growing cold.
From near her feet came another tremulous voice. "Mom, where are you? Are we
still alive?"
"Here I am, Jason." There was a shuffling noise, and Aryl knew Marilyn had
made her way to her son.
Rogav spoke quietly into the dark and spreading cold. "We're all alive for the
moment. But if there aren't any Tsorians left to retrieve us ..."
Nobody finished the sentence. The air was thin now and cut Aryl's throat like
cold knives. But her eyes were getting used to the darkness. She could make
out the huddled forms of Jason and his mother.
Her heart tightened. She and her father could expect a death like this. But
Jason ... it was sad he had to die not even touching his own world. Maybe this
battle was his, but he'd hardly asked for it.
Pulling herself away from her father, she stepped toward the two natives. She
could see them better now. Tears glistened in the eyes of the woman, but
Jason's eyes were turned toward hers.
In fact, she could see them surprisingly well. At the same moment, all four
looked to the forward view screen and on numbed feet stumbled toward it.
Luminous, star-flecked space was taking on a definite blue cast. In moments,
the edge of a glowing blue ship lowered into view. Their own ship gave a
convulsive shudder.
176
"An energy lock," Rogav whispered hoarsely. "They're pulling us in."
By the time they had clanked against the hull of the other ship, the air Aryl
was gasping seemed almost too thin and cold to fight for. Dizzily she and her
father struggled to hold up the two natives. Jason's breathing was shallow and
ragged as he sagged against her. The blue light now flooding the cabin showed
his eyes dazed and filmy looking. "Don't give up now," she gasped. Then her
knees buckled, and they slid in a heap to the floor, joined moments later by
the other two.
Blue light was replaced with clear. There was more thumping and clanging. They
must be inside the other ship, she thought dully. But could anyone get to
them? Could this hatch even be opened with their own power out?
The answer came in a wondrous burst of light and air, rich breathable air. The
hatch on the floor yawned open, and in seconds black-uniformed Tsorians were
scrambling in and pulling the four of them out.

Soon she was standing on a new, familiar-feeling deck. Doctors fussed about
them with injections and monitors, but the air was all she needed. She took
great deep breaths and joyously hugged the others. Her pride in them all
seemed every bit as heady as the new oxygen in her blood.
Then she struggled to recover some dignity as officers came up to them,
saluting her father and expressing their delight at having him back. Aryl
scanned the faces and suddenly saw someone standing shyly back, a radiant
smile on his usually dour face. Theelk. She shot him an answering grin. If
anyone deserved to have survived, deserved to have seen the return of their
Commander, k was First Adjutant Theelk.
177
Soon the four of them were ushered out of the hold and into lift tubes, which
brought them to the top of the command bridge. The dome arching overhead was
transparent, showing the sparse canopy of stars spread in patterns Aryl was
beginning to recognize. To one side spread the rim of a blue-green planet.
As disheveled and battered as the Fleet Commander was, his arrival brought
unrestrained cheering from the crew ranged below. At last Rogav raised an
answering salute and launched into a short, impromptu speech.
Marilyn was struggling to follow the Tsorian words, but Jason simply looked
around wide-eyed. His gaze lingered longest on the planet glowing warmly
beneath him. Aryl saw him swallow hard, and she reached to squeeze his hand.
"Father thanked them for the rescue," she whispered, as translation, "and then
he told them about you and your mother, how you risked your lives for us and
showed him how important your people and your world can be to the Empire."
When the cheers rose anew, Rogav gently pulled the other three forward to
receive them with him. Aryl watched Jason's face turn as red as a Hykzoi ship,
though he smiled and nodded shyly.
Aryl's amusement bubbled into pride. This alien wasn't all that bad. In fact,
he wasn't really all that alien. Neither was his world. Looking at her father,
she was suddenly very glad he had brought them here. And if this was any
example, her career might not be orthodox, but it certainly wouldn't be
boring.
178
twenty
JASON STARED OUT AT THE WILDLY ALIEN LANDSCAPE. THE
sun had just set, small and angry, behind the barren red horizon. But now,
with the sun gone, the planet's thin atmosphere had given up all pretense of
making a sky. The stars, which had peered through even in daylight, had now
taken over. Their patterns were familiar, but not their unblinking intensity.
And among them, glowing like a blue sapphire over the western horizon, hung
the evening star. The planet Earth.
He shifted his eyes away. It was hard to believe that that distant glimmer was
really home, even though he had watched it shrink to this size from a great
glowing sphere. But then, everything seemed hard to believe lately. So much
had happened.
The ship that had rescued them had seemed huge. It had until the Tsorian
flagship had come into view, dwarfing everything, like an aircraft carrier
beside tugboats. And after a surprisingly painful parting, Fleet Commander
Rogav Jy and his bond-daughter had transferred to that colossus. They and the
remaining fleet had gone off to resume the battle, while Jason and his mother,
along with several damaged ships, had been sent to the maintenance base on
Mars.
179
Mars. Again he looked at the cold, alien landscape and the equally alien
towers and domes of the Tsorian base. Mars. His father and the Resisters would
probably have said that this too had been taken from them. For eons humans had
dreamed of walking on this planet, of making it their own. And now their
dreams had been stolen. But maybe, Jason thought suddenly, maybe they just
hadn't been dreaming big enough. They'd written stories and imagined futures,
but they hadn't really let their imaginations loose on all the possibilities.

Jason was jarred from his thoughts by the sound of his name. He looked down
the spiraling ramp that led into the clear-walled body of the Tsorian base. He
and his mother had been given free run of the place and had spent their days
here exploring—and waiting. Again his name was called, and there was something
in the tone of his mother's voice that suggested that, one way or another,
their waiting was over. "Here. Up here."
Marilyn moved quickly up the ramp, auburn hair bouncing lightly in the low
gravity. "I should have guessed I'd find you in the observation tower. You
gravitate here just the way you used to go to Indian Rock." "Guess it's my
kind of place. You have some news?" "Yes." She paused. "There's been a
decisive battle, A very, very costly one. But the Hykzoi, the remaining ones,
have retreated."
"And . .. and the Tsorian flagship?" She smiled. "That's where the message
came from. It survived."
For a moment, their smiles matched. "And," she continued, "Rogav , . .
Commander Rogav said that they would be returning to this base for a while. He
will be
180
making a report to the Emperor, and his first recommendation will be changing
our planet's status from a military outpost to a full part of their empire."
Her expression turned wistful, and she shook her head. "So I guess it really
hasn't been in vain, any of it. Though it's funny, this is hardly what we once
would have wanted—if we ever could have said exactly what that was."
"Maybe we just wanted a chance to make our own future."
Suddenly his mother hugged him. "Jason, I think that may be what we have." She
turned and hurried down the ramp back to the communications room.
Jason started to follow, then paused. With a surge of confidence he looked
back at the familiar sky. No, it hadn't been in vain. His father, Ricky
Jensen, Professor Ackerman, all of them. In a strange way, they had won after
all. They had won back the stars.
He turned and walked down the ramp.
181
about the author
Pamela Service grew up in Berkeley, California. She received a bachelor's
degree in political science from the University of California and a master's
degree in African prehistory from the University of London. While living in
England, she and her husband spent free time on political campaigns, touring
ancient sites, and digging in excavations in Britain and the Sudan.
Now settled in Bloomington, Indiana with her husband and daughter, Ms. Service
is curator of the county historical museum and a member of the Bloomington
City Council.

