Paolo Bacigalupi’s
Think Galactic Reader
Selections from Pump Six

Paolo Bacigalupi

Night Shade Books
San Francisco

Paolo Bacigalupi’s Think Galactic Reader © 2009 by Paolo Bacigalupi
This edition of Paolo Bacigalupi’s Think Galactic Reader
© 2008 by Night Shade Books

“The Calorie Man” © 2005 by Spilogale, Inc. Originally published in The
Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, October/November 2005.
“Pop Squad” © 2006 by Spilogale, Inc. Originally published in The
Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, October/November 2006.
“Yellow Card Man” © 2006 by Paolo Bacigalupi. Originally published in
Asimov’s Science Fiction, December 2006.

All rights reserved

Digital Edition

Night Shade Books
Please visit us on the web at
http://www.nightshadebooks.com

CO N TEN TS
The Calorie Man ......................... 1
Pop Squad .................................. 31
Yellow Card Man ....................... 57

The Calorie Man

“N

o mammy, no pappy, poor little bastard. Money? You
give money?” The urchin turned a cartwheel and then a
somersault in the street, stirring yellow dust around his

nakedness.
Lalji paused to stare at the dirty blond child who had come to a halt
at his feet. The attention seemed to encourage the urchin; the boy did
another somersault. He smiled up at Lalji from his squat, calculating
and eager, rivulets of sweat and mud streaking his face. “Money? You
give money?”
Around them, the town was nearly silent in the afternoon heat. A
few dungareed farmers led mulies toward the fields. Buildings, pressed
from WeatherAll chips, slumped against their fellows like drunkards,
rain-stained and sun-cracked, but, as their trade name implied, still
sturdy. At the far end of the narrow street, the lush sprawl of SoyPRO
and HiGro began, a waving rustling growth that rolled into the bluesky distance. It was much as all the villages Lalji had seen as he traveled
upriver, just another farming enclave paying its intellectual property
dues and shipping calories down to New Orleans.
The boy crawled closer, smiling ingratiatingly, nodding his head like
a snake hoping to strike. “Money? Money?”
Lalji put his hands in his pockets in case the beggar child had friends
and turned his full attention on the boy. “And why should I give money
to you?”
The boy stared up at him, stalled. His mouth opened, then closed.
Finally he looped back to an earlier, more familiar part of his script, “No
mammy? No pappy?” but it was a query now, lacking conviction.
Lalji made a face of disgust and aimed a kick at the boy. The child


 — Paolo Bacigalupi

scrambled aside, falling on his back in his desperation to dodge, and this
pleased Lalji briefly. At least the boy was quick. He turned and started
back up the street. Behind him, the urchin’s wailing despair echoed.
“Noooo maaaammy! Nooo paaaapy!” Lalji shook his head, irritated.
The child might cry for money, but he failed to follow. No true beggar at all. An opportunist only—most likely the accidental creation of
strangers who had visited the village and were open-fisted when it came
to blond beggar children. AgriGen and Midwest Grower scientists and
land factotums would be pleased to show ostentatious kindness to the
villagers at the core of their empire.
Through a gap in the slumped hovels, Lalji caught another glimpse
of the lush waves of SoyPRO and HiGro. The sheer sprawl of calories
stimulated tingling fantasies of loading a barge and slipping it down
through the locks to St. Louis or New Orleans and into the mouths of
waiting megodonts. It was impossible, but the sight of those emerald
fields was more than enough assurance that no child could beg with
conviction here. Not surrounded by SoyPRO. Lalji shook his head again,
disgusted, and squeezed down a footpath between two of the houses.
The acrid reek of WeatherAll’s excreted oils clogged the dim alley. A
pair of cheshires sheltering in the unused space scattered and molted
ahead of him, disappearing into bright sunlight. Just beyond, a kinetic
shop leaned against its beaten neighbors, adding the scents of dung and
animal sweat to the stink of WeatherAll. Lalji leaned against the shop’s
plank door and shoved inside.
Shafts of sunlight pierced the sweet manure gloom with lazy gold
beams. A pair of hand-painted posters scabbed to one wall, partly torn
but still legible. One said: “Unstamped calories mean starving families.
We check royalty receipts and IP stamps.” A farmer and his brood stared
hollow-eyed from beneath the scolding words. PurCal was the sponsor.
The other poster was AgriGen’s trademarked collage of kink-springs,
green rows of SoyPRO under sunlight and smiling children along with
the words “We Provide Energy for the World.” Lalji studied the posters
sourly.
“Back already?” The owner came in from the winding room, wiping
his hands on his pants and kicking straw and mud off his boots. He eyed
Lalji. “My springs didn’t have enough stored. I had to feed the mulies
extra, to make your joules.”
Lalji shrugged, having expected the last-minute bargaining, so much
like Shriram’s that he couldn’t muster the interest to look offended.
“Yes? How much?”

The Calorie Man — 

The man squinted up at Lalji, then ducked his head, his body defensive.
“F-Five hundred.” His voice caught on the amount, as though gagging
on the surprising greed scampering up his throat.
Lalji frowned and pulled his mustache. It was outrageous. The calories
hadn’t even been transported. The village was awash with energy. And
despite the man’s virtuous poster, it was doubtful that the calories feeding his kinetic shop were equally upstanding. Not with tempting green
fields waving within meters of the shop. Shriram often said that using
stamped calories was like dumping money into a methane composter.
Lalji tugged his mustache again, wondering how much to pay for the
joules without calling excessive attention to himself. Rich men must
have been all over the village to make the kinetic man so greedy. Calorie
executives, almost certainly. It would fit. The town was close to the center.
Perhaps even this village was engaged in growing the crown jewels of
AgriGen’s energy monopolies. Still, not everyone who passed through
would be as rich as that. “Two hundred.”
The kinetic man showed a relieved smile along with knotted yellow
teeth, his guilt apparently assuaged by Lalji’s bargaining. “Four.”
“Two. I can moor on the river and let my own winders do the same
work.”
The man snorted. “It would take weeks.”
Lalji shrugged. “I have time. Dump the joules back into your own
springs. I’ll do the job myself.”
“I’ve got family to feed. Three?”
“You live next to more calories than some rich families in St. Louis.
Two.”
The man shook his head sourly but he led Lalji into the winding
room. The manure haze thickened. Big kinetic storage drums, twice
as tall as a man, sat in a darkened corner, mud and manure lapping
around their high-capacity precision kink-springs. Sunbeams poured
between open gaps in the roof where shingles had blown away. Dung
motes stirred lazily.
A half-dozen hyper-developed mulies crouched on their treadmills,
their rib cages billowing slowly, their flanks streaked with salt lines of
sweat residue from the labor of winding Lalji’s boat springs. They blew
air through their nostrils, nervous at Lalji’s sudden scent, and gathered
their squat legs under them. Muscles like boulders rippled under their
bony hides as they stood. They eyed Lalji with resentful near-intelligence.
One of them showed stubborn yellow teeth that matched its owner’s.
Lalji made a face of disgust. “Feed them.”

 — Paolo Bacigalupi

“I already did.”
“I can see their bones. If you want my money, feed them again.”
The man scowled. “They aren’t supposed to get fat, they’re supposed
to wind your damn springs.” But he dipped double handfuls of SoyPRO
into their feed canisters.
The mulies shoved their heads into the buckets, slobbering and grunting with need. In its eagerness, one of them started briefly forward on
its treadmill, sending energy into the winding shop’s depleted storage
springs before seeming to realize that its work was not demanded and
that it could eat without molestation.
“They aren’t even designed to get fat,” the kinetic man muttered.
Lalji smiled slightly as he counted through his wadded bluebills and
handed over the money. The kinetic man unjacked Lalji’s kink-springs
from the winding treadmills and stacked them beside the slavering
mulies. Lalji lifted a spring, grunting at its heft. Its mass was no different than when he had brought it to the winding shop, but now it fairly
seemed to quiver with the mulies’ stored labor.
“You want help with those?” The man didn’t move. His eyes flicked
toward the mulies’ feed buckets, still calculating his chances of interrupting their meal.
Lalji took his time answering, watching as the mulies rooted for the
last of their calories. “No.” He hefted the spring again, getting a better
grip. “My helpboy will come for the rest.”
As he turned for the door, he heard the man dragging the feed buckets
away from the mulies and their grunts as they fought for their sustenance. Once again, Lalji regretted agreeing to the trip at all.
Shriram had been the one to broach the idea. They had been sitting
under the awning of Lalji’s porch in New Orleans, spitting betel nut juice
into the alley gutters and watching the rain come down as they played
chess. At the end of the alley, cycle rickshaws and bicycles slipped through
the midmorning gray, pulses of green and red and blue as they passed
the alley’s mouth draped under rain-glossed corn polymer ponchos.
The chess game was a tradition of many years, a ritual when Lalji was
in town and Shriram had time away from his small kinetic company
where he rewound people’s home and boat springs. Theirs was a good
friendship, and a fruitful one, when Lalji had unstamped calories that
needed to disappear into the mouth of a hungry megodont.
Neither of them played chess well, and so their games often devolved
into a series of trades made in dizzying succession; a cascade of destruc-

The Calorie Man — 

tion that left a board previously well-arrayed in a tantrum wreck, with
both opponents blinking surprise, trying to calculate if the mangle
had been worth the combat. It was after one of these tit-for-tat cleansings that Shriram had asked Lalji if he might go upriver. Beyond the
southern states.
Lalji had shaken his head and spit bloody betel juice into the overflowing gutter. “No. Nothing is profitable so far up. Too many joules to get
there. Better to let the calories float to me.” He was surprised to discover
that he still had his queen. He used it to take a pawn.
“And if the energy costs could be defrayed?”
Lalji laughed, waiting for Shriram to make his own move. “By who?
AgriGen? The IP men? Only their boats go up and down so far.” He
frowned as he realized that his queen was now vulnerable to Shriram’s
remaining knight.
Shriram was silent. He didn’t touch his pieces. Lalji looked up from
the board and was surprised by Shriram’s serious expression. Shriram
said, “I would pay. Myself and others. There is a man who some of us
would like to see come south. A very special man.”
“Then why not bring him south on a paddle wheel? It is expensive to
go up the river. How many gigajoules? I would have to change the boat’s
springs, and then what would the IP patrols ask? ‘Where are you going,
strange Indian man with your small boat and your so many springs?
Going far? To what purpose?’ ” Lalji shook his head. “Let this man take
a ferry, or ride a barge. Isn’t this cheaper?” He waved at the game board.
“It’s your move. You should take my queen.”
Shriram waggled his head thoughtfully from side to side but didn’t
make any move toward the chess game. “Cheaper, yes.…”
“But?”
Shriram shrugged. “A swift, inconsequential boat would attract less
attention.”
“What sort of man is this?”
Shriram glanced around, suddenly furtive. Methane lamps burned like
blue fairies behind the closed glass of the neighbors’ droplet-spattered
windows. Rain sheeted off their roofs, drumming wet into the empty
alley. A cheshire was yowling for a mate somewhere in the wet, barely
audible under the thrum of falling water.
“Is Creo inside?”
Lalji raised his eyebrows in surprise. “He has gone to his gymnasium.
Why? Should it matter?”
Shriram shrugged and gave an embarrassed smile. “Some things are

 — Paolo Bacigalupi

better kept between old friends. People with strong ties.”
“Creo has been with me for years.”
Shriram grunted noncommittally, glanced around again and leaned
close, pitching his voice low, forcing Lalji to lean forward as well. “There
is a man who the calorie companies would like very much to find.”
He tapped his balding head. “A very intelligent man. We want to help
him.”
Lalji sucked in his breath. “A generipper?”
Shriram avoided Lalji’s eyes. “In a sense. A calorie man.”
Lalji made a face of disgust. “Even better reason not to be involved. I
don’t traffic with those killers.”
“No, no. Of course not. But still…you brought that huge sign down
once, did you not? A few greased palms, so smooth, and you float into
town and suddenly Lakshmi smiles on you, such a calorie bandit, and
now with a name instead as a dealer of antiques. Such a wonderful
misdirection.”
Lalji shrugged. “I was lucky. I knew the man to help move it through
the locks.”
“So? Do it again.”
“If the calorie companies are looking for him, it would be dangerous.”
“But not impossible. The locks would be easy. Much easier than carrying unlicensed grains. Or even something as big as that sign. This would
be a man. No sniffer dog would find him of interest. Place him in a barrel.
It would be easy. And I would pay. All your joules, plus more.”
Lalji sucked at his narcotic betel nut, spit red, spit red again, considering. “And what does a second-rate kinetic man like you think this
calorie man will do? Generippers work for big fish, and you are such
a small one.”
Shriram grinned haplessly and gave a self-deprecating shrug. “You
do not think Ganesha Kinetic could not some day be great? The next
AgriGen, maybe?” and they had both laughed at the absurdity and
Shriram dropped the subject.
An IP man was on duty with his dog, blocking Lalji’s way as he returned to his boat lugging the kink-spring. The brute’s hairs bristled as
Lalji approached and it lunged against its leash, its blunt nose quivering
to reach him. With effort, the IP man held the creature back. “I need to
sniff you.” His helmet lay on the grass, already discarded, but still he was
sweating under the swaddling heat of his gray slash-resistant uniform

The Calorie Man — 

and the heavy webbing of his spring gun and bandoliers.
Lalji held still. The dog growled, deep from its throat, and inched
forward. It snuffled his clothing, bared hungry teeth, snuffled again,
then its black ruff iridesced blue and it relaxed and wagged its stubby
tail. It sat. A pink tongue lolled from between smiling teeth. Lalji smiled
sourly back at the animal, glad that he wasn’t smuggling calories and
wouldn’t have to go through the pantomimes of obeisance as the IP man
demanded stamps and then tried to verify that the grain shipment had
paid its royalties and licensing fees.
At the dog’s change in color, the IP man relaxed somewhat, but still he
studied Lalji’s features carefully, hunting for recognition against memorized photographs. Lalji waited patiently, accustomed to the scrutiny.
Many men tried to steal the honest profits of AgriGen and its peers, but
to Lalji’s knowledge, he was unknown to the protectors of intellectual
property. He was an antiques dealer, handling the junk of the previous
century, not a calorie bandit staring out from corporate photo books.
Finally, the IP man waved him past. Lalji nodded politely and made
his way down the stairs to the river’s low stage where his needleboat was
moored. Out on the river, cumbrous grain barges wallowed past, riding
low under their burdens.
Though there was a great deal of river traffic, it didn’t compare with
harvest time. Then the whole of the Mississippi would fill with calories
pouring downstream, pulled from hundreds of towns like this one.
Barges would clot the arterial flow of the river system from high on the
Missouri, the Illinois, and the Ohio and the thousand smaller tributaries.
Some of those calories would float only as far as St. Louis where they
would be chewed by megodonts and churned into joules, but the rest,
the vast majority, would float to New Orleans where the great calorie
companies’ clippers and dirigibles would be loaded with the precious
grains. Then they would cross the Earth on tradewinds and sea, in time
for the next season’s planting, so that the world could go on eating.
Lalji watched the barges moving slowly past, wallowing and bloated
with their wealth, then hefted his kink-spring and jumped aboard his
needleboat.
Creo was lying on deck as Lalji had left him, his muscled body oiled
and shining in the sun, a blond Arjuna waiting for glorious battle. His
cornrows spread around his head in a halo, their tipped bits of bone
lying like foretelling stones on the hot deck. He didn’t open his eyes as
Lalji jumped aboard. Lalji went and stood in Creo’s sun, eclipsing his
tan. Slowly, the young man opened his blue eyes.

 — Paolo Bacigalupi

“Get up.” Lalji dropped the spring on Creo’s rippled stomach.
Creo let out a whuff and wrapped his arms around the spring. He sat
up easily and set it on the deck. “Rest of the springs wound?”
Lalji nodded. Creo took the spring and went down the boat’s narrow
stairs to the mechanical room. When he returned from fitting the spring
into the gearings of the boat’s power system, he said, “Your springs are
shit, all of them. I don’t know why you didn’t bring bigger ones. We have
to rewind, what, every twenty hours? You could have gotten all the way
here on a couple of the big ones.”
Lalji scowled at Creo and jerked his head toward the guard still standing at the top of the riverbank and looking down on them. He lowered
his voice. “And then what would the MidWest Authority be saying as we
are going upriver? All their IP men all over our boat, wondering where
we are going so far? Boarding us and then wondering what we are doing
with such big springs. Where have we gotten so many joules? Wondering what business we have so far upriver.” He shook his head. “No, no.
This is better. Small boat, small distance, who worries about Lalji and
his stupid blond helpboy then? No one. No, this is better.”
“You always were a cheap bastard.”
Lalji glanced at Creo. “You are lucky it is not forty years ago. Then
you would be paddling up this river by hand, instead of lying on your
lazy back letting these fancy kink-springs do the work. Then we would
be seeing you use those muscles of yours.”
“If I was lucky, I would have been born during the Expansion and
we’d still be using gasoline.”
Lalji was about to retort but an IP boat slashed past them, ripping a
deep wake. Creo lunged for their cache of spring guns. Lalji dove after
him and slammed the cache shut. “They’re not after us!”
Creo stared at Lalji, uncomprehending for a moment, then relaxed. He
stepped away from the stored weapons. The IP boat continued upriver,
half its displacement dedicated to massive precision kink-springs and
the stored joules that gushed from their unlocking molecules. Its curling wake rocked the needleboat. Lalji steadied himself against the rail as
the IP boat dwindled to a speck and disappeared between obstructing
barge chains.
Creo scowled after the boat. “I could have taken them.”
Lalji took a deep breath. “You would have gotten us killed.” He glanced
at the top of the riverbank to see if the IP man had noticed their panic.
He wasn’t even visible. Lalji silently gave thanks to Ganesha.
“I don’t like all of them around,” Creo complained. “They’re like ants.

The Calorie Man — 

Fourteen at the last lock. That one, up on the hill. Now these boats.”
“It is the heart of calorie country. It is to be expected.”
“You making a lot of money on this trip?”
“Why should you care?”
“Because you never used to take risks like this.” Creo swept his arm,
indicating the village, the cultivated fields, the muddy width of river
gurgling past, and the massive barges clogging it. “No one comes this
far upriver.”
“I’m making enough money to pay you. That’s all you should concern
yourself with. Now go get the rest of the springs. When you think too
much, your brain makes mush.”
Creo shook his head doubtfully but jumped for the dock and headed
up the steps to the kinetic shop. Lalji turned to face the river. He took
a deep breath.
The IP boat had been a close call. Creo was too eager to fight. It was
only with luck that they hadn’t ended up as shredded meat from the
IP men’s spring guns. He shook his head tiredly, wondering if he had
ever had as much reckless confidence as Creo. He didn’t think so. Not
even when he was a boy. Perhaps Shriram was right. Even if Creo was
trustworthy, he was still dangerous.
A barge chain, loaded with TotalNutrient Wheat, slid past. The happy
sheaves of its logo smiled across the river’s muddy flow, promising “A
Healthful Tomorrow” along with folates, B vitamins, and pork protein.
Another IP boat slashed upriver, weaving amongst the barge traffic. Its
complement of IP men studied him coldly as they went by. Lalji’s skin
crawled. Was it worth it? If he thought too much, his businessman’s
instinct—bred into him through thousands of years of caste practice—told him no. But still, there was Gita. When he balanced his debts
each year on Diwali, how did he account for all he owed her? How did
one pay off something that weighed heavier than all his profits, in all
his lifetimes?
The NutriWheat wallowed past, witlessly inviting, and without answers.
“You wanted to know if there was something that would be worth
your trip upriver.”
Lalji and Shriram had been standing in the winding room of Ganesha Kinetic, watching a misplaced ton of SuperFlavor burn into joules.
Shriram’s paired megodonts labored against the winding spindles, ponderous and steady as they turned just-consumed calories into kinetic

10 — Paolo Bacigalupi

energy and wound the shop’s main storage springs.
Priti and Bidi. The massive creatures barely resembled the elephants
that had once provided their template DNA. Generippers had honed
them to a perfect balance of musculature and hunger for a single purpose: to inhale calories and do terrible labors without complaint. The
smell of them was overwhelming. Their trunks dragged the ground.
The animals were getting old, Lalji thought, and on the heels of that
thought came another: he, too, was getting old. Every morning he found
gray in his mustache. He plucked it, of course, but more gray hairs always
sprouted. And now his joints ached in the mornings as well. Shriram’s
own head shone like polished teak. At some point, he’d turned bald. Fat
and bald. Lalji wondered when they had turned into such old men.
Shriram repeated himself, and Lalji shook away his thoughts. “No, I
am not interested in anything upriver. That is the calorie companies’
province. I have accepted that when you scatter my ashes it will be on
the Mississippi, and not the holy Ganges, but I am not so eager to find
my next life that I wish my corpse to float down from Iowa.”
Shriram twisted his hands nervously and glanced around. He lowered
his voice, even though the steady groan of the spindles was more than
enough to drown their sounds. “Please, friend, there are people…who
want…to kill this man.”
“And I should care?”
Shriram made placating motions with his hands. “He knows how
to make calories. AgriGen wants him, badly. PurCal as well. He has
rejected them and their kind. His mind is valuable. He needs someone
trustworthy to bring him downriver. No friend of the IP men.”
“And just because he is an enemy of AgriGen I should help him? Some
former associate of the Des Moines clique? Some ex-calorie man with
blood on his hands and you think he will help you make money?”
Shriram shook his head. “You make it sound as if this man is unclean.”
“We are talking of generippers, yes? How much morality can he
have?”
“A geneticist. Not a generipper. Geneticists gave us megodonts.” He
waved at Priti and Bidi. “Me, a livelihood.”
Lalji turned on Shriram. “You take refuge in these semantics, now?
You, who starved in Chennai when the Nippon genehack weevil came?
When the soil turned to alcohol? Before U-Tex and HiGro and the rest
all showed up so conveniently? You, who waited on the docks when the
seeds came in, saw them come and then saw them sit behind their fences

The Calorie Man — 11

and guards, waiting for people with the money to buy? What traffic
would I have with this sort of people? I would sooner spit on him, this
calorie man. Let the PurCal devils have him, I say.”
The town was as Shriram had described it. Cottonwoods and willows tangled the edges of the river and over them, the remains of the
bridge, some of it still spanning the river in a hazy network of broken
trusses and crumbling supports. Lalji and Creo stared up at the rusting
construction, a web of steel and cable and concrete, slowly collapsing
into the river.
“How much do you think the steel would bring?” Creo asked.
Lalji filled his cheek with a handful of PestResis sunflower seeds and
started cracking them between his teeth. He spit the hulls into the river
one by one. “Not much. Too much energy to tear it out, then to melt it.”
He shook his head and spat another hull. “A waste to make something
like that with steel. Better to use Fast-Gen hardwoods, or WeatherAll.”
“Not to cover that distance. It couldn’t be done now. Not unless you
were in Des Moines, maybe. I heard they burn coal there.”
“And they have electric lights that go all night and computers as large as
a house.” Lalji waved his hand dismissively and turned to finish securing
the needleboat. “Who needs such a bridge now? A waste. A ferry and a
mulie would serve just as well.” He jumped ashore and started climbing
the crumbling steps that led up from the river. Creo followed.
At the top of the steep climb, a ruined suburb waited. Built to serve
the cities on the far side of the river when commuting was common and
petroleum cheap, it now sprawled in an advanced state of decay. A junk
city built with junk materials, as transient as water, willingly abandoned
when the expense of commuting grew too great.
“What the hell is this place?” Creo muttered.
Lalji smiled cynically. He jerked his head toward the green fields across
the river, where SoyPRO and HiGro undulated to the horizon. “The very
cradle of civilization, yes? AgriGen, Midwest Growers Group, PurCal,
all of them have fields here.”
“Yeah? That excite you?”
Lalji turned and studied a barge chain as it wallowed down the river
below them, its mammoth size rendered small by the height. “If we could
turn all their calories into traceless joules, we’d be wealthy men.”
“Keep dreaming.” Creo breathed deeply and stretched. His back
cracked and he winced at the sound. “I get out of shape when I ride
your boat this long. I should have stayed in New Orleans.”

12 — Paolo Bacigalupi

Lalji raised his eyebrows. “You’re not happy to be making this touristic
journey?” He pointed across the river. “Somewhere over there, perhaps
in those very acres, AgriGen created SoyPRO. And everyone thought
they were such wonderful people.” He frowned. “And then the weevil
came, and suddenly there was nothing else to eat.”
Creo made a face. “I don’t go for those conspiracy theories.”
“You weren’t even born when it happened.” Lalji turned to lead Creo
into the wrecked suburb. “But I remember. No such accident had ever
happened before.”
“Monocultures. They were vulnerable.”
“Basmati was no monoculture!” Lalji waved his hand back toward the
green fields. “SoyPRO is monoculture. PurCal is monoculture. Generippers make monoculture.”
“Whatever you say, Lalji.”
Lalji glanced at Creo, trying to tell if the young man was still arguing
with him, but Creo was carefully studying the street wreckage and Lalji
let the argument die. He began counting streets, following memorized
directions.
The avenues were all ridiculously broad and identical, large enough
to run a herd of megodonts. Twenty cycle rickshaws could ride abreast
easily, and yet the town had only been a support suburb. It boggled
Lalji’s mind to consider the scale of life before.
A gang of children watched them from the doorway of a collapsed
house. Half its timbers had been removed, and the other half were
splintered, rising from the foundation like carcass bones where siding
flesh had been stripped away.
Creo showed the children his spring gun and they ran away. He scowled
at their departing forms. “So what the hell are we picking up here? You
got a lead on another antique?”
Lalji shrugged.
“Come on. I’m going to be hauling it in a couple minutes anyway.
What’s with the secrecy?”
Lalji glanced at Creo. “There’s nothing for you to haul. ‘It’ is a man.
We’re looking for a man.”
Creo made a sound of disbelief. Lalji didn’t bother responding.
Eventually, they came to an intersection. At its center, an old signal
light lay smashed. Around it, the pavement was broken through by
grasses gone to seed. Dandelions stuck up their yellow heads. On the far
side of the intersection, a tall brick building squatted, a ruin of a civil
center, yet still standing, built with better materials than the housing

The Calorie Man — 13

it had served.
A cheshire bled across the weedy expanse. Creo tried to shoot it.
Missed.
Lalji studied the brick building. “This is the place.”
Creo grunted and shot at another cheshire shimmer.
Lalji went over and inspected the smashed signal light, idly curious
to see if it might have value. It was rusted. He turned in a slow circle,
studying the surroundings for anything at all that might be worth taking downriver. Some of the old Expansion’s wreckage still had worthy
artifacts. He’d found the Conoco sign in such a place, in a suburb soon
to be swallowed by SoyPRO, perfectly intact, seemingly never mounted
in the open air, never subjected to the angry mobs of the energy Contraction. He’d sold it to an AgriGen executive for more than an entire
smuggled cargo of HiGro.
The AgriGen woman had laughed at the sign. She’d mounted it on her
wall, surrounded by the lesser artifacts of the Expansion: plastic cups,
computer monitors, photos of racing automobiles, brightly colored
children’s toys. She’d hung the sign on her wall and then stood back and
murmured that at one point, it had been a powerful company…global,
even.
Global.
She’d said the word with an almost sexual yearning as she stared up
at the sign’s ruddy polymers.
Global.
For a moment, Lalji had been smitten by her vision: a company that
pulled energy from the remotest parts of the planet and sold it far away
within weeks of extraction; a company with customers and investors
on every continent, with executives who crossed time zones as casually
as Lalji crossed the alley to visit Shriram.
The AgriGen woman had hung the sign on her wall like the head of
a trophy megodont and in that moment, next to a representative of the
most powerful energy company in the world, Lalji had felt a sudden
sadness at how very diminished humanity had become.
Lalji shook away the memory and again turned slowly in the intersection, seeking signs of his passenger. More cheshires flitted amongst
the ruins, their smoky shimmer shapes pulsing across the sunlight and
passing into shadows. Creo pumped his spring gun and sprayed disks.
A shimmer tumbled to stillness and became a matted pile of calico and
blood.
Creo repumped his spring gun. “So where is this guy?”

14 — Paolo Bacigalupi

“I think he will come. If not today, then tomorrow or the next.” Lalji
headed up the steps of the civil center and slipped between its shattered
doors. Inside, it was nothing but dust and gloom and bird droppings. He
found stairs and made his way upward until he found a broken window
with a view. A gust of wind rattled the window pane and tugged his
mustache. A pair of crows circled in the blue sky. Below, Creo pumped
his spring gun and shot more cheshire shimmers. When he hit, angry
yowls filtered up. Blood swatches spattered the weedy pavement as more
animals fled.
In the distance, the suburb’s periphery was already falling to agriculture. Its time was short. Soon the houses would be plowed under and a
perfect blanket of SoyPRO would cover it. The suburb’s history, as silly
and transient as it had been, would be lost, churned under by the march
of energy development. No loss, from the standpoint of value, but still,
some part of Lalji cringed at the thought of time erased. He spent too
much time trying to recall the India of his boyhood to take pleasure in
the disappearance. He headed back down the dusty stairs to Creo.
“See anyone?”
Lalji shook his head. Creo grunted and shot at another cheshire, narrowly missing. He was good, but the nearly invisible animals were hard
targets. Creo pumped his spring gun and fired again. “Can’t believe how
many cheshires there are.”
“There is no one to exterminate them.”
“I should collect the skins and take them back to New Orleans.”
“Not on my boat.”
Many of the shimmers were fleeing, finally understanding the quality
of their enemy. Creo pumped again and aimed at a twist of light further
down the street.
Lalji watched complacently. “You will never hit it.”
“Watch.” Creo aimed carefully.
A shadow fell across them. “Don’t shoot.”
Creo whipped his spring gun around.
Lalji waved a hand at Creo. “Wait! It’s him!”
The new arrival was a skinny old man, bald except for a greasy fringe
of gray and brown hair, his heavy jaw thick with gray stubble. Hemp
sacking covered his body, dirty and torn, and his eyes had a sunken,
knowing quality that unearthed in Lalji the memory of a long-ago
sadhu, covered with ash and little else: the tangled hair, the disinterest
in his clothing, the distance in the eyes that came from enlightenment.
Lalji shook away the memory. This man was no holy man. Just a man,

The Calorie Man — 15

and a generipper, at that.
Creo resighted his spring gun on the distant cheshire. “Down south,
I get a bluebill for every one I kill.”
The old man said, “There are no bluebills for you to collect here.”
“Yeah, but they’re pests.”
“It’s not their fault we made them too perfectly.” The man smiled
hesitantly, as though testing a facial expression. “Please.” He squatted
down in front of Creo. “Don’t shoot.”
Lalji placed a hand on Creo’s spring gun. “Let the cheshires be.”
Creo scowled, but he let his gun’s mechanism unwind with a sigh of
releasing energy.
The calorie man said, “I am Charles Bowman.” He looked at them
expectantly, as though anticipating recognition. “I am ready. I can
leave.”
Gita was dead, of that Lalji was now sure.
At times, he had pretended that it might not be so. Pretended that she
might have found a life, even after he had gone.
But she was dead, and he was sure of it.
It was one of his secret shames. One of the accretions to his life that
clung to him like dog shit on his shoes and reduced himself in his own
eyes: as when he had thrown a rock and hit a boy’s head, unprovoked,
to see if it was possible; or when he had dug seeds out of the dirt and
eaten them one by one, too starved to share. And then there was Gita.
Always Gita. That he had left her and gone instead to live close to the
calories. That she had stood on the docks and waved as he set sail, when
it was she who had paid his passage price.
He remembered chasing her when he was small, following the rustle of
her salwar kameez as she dashed ahead of him, her black hair and black
eyes and white, white teeth. He wondered if she had been as beautiful
as he recalled. If her oiled black braid had truly gleamed the way he
remembered when she sat with him in the dark and told him stories
of Arjuna and Krishna and Ram and Hanuman. So much was lost. He
wondered sometimes if he even remembered her face correctly, or if he
had replaced it with an ancient poster of a Bollywood girl, one of the
old ones that Shriram kept in the safe of his winding shop and guarded
jealously from the influences of light and air.
For a long time he thought he would go back and find her. That he
might feed her. That he would send money and food back to his blighted
land that now existed only in his mind, in his dreams, and in half-awake

16 — Paolo Bacigalupi

hallucinations of deserts, red and black saris, of women in dust, and
their black hands and silver bangles, and their hunger, so many of the
last memories of hunger.
He had fantasized that he would smuggle Gita back across the shining sea, and bring her close to the accountants who calculated calorie
burn quotas for the world. Close to the calories, as she had said, once
so long ago. Close to the men who balanced price stability against
margins of error and protectively managed energy markets against a
flood of food. Close to those small gods with more power than Kali to
destroy the world.
But she was dead by now, whether through starvation or disease, and
he was sure of it.
And wasn’t that why Shriram had come to him? Shriram who knew
more of his history than any other. Shriram, who had found him after
he arrived in New Orleans, and known him for a fellow countryman:
not just another Indian long settled in America, but one who still spoke
the dialects of desert villages and who still remembered their country as
it had existed before genehack weevil, leafcurl, and root rust. Shriram,
who had shared a place on the floor while they both worked the winding
sheds for calories and nothing else, and were grateful for it, as though
they were nothing but genehacks themselves.
Of course Shriram had known what to say to send him upriver. Shriram had known how much he wished to balance the unbalanceable.
They followed Bowman down empty streets and up remnant alleys,
winding through the pathetic collapse of termite-ridden wood, crumbling concrete foundations, and rusted rebar too useless to scavenge
and too stubborn to erode. Finally, the old man squeezed them between
the stripped hulks of a pair of rusted automobiles. On the far side, Lalji
and Creo gasped.
Sunflowers waved over their heads. A jungle of broad squash leaves
hugged their knees. Dry corn stalks rattled in the wind. Bowman looked
back at their surprise, and his smile, so hesitant and testing at first,
broadened with unrestrained pleasure. He laughed and waved them
onward, floundering through a garden of flowers and weeds and produce, catching his torn hemp cloth on the dried stems of cabbage gone
to seed and the cling of cantaloupe vines. Creo and Lalji picked their
way through the tangle, wending around purple lengths of eggplants,
red orb tomatoes, and dangling orange ornament chilies. Bees buzzed
heavily between the sunflowers, burdened with saddlebags of pollen.

The Calorie Man — 17

Lalji paused in the overgrowth and called after Bowman. “These plants.
They are not engineered?”
Bowman paused and came thrashing back, wiping sweat and vegetal
debris off his face, grinning. “Well, engineered, that is a matter of definition, but no, these are not owned by calorie companies. Some of them
are even heirloom.” He grinned again. “Or close enough.”
“How do they survive?”
“Oh, that.” He reached down and yanked up a tomato. “Nippon genehack weevils, or curl.111.b, or perhaps cibiscosis bacterium, something
like that?” He bit into the tomato and let the juice run down his gray
bristled chin. “There isn’t another heirloom planting within hundreds
of miles. This is an island in an ocean of SoyPRO and HiGro. It makes
a formidable barrier.” He studied the garden thoughtfully, took another
bite of tomato. “Now that you have come, of course, only a few of these
plants will survive.” He nodded at Lalji and Creo. “You will be carrying
some infection or another and many of these rarities can only survive in
isolation.” He plucked another tomato and handed it to Lalji. “Try it.”
Lalji studied its gleaming red skin. He bit into it and tasted sweetness
and acid. Grinning, he offered it to Creo, who took a bite and made a
face of disgust. “I’ll stick with SoyPRO.” He handed it back to Lalji, who
finished it greedily.
Bowman smiled at Lalji’s hunger. “You’re old enough to remember,
I think, what food used to be. You can take as much of this as you like,
before we go. It will all die anyway.” He turned and thrashed again
through the garden overgrowth, shoving aside dry corn stalks with
crackling authoritative sweeps of his arms.
Beyond the garden a house lay collapsed, leaning as though it had
been toppled by a megodont, its walls rammed and buckled. The collapsed roof had an ungainly slant, and at one end, a pool of water lay
cool and deep, rippled with water skippers. Scavenged gutter had been
laid to sluice rainwater from the roof into the pond.
Bowman slipped around the pool’s edge and disappeared down a
series of crumbled cellar steps. By the time Lalji and Creo followed him
down, he had wound a handlight and its dim bulb was spattering the
cellar with illumination as its spring ran its course. He cranked the light
again while he searched around, then struck a match and lit a lantern.
The wick burned high on vegetable oil.
Lalji studied the cellar. It was sparse and damp. A pair of pallets lay on
the broken concrete floor. A computer was tucked against a corner, its
mahogany case and tiny screen gleaming, its treadle worn with use. An

18 — Paolo Bacigalupi

unruly kitchen was shoved against a wall with jars of grains arrayed on
pantry shelves and bags of produce hanging from the ceiling to defend
against rodents.
The man pointed to a sack on the ground. “There, my luggage.”
“What about the computer?” Lalji asked.
Bowman frowned at the machine. “No. I don’t need it.”
“But it’s valuable.”
“What I need, I carry in my head. Everything in that machine came
from me. My fat burned into knowledge. My calories pedaled into data
analysis.” He scowled. “Sometimes, I look at that computer and all I
see is myself whittled away. I was a fat man once.” He shook his head
emphatically. “I won’t miss it.”
Lalji began to protest but Creo startled and whipped out his spring
gun. “Someone else is here.”
Lalji saw her even as Creo spoke: a girl squatting in the corner, hidden
by shadow, a skinny, staring, freckled creature with stringy brown hair.
Creo lowered his spring gun with a sigh.
Bowman beckoned. “Come out, Tazi. These are the men I told you
about.”
Lalji wondered how long she had been sitting in the cellar darkness,
waiting. She had the look of a creature who had almost molded with the
basement: her hair lank, her dark eyes nearly swallowed by their pupils.
He turned on Bowman. “I thought there was only you.”
Bowman’s pleased smile faded. “Will you go back because of it?”
Lalji eyed the girl. Was she a lover? His child? A feral adoptee? He
couldn’t guess. The girl slipped her hand into the old man’s. Bowman
patted it reassuringly. Lalji shook his head. “She is too many. You, I have
agreed to take. I prepared a way to carry you, to hide you from boarders and inspections. Her,” he waved at the girl, “I did not agree to. It is
risky to take someone like yourself, and now you wish to compound
the danger with this girl? No.” He shook his head emphatically. “It cannot be done.”
“What difference does it make?” Bowman asked. “It costs you nothing. The current will carry us all. I have food enough for both of us.”
He went over to the pantry and started to pull down glass jars of beans,
lentils, corn, and rice. “Look, here.”
Lalji said, “We have more than enough food.”
Bowman made a face. “SoyPRO, I suppose?”
“Nothing wrong with SoyPRO,” Creo said.
The old man grinned and held up a jar of green beans floating in

The Calorie Man — 19

brine. “No. Of course not. But a man likes variety.” He began filling his
bag with more jars, letting them clink carefully. He caught Creo’s snort
of disgust and smiled, ingratiating suddenly. “For lean times, if nothing
else.” He dumped more jars of grains into the sack.
Lalji chopped the air with his hand. “Your food is not the issue. Your
girl is the issue, and she is a risk!”
Bowman shook his head. “No risk. No one is looking for her. She can
travel in the open, even.”
“No. You must leave her. I will not take her.”
The old man looked down at the girl, uncertain. She gazed back,
extricated her hand from his. “I’m not afraid. I can live here still. Like
before.”
Bowman frowned, thinking. Finally, he shook his head. “No.” He
faced Lalji. “If she cannot go, then I cannot. She fed me when I worked.
I deprived her of calories for my research when they should have gone
to her. I owe her too much. I will not leave her to the wolves of this
place.” He placed his hands on her shoulders and placed her ahead of
him, between himself and Lalji.
Creo made a face of disgust. “What difference does it make? Just bring
her. We’ve got plenty of space.”
Lalji shook his head. He and Bowman stared at one another across
the cellar. Creo said, “What if he gives us the computer? We could call
it payment.”
Lalji shook his head stubbornly. “No. I do not care about the money.
It is too dangerous to bring her.”
Bowman laughed. “Then why come all this way if you are afraid? Half
the calorie companies want to kill me and you talk about risk?”
Creo frowned. “What’s he talking about?”
Bowman’s eyebrows went up in surprise. “You haven’t told your
partner about me?”
Creo looked from Lalji to Bowman and back. “Lalji?”
Lalji took a deep breath, his eyes still locked on Bowman. “They say
he can break the calorie monopolies. That he can pirate SoyPRO.”
Creo boggled for a moment. “That’s impossible!”
Bowman shrugged. “For you, perhaps. But for a knowledgeable man?
Willing to dedicate his life to DNA helixes? More than possible. If one
is willing to burn the calories for such a project, to waste energy on
statistics and genome analysis, to pedal a computer through millions
upon millions of cycles. More than possible.” He wrapped his arms
around his skinny girl and held her to him. He smiled at Lalji. “So. Do

20 — Paolo Bacigalupi

we have any agreement?”
Creo shook his head, puzzling. “I thought you had a money plan,
Lalji, but this…” He shook his head again. “I don’t get it. How the hell
do we make money off this?”
Lalji gave Creo a dirty look. Bowman smiled, patiently waiting. Lalji
stifled an urge to seize the lantern and throw it in his face, such a confident man, so sure of himself, so loyal.…
He turned abruptly and headed for the stairs. “Bring the computer,
Creo. If his girl makes any trouble, we dump them both in the river, and
still keep his knowledge.”
Lalji remembered his father pushing back his thali, pretending he
was full when dal had barely stained the steel plate. He remembered his
mother pressing an extra bite onto his own. He remembered Gita, watching, silent, and then all of them unfolding their legs and climbing off
the family bed, bustling around the hovel, ostentatiously ignoring him
as he consumed the extra portion. He remembered roti in his mouth,
dry like ashes, and forcing himself to swallow anyway.
He remembered planting. Squatting with his father in desert heat,
yellow dust all around them, burying seeds they had stored away, saved
when they might have been eaten, kept when they might have made
Gita fat and marriageable, his father smiling, saying, “These seeds will
make hundreds of new seeds and then we will all eat well.”
“How many seeds will they make?” Lalji had asked.
And his father had laughed and spread his arms fully wide, and seemed
so large and great with his big white teeth and red and gold earrings
and crinkling eyes as he cried, “Hundreds! Thousands if you pray!” And
Lalji had prayed, to Ganesha and Lakshmi and Krishna and Rani Sati
and Ram and Vishnu, to every god he could think of, joining the many
villagers who did the same as he poured water from the well over tiny
seeds and sat guard in the darkness against the possibility that the precious grains might be uprooted in the night and transported to some
other farmer’s field.
He sat every night while cold stars turned overhead, watching the seed
rows, waiting, watering, praying, waiting through the days until his father
finally shook his head and said it was no use. And yet still he had hoped,
until at last he went out into the field and dug up the seeds one by one,
and found them already decomposed, tiny corpses in his hand, rotted.
As dead in his palm as the day he and his father had planted them.
He had crouched in the darkness and eaten the cold dead seeds, know-

The Calorie Man — 21

ing he should share, and yet unable to master his hunger and carry them
home. He wolfed them down alone, half-decayed and caked with dirt:
his first true taste of PurCal.
In the light of early morning, Lalji bathed in the most sacred river of
his adopted land. He immersed himself in the Mississippi’s silty flow,
cleansing the weight of sleep, making himself clean before his gods. He
pulled himself back aboard, slick with water, his underwear dripping
off his sagging bottom, his brown skin glistening, and toweled himself
dry on the deck as he looked across the water to where the rising sun
cast gold flecks on the river’s rippled surface.
He finished drying himself and dressed in new clean clothes before
going to his shrine. He lit incense in front of the gods, placed U-Tex and
SoyPRO before the tiny carved idols of Krishna and his lute, benevolent
Lakshmi, and elephant-headed Ganesha. He knelt in front of the idols,
prostrated himself, and prayed.
They had floated south on the river’s current, winding easily through
bright fall days and watching as leaves changed and cool weather came
on. Tranquil skies had arched overhead and mirrored on the river, turning the mud of the Mississippi’s flow into shining blue, and they had
followed that blue road south, riding the great arterial flow of the river
as creeks and tributaries and the linked chains of barges all crowded in
with them and gravity did the work of carrying them south.
He was grateful for their smooth movement downriver. The first of
the locks were behind them, and having watched the sniffer dogs ignore
Bowman’s hiding place under the decking, Lalji was beginning to hope
that the trip would be as easy as Shriram had claimed. Nonetheless, he
prayed longer and harder each day as IP patrols shot past in their fast
boats, and he placed extra SoyPRO before Ganesha’s idol, desperately
hoping that the Remover of Obstacles would continue to do so.
By the time he finished his morning devotions, the rest of the boat
was stirring. Creo came below and wandered into the cramped galley.
Bowman followed, complaining of SoyPRO, offering heirloom ingredients that Creo shook off with suspicion. On deck, Tazi sat at the edge
of the boat with a fishing line tossed into the water, hoping to snare one
of the massive lethargic LiveSalmon that occasionally bumped against
the boat’s keel in the warm murk of the river.
Lalji unmoored and took his place at the tiller. He unlocked the kinksprings and the boat whirred into the deeper current, stored joules dripping from its precision springs in a steady flow as molecules unlocked,

22 — Paolo Bacigalupi

one after another, reliable from the first kink to the last. He positioned
the needleboat amongst the wallowing grain barges and locked the
springs again, allowing the boat to drift.
Bowman and Creo came back up on deck as Creo was asking, “…you
know how to grow SoyPRO?”
Bowman laughed and sat down beside Tazi. “What good would that
do? The IP men would find the fields, ask for the licenses, and if none
were provided, the fields would burn and burn and burn.”
“So what good are you?”
Bowman smiled and posed a question instead. “SoyPRO—what is its
most precious quality?”
“It’s high calorie.”
Bowman’s braying laughter carried across the water. He tousled Tazi’s
hair and the pair of them exchanged amused glances. “You’ve seen too
many billboards from AgriGen. ‘Energy for the world’ indeed, indeed.
Oh, AgriGen and their ilk must love you very much. So malleable,
so…tractable.” He laughed again and shook his head. “No. Anyone can
make high-calorie plants. What else?”
Nettled, Creo said, “It resists the weevil.”
Bowman’s expression became sly. “Closer, yes. Difficult to make a
plant that fights off the weevil, the leafcurl rust, the soil bacterium which
chew through their roots… so many blights plague us now, so many
beasts assail our plantings, but come now, what, best of all, do we like
about SoyPRO? We of AgriGen who ‘provide energy to the world’?” He
waved at a chain of grain barges slathered with logos for SuperFlavor.
“What makes SuperFlavor so perfect from a CEO’s perspective?” He
turned toward Lalji. “You know, Indian, don’t you? Isn’t it why you’ve
come all this distance?”
Lalji stared back at him. When he spoke, his voice was hoarse. “It’s
sterile.”
Bowman’s eyes held Lalji’s for a moment. His smile slipped. He ducked
his head. “Yes. Indeed, indeed. A genetic dead-end. A one-way street.
We now pay for a privilege that nature once provided willingly, for just
a little labor.” He looked up at Lalji. “I’m sorry. I should have thought.
You would have felt our accountants’ optimum demand estimates more
than most.”
Lalji shook his head. “You cannot apologize.” He nodded at Creo. “Tell
him the rest. Tell him what you can do. What I was told you can do.”
“Some things are perhaps better left unsaid.”
Lalji was undaunted. “Tell him. Tell me. Again.”

The Calorie Man — 23

Bowman shrugged. “If you trust him, then I must trust him as well,
yes?” He turned to Creo. “Do you know cheshires?”
Creo made a noise of disgust. “They’re pests.”
“Ah, yes. A bluebill for every dead one. I forgot. But what makes our
cheshires such pests?”
“They molt. They kill birds.”
“And?” Bowman prodded.
Creo shrugged.
Bowman shook his head. “And to think it was for people like you that
I wasted my life on research and my calories on computer cycles.
“You call cheshires a plague, and truly, they are. A few wealthy patrons, obsessed with Lewis Carroll, and suddenly they are everywhere,
breeding with heirloom cats, killing birds, wailing in the night, but
most importantly, their offspring, an astonishing ninety-two percent
of the time, are cheshires themselves, pure, absolute. We create a new
species in a heartbeat of evolutionary time, and our songbird populations disappear almost as quickly. A more perfect predator, but most
importantly, one that spreads.
“With SoyPRO, or U-Tex, the calorie companies may patent the plants
and use intellectual property police and sensitized dogs to sniff out
their property, but even IP men can only inspect so many acres. Most
importantly, the seeds are sterile, a locked box. Some may steal a little
here and there, as you and Lalji do, but in the end, you are nothing but
a small expense on a balance sheet fat with profit because no one except
the calorie companies can grow the plants.
“But what would happen if we passed SoyPRO a different trait, stealthily, like a man climbing atop his best friend’s wife?” He waved his arm
to indicate the green fields that lapped at the edges of the river. “What if
someone were to drop bastardizing pollens amongst these crown jewels
that surround us? Before the calorie companies harvested and shipped
the resulting seeds across the world in their mighty clipper fleets, before
the licensed dealers delivered the patented crop seed to their customers.
What sorts of seeds might they be delivering then?”
Bowman began ticking traits off with his fingers. “Resistant to weevil
and leafcurl, yes. High calorie, yes, of course. Genetically distinct and
therefore unpatentable?” He smiled briefly. “Perhaps. But best of all,
fecund. Unbelievably fecund. Ripe, fat with breeding potential.” He
leaned forward. “Imagine it. Seeds distributed across the world by the
very cuckolds who have always clutched them so tight, all of those
seeds lusting to breed, lusting to produce their own fine offspring full

24 — Paolo Bacigalupi

of the same pollens that polluted the crown jewels in the first place.”
He clapped his hands. “Oh, what an infection that would be! And how
it would spread!”
Creo stared, his expression contorting between horror and fascination. “You can do this?”
Bowman laughed and clapped his hands again. “I’m going to be the
next Johnny Appleseed.”
Lalji woke suddenly. Around him, the darkness of the river was nearly
complete. A few windup LED beacons glowed on grain barges, powered
by the flow of the current’s drag against their ungainly bodies. Water
lapped against the sides of the needleboat and the bank where they had
tied up. Beside him on the deck the others lay bundled in blankets.
Why had he wakened? In the distance, a pair of village roosters were
challenging one another across the darkness. A dog was barking, incensed by whatever hidden smells or sounds caused dogs to startle and
defend their territory. Lalji closed his eyes and listened to the gentle
undulation of the river, the sounds of the distant village. If he pressed
his imagination, he could almost be lying in the early dawn of another
village, far away, long ago dissolved.
Why was he awake? He opened his eyes again and sat up. He strained
his eyes against the darkness. A shadow appeared on the river blackness,
a subtle blot of movement.
Lalji shook Bowman awake, his hand over Bowman’s mouth. “Hide!”
he whispered.
Lights swept over them. Bowman’s eyes widened. He fought off his
blankets and scrambled for the hold. Lalji gathered Bowman’s blankets
with his own, trying to obscure the number of sleepers as more lights
flashed brightly, sliding across the deck, pasting them like insects on a
collection board.
Abandoning its pretense of stealth, the IP boat opened its springs and
rushed in. It slammed against the needleboat, pinning it to the shoreline
as men swarmed aboard. Three of them, and two dogs.
“Everyone stay calm! Keep your hands in sight!”
Handlight beams swept across the deck, dazzlingly bright. Creo and
Tazi clawed out of their blankets and stood, surprised. The sniffer dogs
growled and lunged against their leashes. Creo backed away from them,
his hands held before him, defensive.
One of the IP men swept his handlight across them. “Who owns this
boat?”

The Calorie Man — 25

Lalji took a breath. “It’s mine. This is my boat.” The beam swung
back and speared his eyes. He squinted into the light. “Have we done
something wrong?”
The leader didn’t answer. The other IP men fanned out, swinging
their lights across the boat, marking the people on deck. Lalji realized
that except for the leader, they were just boys, barely old enough to have
mustaches and beards at all. Just peachfuzzed boys carrying spring guns
and covered in armor that helped them swagger.
Two of them headed for the stairs with the dogs as a fourth jumped
aboard from the secured IP boat. Handlight beams disappeared into
the bowels of the needleboat, casting looming shadows from inside
the stairway. Creo had somehow managed to end up backed against
the needleboat’s cache of spring guns. His hand rested casually beside
the catches. Lalji stepped toward the captain, hoping to head off Creo’s
impulsiveness.
The captain swung his light on him. “What are you doing here?”
Lalji stopped and spread his hands helplessly. “Nothing.”
“No?”
Lalji wondered if Bowman had managed to secure himself. “What I
mean is that we only moored here to sleep.”
“Why didn’t you tie up at Willow Bend?”
“I’m not familiar with this part of the river. It was getting dark. I
didn’t want to be crushed by the barges.” He wrung his hands. “I deal
with antiques. We were looking in the old suburbs to the north. It’s
not illeg—” A shout from below interrupted him. Lalji closed his eyes
regretfully. The Mississippi would be his burial river. He would never
find his way to the Ganges.
The IP men came up dragging Bowman. “Look what we found! Trying
to hide under the decking!”
Bowman tried to shake them off. “I don’t know what you’re talking
about—”
“Shut up!” One of the boys shoved a club into Bowman’s stomach.
The old man doubled over. Tazi lunged toward them, but the captain
corralled her and held her tightly as he flashed his light over Bowman’s
features. He gasped.
“Cuff him. We want him. Cover them!” Spring guns came up all
around. The captain scowled at Lalji. “An antiques dealer. I almost
believed you.” To his men he said, “He’s a generipper. From a long time
ago. See if there’s anything else on board. Any disks, any computers,
any papers.”

One of them said, “There’s a treadle computer below.”
“Get it.”
In moments the computer was on deck. The captain surveyed his captives. “Cuff them all.” One of the IP boys made Lalji kneel and started
patting him down while a sniffer dog growled over them.
Bowman was saying, “I’m really very sorry. Perhaps you’ve made a
mistake. Perhaps.…”
Suddenly the captain shouted. The IP men’s handlights swung toward
the sound. Tazi was latched onto the captain’s hand, biting him. He
was shaking at her as though she were a dog, struggling with his other
hand to get his spring gun free. For a brief moment everyone watched
the scuffle between the girl and the much larger man. Someone—Lalji
thought it was an IP man—laughed. Then Tazi was flung free and the
captain had his gun out and there was a sharp hiss of disks. Handlights
thudded on the deck and rolled, casting dizzy beams of light.
More disks hissed through the darkness. A rolling light beam showed
the captain falling, crashing against Bowman’s computer, silver disks
embedded in his armor. He and the computer slid backwards. Darkness
again. A splash. The dogs howled, either released and attacking or else
wounded. Lalji dove and lay prone on the decking as metal whirred
past his head.
“Lalji!” It was Creo’s voice. A gun skittered across the planking. Lalji
scrambled toward the sound.
One of the handlight beams had stabilized. The captain was sitting
up, black blood lines trailing from his jaw as he leveled his pistol at
Tazi. Bowman lunged into the light, shielding the girl with his body.
He curled as disks hit him.
Lalji’s fingers bumped the spring gun. He clutched after it blindly. His
hand closed on it. He jacked the pump, aimed toward bootfalls, and let
the spring gun whir. The shadow of one of the IP men, the boys, was
above him, falling, bleeding, already dead as he hit the decking.
Everything went silent.
Lalji waited. Nothing moved. He waited still, forcing himself to breathe
quietly, straining his eyes against the shadows where the handlights
didn’t illuminate. Was he the only one alive?
One by one, the three remaining handlights ran out of juice. Darkness
closed in. The IP boat bumped gently against the needleboat. A breeze
rustled the willow banks, carrying the muddy reek of fish and grasses.
Crickets chirped.
Lalji stood. Nothing. No movement. Slowly he limped across the deck.

He’d twisted his leg somehow. He felt for one of the handlights, found it
by its faint metallic gleam, and wound it. He played its flickering beam
across the deck.
Creo. The big blond boy was dead, a disk caught in his throat. Blood
pooled from where it had hit his artery. Not far away, Bowman was
ribboned with disks. His blood ran everywhere. The computer was
missing. Gone overboard. Lalji squatted beside the bodies, sighing. He
pulled Creo’s bloodied braids off his face. He had been fast. As fast as
he had believed he was. Three armored IP men and the dogs as well.
He sighed again.
Something whimpered. Lalji flicked his light toward the source,
afraid of what he would find, but it was only the girl, seemingly unhurt, crawling to Bowman’s body. She looked up into the glare of Lalji’s
light, then ignored him and crouched over Bowman. She sobbed, then
stifled herself. Lalji locked the handlight’s spring and let darkness fall
over them.
He listened to the night sounds again, praying to Ganesha that there
were no others out on the river. His eyes adjusted. The shadow of the
grieving girl kneeling amongst lumped bodies resolved from the blackness. He shook his head. So many dead for such an idea. That such a
man as Bowman might be of use. And now such a waste. He listened
for signs others had been alerted but heard nothing. A single patrol, it
seemed, uncoordinated with any others. Bad luck. That was all. One
piece of bad luck breaking a string of good. Gods were fickle.
He limped to the needleboat’s moorings and began untying. Unbidden, Tazi joined him, her small hands fumbling with the knots. He
went to the tiller and unlocked the kink-springs. The boat jerked as
the screws bit and they swept into the river darkness. He let the springs
fly for an hour, wasting joules but anxious to make distance from the
killing place, then searched the banks for an inlet and anchored. The
darkness was nearly total.
After securing the boat, he searched for weights and tied them around
the ankles of the IP men. He did the same with the dogs, then began
shoving the bodies off the deck. The water swallowed them easily. It felt
unclean to dump them so unceremoniously, but he had no intention of
taking time to bury them. With luck, the men would bump along under
water, picked at by fish until they disintegrated.
When the IP men were gone, he paused over Creo. So wonderfully
quick. He pushed Creo overboard, wishing he could build a pyre for
him.
27

28 — Paolo Bacigalupi

Lalji began mopping the decks, sluicing away the remaining blood. The
moon rose, bathing them in pale light. The girl sat beside the body of her
chaperone. Eventually, Lalji could avoid her with his mopping no more.
He knelt beside her. “You understand he must go into the river?”
The girl didn’t respond. Lalji took it as assent. “If there is anything you
wish to have of his, you should take it now.” The girl shook her head.
Lalji hesitantly let his hand rest on her shoulder. “It is no shame to be
given to a river. An honor, even, to go to a river such as this.”
He waited. Finally, she nodded. He stood and dragged the body to
the edge of the boat. He tied it with weights and levered the legs over
the lip. The old man slid out of his hands. The girl was silent, staring at
where Bowman had disappeared into the water.
Lalji finished his mopping. In the morning he would have to mop
again, and sand the stains, but for the time it would do. He began pulling
in the anchors. A moment later, the girl was with him again, helping.
Lalji settled himself at the tiller. Such a waste, he thought. Such a great
waste.
Slowly, the current drew their needleboat into the deeper flows of the
river. The girl came and knelt beside him. “Will they chase us?”
Lalji shrugged. “With luck? No. They will look for something larger
than us to make so many of their men disappear. With just the two of
us now, we will look like very small inconsequential fish to them. With
luck.”
She nodded, seeming to digest this information. “He saved me, you
know. I should be dead now.”
“I saw.”
“Will you plant his seeds?”
“Without him to make them, there will be no one to plant them.”
Tazi frowned. “But we’ve got so many.” She stood and slipped down
into the hold. When she returned, she lugged the sack of Bowman’s food
stores. She began pulling jars from the sack: rice and corn, soybeans and
kernels of wheat.
“That’s just food,” Lalji protested.
Tazi shook her head stubbornly. “They’re his Johnny Appleseeds. I
wasn’t supposed to tell you. He didn’t trust you to take us all the way.
To take me. But you could plant them, too, right?”
Lalji frowned and picked up a jar of corn. The kernels nestled tightly
together, hundreds of them, each one unpatented, each one a genetic
infection. He closed his eyes and in his mind he saw a field: row upon
row of green rustling plants, and his father, laughing, with his arms

The Calorie Man — 29

spread wide as he shouted, “Hundreds! Thousands if you pray!”
Lalji hugged the jar to his chest, and slowly, he began to smile.
The needleboat continued downstream, a bit of flotsam in the Mississippi’s current. Around it, the crowding shadow hulks of the grain
barges loomed, all of them flowing south through the fertile heartland
toward the gateway of New Orleans; all of them flowing steadily toward
the vast wide world.

Pop Squad

T

he familiar stench of unwashed bodies, cooked food, and shit
washes over me as I come through the door. Cruiser lights
flicker through the blinds, sparkling in rain and illuminating
the crime scene with strobes of red and blue fire. A kitchen. A humid
mess. A chunky woman huddles in the corner, clutching closed her
nightgown. Fat thighs and swaying breasts under stained silk. Squad
goons crowding her, pushing her around, making her sit, making her
cower. Another woman, young-looking and pretty, pregnant and blackhaired, is slumped against the opposite wall, her blouse spackled with
spaghetti remains. Screams from the next room: kids.
I squeeze my fingers over my nose and breathe through my mouth,
fighting off nausea as Pentle wanders in, holstering his Grange. He sees
me and tosses me a nosecap. I break it and snort lavender until the stink
slides off. Children come scampering in with Pentle, a brood of three
tangling around his knees—the screamers from the other room. They
gallop around the kitchen and disappear again, screaming still, into the
living room where data sparkles like fairy dust on the wallscreens and
provides what is likely their only connection to the outside world.
“That’s everyone,” Pentle says. He’s got a long skinny face and a
sour small mouth that always points south. Weights seem to hang
off his cheeks. Fat caterpillar brows droop over his eyes. He surveys
the kitchen, mouth corners dragging lower. It’s always depressing to
come into these scenes. “They were all inside when we broke down
the door.”
I nod absently as I shake monsoon water from my hat. “Great.
Thanks.” Liquid beads scatter on the floor, joining puddles of wet from
the pop squad along with the maggot debris of the spaghetti dinner. I
31

32 — Paolo Bacigalupi

put my hat back on. Water still manages to drip off the brim and slip
under my collar, a slick rivulet of discomfort. Someone closes the door
to the outside. The shit smell thickens, eggy and humid. The nosecap
barely holds it off. Old peas and bits of cereal crunch under my feet.
They squish with the spaghetti, the geologic layers of past feedings.
The kitchen hasn’t been self-cleaned in years.
The older woman coughs and pulls her nightgown tighter around
her cellulite and I wonder, as I always do when I come into situations
like this, what made her choose this furtive nasty life of rotting garbage
and brief illicit forays into daylight. The pregnant girl seems to have
slipped even further into herself since I arrived. She stares into space.
You’d have to touch her pulse to know that she’s alive. It amazes me that
women can end up like this, seduced so far down into gutter life that
they arrive here, fugitives from everyone who would have kept them
and held them and loved them and let them see the world outside.
The children run in from the living room again, playing chase: a
blond, no more than five; another, younger and with brown braids,
topless and in makeshift diapers, less than three; and a knee-high toddler boy, scrap diaper bunched around little muscle thighs, wearing a
T-shirt stained with tomato sauce that says “Who’s the Cutest?” The
T-shirt would be an antique if it wasn’t stained.
“You need anything else?” Pentle asks. He wrinkles his nose as new
reek wafts from the direction of the kids.
“You get photos for the prosecutor?”
“Got ’em.” Pentle holds out a digicam and thumbs through the
images of the ladies and the three children, all of them staring out
from the screen like little smeared dolls. “You want me to take them
in, now?”
I look over the women. The kids have run out again. From the other
room, their howls echo as they chase around. Their shrieks are piercing. Even from a distance they hurt my head. “Yeah. I’ll deal with the
kids.”
Pentle gets the women up off the floor and shuffles out the door,
leaving me standing alone in the middle of the kitchen. It’s all so familiar: a typical floor plan from Builders United. Custom undercab
lighting, black mirror tile on the floors, clever self-clean nozzles hidden
behind deco trim lines, so much like the stuff Alice and I have that I
can almost forget where I am. It’s a negative image of our apartment’s
kitchen: light vs. dark, clean vs. dirty, quiet vs. loud. The same floor
plan, everything about it the same, and yet, nothing in it is. It’s ar-

Pop Squad — 33

cheological. I can look at the layers of gunk and grime and noise and
see what must have underlain it before…when these people worried
about color coordinating and classy appliances.
I open the fridge (smudgefree nickel, how practical). Ours contains
pineapples and avocados and endive and corn and coffee and brazil
nuts from Angel Spire’s hanging gardens. This one holds a shelf cluttered with ground mycoprotein bars and wadded piles of nutrition
supplement sacs like the kind they hand out at the government rejoo
clinics. Other than a bag of slimy lettuce, there isn’t anything unprocessed in the fridge at all. No vegetables except in powder jars, ditto for
fruit. A stack of self-warming dinner bins for fried rice and laap and
spaghetti just like the one still lying on the kitchen table in a puddle
of its own sauce, and that’s it.
I close the fridge and straighten. There’s something here in the mess
and the screaming in the next room and the reek of the one kid’s
poopy pants, but I’m stumped as to what it is. They could have lived
up in the light and air. Instead, they hid in the dark under wet jungle
canopy and turned pale and gave up their lives.
The kids race back in, chasing each other all in a train, laughing and
shrieking. They stop and look around, surprised, maybe, that their
moms have disappeared. The littlest one has a stuffed dinosaur by
the nose. It’s got a long green neck and a fat body. A brontosaurus, I
think, with big cartooney eyes and black felt lashes. It’s funny about the
dinosaur, because they’ve been gone so long, but here one is, showing
up as a stuffed toy. And then it’s funny again, because when you think
about it, a dinosaur toy is really extinct twice.
“Sorry, kids. Mommy’s gone.”
I pull out my Grange. Their heads kick back in successive jerks, bang
bang bang down the line, holes appearing on their foreheads like paint
and their brains spattering out the back. Their bodies flip and skid on
the black mirror floor. They land in jumbled piles of misaligned limbs.
For a second, gunpowder burn makes the stench bearable.
Up out of the jungle like a bat out of hell, climbing out of Rhinehurst Supercluster’s holdout suburban sprawl and then rising through
jungle overstory. Blasting across the Causeway toward Angel Spire and
the sea. Monkeys diving off the rail line like grasshoppers, pouring
off the edge ahead of my cruiser and disappearing into the mangrove
and kudzu and mahogany and teak, disappearing into the wet bowels
of greenery tangle. Dumping the cruiser at squad center, no time for

34 — Paolo Bacigalupi

mopdown, don’t need it anyway. My hat, my raincoat, my clothes into
hazmat bags, and then out again on the other side, rushing to pull on a
tux before catching a masslift up 188 stories, rising into the high clear
air over the jungle fur of carbon sequestration project N22.
Mma Telogo has a new concerto. Alice is his diva viola, his prize,
and Hua Chiang and Telogo have been circling her like ravens, picking apart her performance, corvid eyes on her, watching and hungry
for fault, but now they call her ready. Ready to banish Banini from
his throne. Ready to challenge for a place in the immortal canon of
classical performance. And I’m late. Caught in a masslift on Level 55,
packed in with the breath and heat of upper-deck diners and weekenders climbing the spire while the seconds tick by, listening to the
climate fans buzz and whir while we all sweat and wilt, waiting for
some problem on the line to clear.
Finally we’re rising again, our stomachs dropping into our shoes,
our ears popping as we soar into the heavens, flying under magnetic
acceleration…and then slowing so fast we almost leave the floor. Our
stomachs catch up. I shove out through hundreds of people, waving
my cop badge when anyone complains, and sprint through the glass
arch of the Ki Performance Center. I dive between the closing slabs
of the attention doors.
The autolocks thud home behind me, sealing the performance space.
It’s comforting. I’m inside, enfolded in the symphony, as though its
hands have cupped themselves around me and pulled me into a chamber of absolute focus. The lights dim. Conversational thrum falls away.
I find my way to my seat more by feel than sight. Dirty looks from
men in topaz hats and women in spectacle eyes as I squeeze across
them. Gauche, I know. Absurdly late to an event that happens once in a
decade. Plopping down just as Hua Chiang steps up to the podium.
His hands rise like crane wings. Bows and horns and flutes flash with
movement and then the music comes, first a hint, like blowing mist,
and then building, winding through a series of repeated stanzas that I
have heard Alice play perhaps ten thousand times. Notes I heard first
so long ago, stumbling and painful, that now spill like water and burst
like ice flowers. The music settles, pianissimo again, the lovely delicate
motifs that I know from Alice’s practice. An introduction only, she has
told me, intended to file away the audience’s last thoughts of the world
outside, repeated stanzas until Hua Chiang accepts that the audience is
completely his and then Alice’s viola rises, and the other players move
to support her, fifteen years of practice coming to fruition.

Pop Squad — 35

I look down at my hands, overwhelmed. It’s different in the concert
hall. Different than all those days when she cursed and practiced and
swore at Telogo and claimed his work couldn’t be performed. Different even from when she finished her practices early, smiling, hands
calloused in new ways, face flushed, eager to drink a cool white wine
with me on our balcony in the light of the setting sun and watch
the sky as monsoon clouds parted and starlight shone down on our
companionship. Tonight, her part joins the rest of the symphony and
I can’t speak or think for the beauty of the whole.
Later, I’ll hear whether Telogo has surpassed Banini for sheer
audacity. I’ll hear how critics compare living memories of ancient
performances and see how critical opinion shifts to accommodate
this new piece in a canon that stretches back more than a century,
and that hangs like a ghost over everything that Alice and her director
Hua Chiang hope for: a performance that will knock Banini off his
throne and perhaps depress him enough to stop rejoo and stuff him
in his grave. For me, competing against that much history would be
a heavy weight. I’m glad I’ve got a job where forgetting is the most
important part. Working on the pop squad means your brain takes
a vacation and your hands do the work. And when you leave work,
you’ve left it for good.
Except now, as I look down at my hands, I’m surprised to find pinpricks of blood all over them. A fine spray. The misty remains of the
little kid with the dinosaur. My fingers smell of rust.
The tempo accelerates. Alice is playing again. Notes writhe together
so fluidly that it seems impossible they aren’t generated electronically,
and yet the warmth and phrasing is hers, achingly hers, I’ve heard it
in the morning, when she practiced on the balcony, testing herself,
working again and again against the limitations of her self. Disciplining her fingers and hands, forcing them to accept Telogo’s demands,
the ones that years ago she had called impossible and which now run
so cleanly through the audience.
The blood is all over my hands. I pick at it, scrape it away in flakes.
It had to be the kid with the dinosaur. He was closest when he took
the bullet. Some of his residue is stuck tight, bonded to my own skin.
I shouldn’t have skipped mopdown.
I pick.
The man next to me, tan face and rouged lips, frowns. I’m ruining a
moment of history for him, something he has waited years to hear.
I pick more carefully. Silently. The blood flakes off. Dumb kid with

36 — Paolo Bacigalupi

the dumb dinosaur that almost made me miss the performance.
The cleanup crew noticed the dinosaur toy too. Caught the irony.
Joked and snorted nosecaps and started bagging the bodies for compost. Made me late. Stupid dinosaur.
The music cascades into silence. Hua Chiang’s hands fall. Applause.
Alice stands at Chiang’s urging and the applause increases. Craning
my neck, I can see her, nineteen-year-old face flushed, smile bright
and triumphant, enveloped in our adulation.
We end up at a party thrown by Maria Illoni, one of the symphony’s
high donors. She made her money on global warming mitigation for
New York City, before it went under. Her penthouse is in Shoreline
Curve, daringly arcing over the seawalls and the surf, a sort of flip of
the finger to the ocean that beat her storm surge calculations. A spidery
silver vine over dark water and the bob of the boat communities out
in the deeps. New York obviously never got its money back: Illoni’s
outdoor patio runs across the entire top floor of the Shoreline and
platforms additional petals of spun hollowform carbon out into the
air.
From the far side of the Curve, you can see beyond the incandescent
cores of the superclusters to the old city sprawl, dark except along
where maglines radiate. A strange mangle of wreckage and scavenge
and disrepair. In the day, it looks like some kind of dry red fungal
collapse, a weave of jungle canopy and old suburban understory, but
at night, all that’s visible is the skeleton of glowing infrastructure,
radial blooms in the darkness, and I breathe deeply, enjoying all the
freshness and openness that’s missing from those steaming hideouts
I raid with the pop squad.
Alice sparkles in the heat, perfectly slim, well curved—an armful of
beautiful girl. The fall air is under thirty-three degrees and pleasant,
and I feel infinitely tender toward her. I pull her close. We slip into a
forest of century-old bonsai sculptures created by Maria’s husband.
Alice murmurs that he spends all his time here on the roof, staring
at branches, studying their curves, and occasionally, perhaps every
few years, wiring a branch and guiding it in a new direction. We kiss
in the shadows they provide, and Alice is beautiful and everything is
perfect.
But I’m distracted.
When I hit the kids with my Grange, the littlest one—the one with
that stupid dinosaur—flipped over. A Grange is built for nitheads,

Pop Squad — 37

not little kids, so the bullet plowed through the kid and he flipped
and his dinosaur went flying. It sailed, I mean really sailed, through
the air. And now I can’t get it out of my mind: that dinosaur flying.
And then hitting the wall and bouncing onto the black mirror floor.
So fast and so slow. Bang bang bang down the line…and then the
dinosaur in the air.
Alice pulls away, seeming to sense my inattention. I straighten up.
Try to focus on her.
She says, “I thought you weren’t going to make it. When we were
tuning, I looked out and your seat was empty.”
I force a grin. “But I did. I made it.”
Barely. I stood around too long with the cleanup guys while the dinosaur lay in a puddle and sopped up the kid’s blood. Double extinct.
The kid and the dinosaur both. Dead one way, and then dead again.
There’s a weird symmetry there.
She cocks her head, studying me. “Was it bad?”
“What?” The brontosaurus? “The call?” I shrug. “Just a couple crazy
ladies. Not armed or anything. It was easy.”
“I can’t imagine it. Cutting rejoo like that.” She sighs and reaches out
to touch a bonsai, perfectly guided over the decades by the map that
only Michael Illoni can see or understand. “Why give all this up?”
I don’t have an answer. I rewind the crime scene in my mind. I have
the same feeling that I did when I stood on spaghetti maggots and
went through their fridge. There’s something there in the stink and
noise and darkness, something hot and obsessive and ripe. But I don’t
know what it is.
“The ladies looked old,” I say. “Like week-old balloons, all puffy
and droopy.”
Alice makes a face of distaste. “Can you imagine trying to perform
Telogo without rejoo? We wouldn’t have had the time. Half of us would
have been past our prime, and we’d have needed understudies, and
then the understudies would have had to find understudies. Fifteen
years. And these women throw it all away. How can they throw away
something as beautiful as Telogo?”
“You thinking about Kara?”
“She would have played Telogo twice as well as I did.”
“I don’t believe that.”
“Believe it. She was the best. Before she went kid-crazy.” She sighs.
“I miss her.”
“You could still visit her. She’s not dead yet.”

38 — Paolo Bacigalupi

“She might as well be. She’s already twenty years older than when we
knew her.” She shakes her head. “No. I’d rather remember her in her
prime, not out at some single-sex work camp growing vegetables and
losing the last of her talent. I couldn’t stand listening to her play now.
It would kill me to hear all of that gone.” She turns abruptly. “That
reminds me, my rejoo booster is tomorrow. Can you take me?”
“Tomorrow?” I hesitate. I’m supposed to be on another shift popping
kids. “It’s kind of short notice.”
“I know. I meant to ask sooner, but with the concert coming up, I
forgot.” She shrugs. “It’s not that important. I can go by myself.” She
glances at me sidelong. “But it is nicer when you come.”
What the hell. I don’t really want to work anyway. “Okay, sure. I’ll
get Pentle to cover for me.” Let him deal with the dinosaurs.
“Really?”
I shrug. “What can I say? I’m a sweet guy.”
She smiles and stands on tiptoe to kiss me. “If we weren’t going to
live forever, I’d marry you.”
I laugh. “If we weren’t going to live forever, I’d get you pregnant.”
We look at each other. Alice laughs unsteadily and takes it as a joke.
“Don’t be gross.”
Before we can talk any more, Illoni pops out from behind a bonsai
and grabs Alice by the arm. “There you are! I’ve been looking everywhere for you. You can’t hide yourself like this. You’re the woman of
the hour.”
She pulls Alice away with all the confidence that must have made
New York believe she could save it. She barely even looks at me as
they hustle off. Alice smiles tolerantly and motions for me to follow.
Then Maria’s calling to everyone and pulling them all together and she
climbs up on a fountain’s rim and pulls Alice up beside her. She starts
talking about art and sacrifice and discipline and beauty.
I tune it out. There’s only so much self-congratulation you can take.
It’s obvious Alice is one of the best in the world. Talking about it just
makes it seem banal. But the donors need to feel like they’re part of
the moment, so they all want to squeeze Alice and make her theirs, so
they talk and talk and talk.
Maria’s saying, “…wouldn’t be standing here congratulating ourselves, if it weren’t for our lovely Alice. Hua Chiang and Telogo did their
work well, but in the final moment it was Alice’s execution in the face of
Telogo’s ambitious piece that has made it resonate so strongly already
with the critics. We have her to thank for the piece’s flawlessness.”

Pop Squad — 39

Everyone starts applauding and Alice blushes prettily, not accustomed to adulation from her peers and competitors. Maria shouts
over the cheering, “I’ve made several calls to Banini, and it is more
than apparent that he has no answer to our challenge and so I expect
the next eighty years are ours. And Alice’s!” The applause is almost
deafening.
Maria waves for attention again and the applause fades into scattered
whistles and catcalls which finally taper off enough to allow Maria to
continue. “To commemorate the end of Banini’s age, and the beginning of a new one, I would like to present Alice with a small token
of affection—” and here she leans down and picks up a jute-woven
gift bag shot with gold as she says, “Of course a woman likes gold and
jewels, and strings for her viola, but I thought this was a particularly
apt gift for the evening.…”
I’m leaning against the woman next to me, trying to see, as Maria
holds the bag dramatically above her head and calls out to the crowd,
“For Alice, our slayer of dinosaurs!” and pulls the green brontosaurus
out of the bag.
It’s just like the one the kid had.
Its big eyes look right at me. For a second it seems to blink at me
with its big black lashes and then the crowd laughs and applauds as
they all get the joke. Banini = dinosaur. Ha ha.
Alice takes the dinosaur and holds it by the neck and swings it over
her head and everybody laughs again but I can’t see anything anymore
because I’m lying on the ground caught in the jungle swelter of people’s
legs and I can’t breathe.
“Are you sure you’re okay?”
“Sure. No problem. I told you. I’m fine.”
It’s true, I guess. Sitting next to Alice in the waiting room, I don’t feel
dizzy or anything, even if I am tired. Last night, she put the dinosaur
on the bedside table, right in with her collection of little jeweled music
boxes, and the damn thing looked at me all night long. Finally at four
a.m. I couldn’t stand it anymore and I shoved it under the bed. But
in the morning, she found it and put it back, and it’s been looking at
me ever since.
Alice squeezes my hand. The rejoo clinic’s a small one, private,
carefully appointed with holographic windows of sailboats on the
Atlantic so it feels open and airy even though its daylight is piped in
through mirror collectors. It’s not one of the big public monsters out

40 — Paolo Bacigalupi

in the clusters that got started after rejoo’s patents expired. You pay a
little more than you do for the Medicaid generics, but you don’t rub
shoulders with a bunch of starving gamblers and nitheads and drunks
who all still want their rejoo even if they’re wasting every day of their
endless lives.
The nurses are quick and efficient. Pretty soon, Alice is on her back
hooked up to an IV bladder with me sitting beside her on the bed,
and we’re watching rejoo push into her.
It’s just a clear liquid. I always thought it should be fizzy and green
for growing things. Or maybe not green, but definitely fizzy. It always
feels fizzy when it goes in.
Alice takes a quick breath and reaches out for me, her slender pale
fingers brushing my thigh. “Hold my hand.”
The elixir of life pulses into her, filling her, flushing her. She pants
shallowly. Her eyes dilate. She isn’t watching me anymore. She’s
somewhere deep inside, reclaiming what was lost over the last eighteen months. No matter how many times I do it, I’m surprised when
I watch it come over someone, the way it seems to swallow them and
then they come back to the surface more whole and alive than when
they started.
Alice’s eyes focus. She smiles. “Oh, God. I can never get used to
that.”
She tries to stand up, but I hold her down and beep the nurse. Once
we’ve got her unhooked, I lead her back out to the car. She leans heavily
against me, stumbling and touching me. I can almost feel the fizzing
and tingling through her skin. She climbs into the car. When I’m inside,
she looks over at me and laughs. “I can’t believe how good I feel.”
“Nothing like winding back the clock.”
“Take me home. I want to be with you. ”
I push the start button on the car and we slide out of our parking
space. We hook onto the magline out of Center Spire. Alice watches the
city slide by outside the windows. All the shoppers and the businessmen
and the martyrs and the ghosts, and then we’re out in the open, on the
high track over the jungle, speeding north again, for Angel Spire.
“It’s so wonderful to be alive,” she says, “It doesn’t make any
sense.”
“What doesn’t?”
“Cutting rejoo.”
“If people made sense, we wouldn’t have psychologists.” And we
wouldn’t buy dinosaur toys for kids who were never going to make

Pop Squad — 41

it anyway. I grit my teeth. None of them make any sense. Stupid
moms.
Alice sighs and runs her hands across her thighs, kneading herself,
hiking up her skirt and digging her fingers into her flesh. “But it still
doesn’t make any sense. It feels so good. You’d have to be crazy to
stop rejoo.”
“Of course they’re crazy. They kill themselves, they make babies
they don’t know how to take care of, they live in shitty apartments in
the dark, they never go out, they smell bad, they look terrible, they
never have anything good again—” I’m starting to shout. I shut my
mouth.
Alice looks over at me. “Are you okay?”
“I’m fine.”
But I’m not. I’m mad. Mad at the ladies and their stupid toy-buying. Pissed off that these dumb women tease their dumb terminal kids
like that; treat them like they aren’t going to end up as compost. “Let’s
not talk about work right now. Let’s just go home.” I force a grin. “I’ve
already got the day off. We should take advantage of it.”
Alice is still looking at me. I can see the questions in her eyes. If she
weren’t on the leading edge of a rejoo high, she’d keep pressing, but
she’s so wrapped up in the tingling of her rebuilt body that she lets it
go. She laughs and runs her fingers up my leg and starts to play with
me. I override the magline’s safeties with my cop codes and we barrel
across the Causeway toward Angel Spire with the sun on the ocean and
Alice smiling and laughing and the bright air whirling around us.
Three a.m. Another call, windows down, howling through the humidity and swelter of Newfoundland. Alice wants me to come home,
come back, relax, but I can’t. I don’t want to. I’m not sure what I want,
but it’s not brunch with Belgian waffles or screwing on the living room
floor or a trip to the movies or…anything, really.
I can’t do it, anyway. We got home, and I couldn’t do it. Nothing felt
right. Alice said it didn’t matter, that she wanted to practice.
Now I haven’t seen her for more than a day.
I’ve been on duty, catching up on calls. I’ve been going for twentyfour hours straight, powered on coppers’-little-helpers and mainlined
caffeine and my hat and trench coat and hands are pinprick-sprayed
with the residue of work.
Along the coastline the sea runs high and hot, splashing in over the
breakwaters. Lights ahead, the glow of coalfoundries and gasification

42 — Paolo Bacigalupi

works. The call takes me up the glittering face of Palomino Cluster.
Nice real estate. Up the masslifts and smashing through a door with
Pentle backing me, knowing what we’re going to find but never knowing how much these ones will fight.
Bedlam. A lady, this one a pretty brown girl who might have had a
great life if she didn’t decide she needed a baby, and a kid lying in the
corner in a box screaming and screaming. And the lady’s screaming too,
screaming at the little kid in its box, like she’s gone out of her mind.
As we come in through the door, she starts screaming at us. The
kid keeps screaming. The lady keeps screaming. It’s like a bunch of
screwdrivers jamming in my ears; it goes on and on. Pentle grabs the
lady and tries to hold her but she and the kid just keep screaming
away and suddenly I can’t breathe. I can barely stand. The kid screams
and screams and screams: screwdrivers and glass and icepicks in my
head.
So I shoot the thing. I pull out my Grange and put a bullet in the
little sucker. Fragments of box and baby spray the air.
I don’t do that, normally; it’s against procedure to waste the kid in
front of the mother.
But there we all are, staring at the body, bloodmist and gunpowder
all over and my ears ringing from the shot and for one pristine crystal
second, it’s quiet.
Then the woman’s screaming at me again and Pentle’s screaming too
because I screwed up the evidence before he could get a picture, and
then the lady’s all over me, trying to claw my eyes out. Pentle drags
her off and then she’s calling me a bastard and a killer and bastard and
monkey man and a fucking pig and that I’ve got dead eyes.
And that really gets me: I’ve got dead eyes. This lady’s headed into
a rejoo collapse and won’t last another twenty years and she’ll spend
all of it in a single-sex work camp. She’s young, a lot like Alice, maybe
the last of them to cross the line into rejoo, right when she came of
age—not an old workhorse like me who was already forty when it
went generic—and now she’ll be dead in an eye blink. But I’m the
one with dead eyes.
I take my Grange and shove it into her forehead. “You want to die
too?”
“Go ahead! Do it! Do it!” She doesn’t stop for a second, just keeps
howling and spitting. “Fucking bastard! Bastard fuckingfuckfucking— Do it! Do it!” She’s crying.
Even though I want to see her brains pop out the back of her head,

Pop Squad — 43

I don’t have the heart. She’ll die soon enough. Another twenty years
and she’s done for. The paperwork isn’t worth it.
Pentle cuffs her while she babbles to the baby in the box, just a lump
of blood and limp doll parts now. “My baby my poor baby I didn’t
know I’m sorry my baby my poor baby I’m sorry.…” Pentle muscles
her out to the car.
For a while I can hear her in the hall. My baby my poor baby my
poor baby.… And then she’s gone down the lifts and it’s a relief just
to be standing there with the wet smells of the apartment and the
dead body.
She was using a dresser drawer as her bassinet.
I run my fingers along the splintered edge, fondle the brass pulls. If
nothing else, these ladies are resourceful, making the things we can’t
buy anymore. If I close my eyes, I can almost remember a whole industry around these little guys. Little outfits. Little chairs. Little beds.
Everything made little.
Little dinosaurs.
“She couldn’t make it shut up.”
I jerk my hands away from the baby box, startled. Pentle has come
up behind me. “Huh?”
“She couldn’t make it stop crying. Didn’t know what to do with it.
Didn’t know how to make it calm down. That’s how the neighbors
heard.”
“Dumb.”
“Yeah. She didn’t even have a tag-teamer. How the heck was she
going to do grocery shopping?”
He gets out his camera and tries a couple shots of the baby. There’s
not a whole lot left. A 12mm Grange is built for junkies, nitheads going crazy, ’bot assassins. It’s overkill for an unarmored thing like this.
When the new Granges came out, Grange ran an ad campaign on the
sides of our cruisers. “Grange: Unstoppable.” Or something like that.
There was this one that said “Point Blank Grange” with a photo of a
completely mangled nithead. That one was in all our lockers.
Pentle tries another angle on the drawer, going for a profile, trying
to make the best of a bad situation. “I like how she used a drawer,”
he says.
“Yeah. Resourceful.”
“I saw this one where the lady made a whole little table and chair set
for her kid. Handmade it all. I couldn’t believe how much energy she
put into it.” He makes shapes with his hand. “Little scalloped edges,

44 — Paolo Bacigalupi

shapes painted on the top: squares and triangles and things.”
“If you’re going to die doing something, I guess you want to do a
good job of it.”
“I’d rather be parasailing. Or go to a concert. I heard Alice was great
the other night.”
“Yeah. She was.” I study the baby’s body as Pentle takes some more
shots. “If you had to do it, how do you think you’d make one of them
be quiet?”
Pentle nods at my Grange. “I’d tell it to shut up.”
I grimace and holster the gun. “Sorry about that. It’s been a rough
week. I’ve been up too long. Haven’t been sleeping.” Too many dinosaurs looking at me.
Pentle shrugs. “Whatever. It would have been better to get an intact
image—” He snaps another picture. “—but even if she gets off this
time, you got to figure in another year or two we’ll be busting down
her door again. These girls have a damn high recidivism.” He takes
another photo.
I go to a window and open it. Salt air flows in like fresh life, cleaning out the wet shit and body stinks. Probably the first fresh air the
apartment’s had since the baby was born. Got to keep the windows
closed or the neighbors might hear. Got to stay locked in. I wonder if
she’s got a boyfriend, some rejoo dropout who’s going to show up with
groceries and find her gone. Probably worth staking out the apartment,
just to see. Keep the feminists off us for only bagging the women. I take
a deep breath of sea air to get something fresh in my lungs, then light
a cigarette and turn back to the room with its clutter and stink.
Recidivism. Fancy word for girls with a compulsion. Like a nithead
or a coke freak, but weirder, more self-destructive. At least being a
junkie is fun. Who the hell chooses to live in dark apartments with
shitty diapers, instant food, and no sleep for years on end? The whole
breeding thing is an anachronism—twenty-first-century ritual torture
we don’t need anymore. But these girls keep trying to turn back the
clock and pop out the pups, little lizard brains compelled to pass on
some DNA. And there’s a new batch every year, little burps of offspring cropping up here and there, the convulsions of a species trying
to restart itself and get evolution rolling again, like we can’t tell that
we’ve already won.
I’m keying through the directory listings in my cruiser, fiddling
through ads and keywords and search preferences, trying to zero in

Pop Squad — 45

on something that doesn’t come up no matter how I go after it.
Dinosaur.
Toys.
Stuffed animals.
Nothing. Nobody sells stuff like that dinosaur. But I’ve run into two
of them now.
Monkeys scamper over the roof of my car. One of them lands on my
forward impact rails and looks at me, yellow eyes wide, before another
jumps it and they fall off the carbon petal pullout where I’m parked.
Somewhere down below, suburban crumble keeps small herds of them.
I remember when this area was tundra. It was a long time ago. I’ve
talked to techs in the carbon sink business who talk about flipping the
climate and building an icecap, but it’s a slow process, an accretion of
centuries most likely. Assuming I don’t get shot by a crazy mom or a
nithead, I’ll see it happen. But for now, it’s monkeys and jungle.
Forty-eight hours on call and two more cleanups and Alice wants
me to take the weekend off and play, but I can’t. I’m living on perkies,
now. She feels good about her work, and wants me all day. We’ve done
it before. Lying together, enjoying the silence and our own company,
the pleasure of just being together with nothing needing to be done.
There’s something wonderful about peace and silence and sea breezes
twisting the curtains on the balcony.
I should go home. In a week, maybe, she’ll be back at worrying,
doubting herself, thrashing herself to work harder, to practice longer,
to listen and feel and move inside of music that’s so complex it might
as well be the mathematics of chaos for anyone but her. But in reality,
she has time. All the time in the world, and it makes me happy that
she has it, that fifteen years isn’t too long to prepare for something as
heartstoppingly beautiful as what she did with Telogo.
I want to spend this time with her, to enjoy her bliss. But I don’t
want to go back and sleep with that dinosaur. I can’t.
I call her from the cruiser.
“Alice?”
She looks out at me from the dash. “Are you coming home? I could
meet you for lunch.”
“Do you know where Maria got that dinosaur toy?”
She shrugs. “Maybe one of the shops on the Span? Why?”
“Just wondering.” I pause. “Could you go get it for me?”
“Why? Why can’t we do something fun? I’m on vacation. I just had
my rejoo. I feel great. If you want to see my dinosaur, why don’t you

46 — Paolo Bacigalupi

come home and get it?”
“Alice, please.”
Scowling, she disappears from the screen. In a few minutes she’s
back, holding it up to the screen, shoving it in my face. I can feel my
heart beating faster. It’s cool in the cruiser, but I break into a sweat
when I see the dinosaur on the screen. I clear my throat. “What’s it
say on the tag?”
Frowning, she turns the thing over, runs her fingers through its fur.
She holds up the tag to the camera. It comes in blurry as the camera
focuses, then it’s there, clear and sharp. “Ipswitch Collectibles.”
Of course. Not a toy at all.
The woman who runs Ipswitch is old, as old a rejoo as I’ve ever met.
The wrinkles on her face look so much like plastic that it’s hard to tell
what’s real and what may be a mask. Her eyes are sunken little blue
coals and her hair is so white I think of weddings and silk. She must
have been ninety when rejoo hit.
Whatever the name of it, Ipswitch Collectibles is full of toys: dolls
staring down from their racks, different faces and shapes and colors
of hair, some of them soft, some of them made of hard bright plastics;
tiny trains that run around miniature tracks and spout steam from
their pinky-sized smokestacks; figurines from old-time movies and
comics in action poses: Superman, Dolphina, Rex Mutinous. And,
under a shelf of hand-carved wooden cars, a bin full of stuffed dinosaurs in green and blue and red. A tyrannosaurus rex. A pterodactyl.
The brontosaurus.
“I’ve got a few stegosauruses in the back.”
I look up, startled. The old woman watches me from behind the
counter, a strange wrinkly buzzard, studying me with those sharp blue
eyes, examining me like I’m carrion.
I pick out the brontosaurus and hold it up by the neck. “No. These’re
fine.”
A bell rings. The shop’s main doors to the concourse slide open. A
woman steps through, hesitant. Her hair is pulled back in a ponytail
and she hasn’t applied any makeup, and I can tell, even before she’s all
the way through the door, that she’s one of them: a mom.
She hasn’t been off rejoo long; she still looks fresh and young, despite
the plumpness that comes with kids. She still looks good. But even
without rejoo-collapse telltales, I know what she’s done to herself.
She’s got the tired look of a person at war with the world. None of us

Pop Squad — 47

look like that. No one has to look like that. Nitheads look less besieged.
She’s trying to act like the person she was before, like the actress or the
financial advisor or the code engineer or the biologist or the waitress
or whatever, putting on clothes from her life before, that used to fit
perfectly and don’t now, making herself look like a person who walks
without fear in the open air, and who doesn’t now.
As she wanders the aisles, I spy a stain on her shoulder. It’s small
but obvious if you know what to look for, a light streak of green on a
creamy blouse. The kind of thing that never happens to anyone except
women with children. No matter how hard she tries, she doesn’t fit
anymore. Not with us.
Ipswitch Collectibles, like others of its ilk, is a trap door of sorts—a
rabbit hole down into the land of illicit motherhood: the place of
mashed pea stains, sound-proofed walls, and furtive forays into daylight for resupply and survival. If I stand here long enough, holding
my magic brontosaurus by the neck, I’ll slip through entirely and see
their world as it overlaps with my own, see it with the queer double
vision of these women who have learned to turn a drawer into a crib,
and know how to fold and pin an old shirt into a diaper, and know
that “collectibles” really means “toys.”
The woman slips in the direction of the train sets. She chooses one
and places it on the counter. It’s a bright wooden thing, each car a
different color, each connected by a magnet.
The old woman takes the train and says, “Oh yes, this is a fine piece.
I had grandchildren who played with trains like this when they were
just a little more than one.”
The mother doesn’t say anything, just holds out her wrist for the
charge, her eyes down on the train. She fingers the blue and yellow
engine nervously.
I come up to the counter. “I’ll bet you sell a lot of them.”
The mother jerks. For a second she looks like she’ll run, but she
steadies. The old woman’s eyes turn on me. Dark sunken blue cores,
infinitely knowledgeable. “Not many. Not now. Not many collectors
around for this sort of thing. Not now.”
The transaction clears. The woman hustles out of the store, not
looking back. I watch her go.
The old woman says, “That dinosaur is forty-seven, if you want it.”
Her tone says that she already knows I won’t be buying.
I’m not a collector.
***

48 — Paolo Bacigalupi

Nighttime. More dark-of-night encounters with illicit motherhood.
The babies are everywhere, popping up like toadstools after rain. I can’t
keep up with them. I had to leave my last call before the cleanup crew
came. Broke the chain of evidence, but what can you do? Everywhere
I go, the baby world is ripping open around me, melons and seedpods
and fertile wombs splitting open and vomiting babies onto the ground.
We’re drowning in babies. The jungle seems to seethe with them, the
hidden women down in the suburb swelter, and as I shoot along the
maglines on my way to bloody errands, the jungle’s tendril vines curl
up from below, reaching out to me.
I’ve got the mom’s address in my cruiser. She’s hidden now. Back
down the rabbit hole. Pulled the lid down tight over her head. Lying
low with her brood, reconnected with the underground of women who
have all decided to kill themselves for the sake of squeezing out pups.
Back in the swelter of locked doors and poopy diapers amongst the
sorority who give train sets to little creatures who actually play with
them instead of putting them on an end table and making you look
at them every damn day.…
The woman. The collector. I’ve been holding off on hitting her. It
doesn’t seem fair. It seems like I should wait for her to make her mistake before I pop her kids. But knowing that she’s out there tickles my
mind. I catch myself again and again, reaching to key in the homing
on her address.
But then another call comes, another cleanup, and I let myself pretend I don’t know about her, that I haven’t perforated her hidey-hole
and can now peer in on her whenever I like. The woman we don’t know
about—yet. Who hasn’t made a mistake—yet. Instead I barrel down the
rails to another call, slicing through jungle overstory where it impinges
around the tracks, blasting toward another woman’s destiny who was
less lucky and less clever than the one who likes to collect. And these
other women hold me for a little while. But in the end, parked on the
edge of the sea, with monkeys screeching from the jungle and rain
spackling my windshield, I punch in the collector’s address.
I’ll just drive by.
It could have been a rich house, before carbon sequestration. Before
we all climbed into the bright air of the spires and superclusters. But
now it exists at the very edge of what is left of suburbs. I’m surprised
it even has electric or any services running to it at all. The jungle surrounds it, envelopes it. The road to it, off the maglines and off the

Pop Squad — 49

maintenance routes, is heaved and split and perforated with encroaching trees. She’s smart. She’s as close to wilderness as it is possible to live.
Beyond is only shadow tangle and green darkness. Monkeys scamper
away from the spray of my headlights. The houses around her have
already been abandoned. Any day now, they’ll stop serving this area
entirely. In another couple years, this portion will be completely overgrown. We’ll cut off services and the last of the spires will go online
and the jungle will swallow this place completely.
I sit outside the house for a while, looking at it. She’s a smart one.
To live this far out. No neighbors to hear the screaming. But if I think
about it, she would have been smarter to move into the jungle entirely,
and live with all the other monkeys that just can’t keep themselves
from breeding. I guess at the end of the day, even these crazy ladies
are still human. They can’t leave civilization totally behind. Or don’t
know how, anyway.
I get out of my car, pull my Grange, and hit the door.
As I slam through, she looks up from where she sits at her kitchen
table. She isn’t even surprised. A little bit of her seems to deflate, and
that’s all. Like she knew it was going to happen all along. Like I said:
a smart one.
A kid runs in from the other room, attracted by the noise of me
coming through the door. Maybe one and a half or two years old. It
stops and stares, little tow-headed thing, its hair already getting long
like hers. We stare at each other. Then it turns and scrambles into its
mother’s lap.
The woman closes her eyes. “Go on, then. Do it.”
I point my Grange, my 12mm hand cannon. Zero in on the kid.
The lady wraps her arms around it. It’s not a clear shot. It’ll rip right
through and take out the mom. I angle differently, looking for the
shot. Nothing.
She opens her eyes. “What are you waiting for?”
We stare at each other. “I saw you in the toy store. A couple days
ago.”
She closes her eyes again, regretful, understanding her mistake. She
doesn’t let go of the kid. I could just take it out of her arms, throw it
on the floor and shoot it. But I don’t. Her eyes are still closed.
“Why do you do it?” I ask.
Her eyes open again. She’s confused. I’m breaking the script. She’s
mapped this out in her own mind. Probably a thousand times. Had
to. Had to know this day would be coming. But here I am, all alone,

50 — Paolo Bacigalupi

and her kid’s not dead yet. And I keep asking her questions.
“Why do you keep having these kids?”
She just stares at me. The kid squirms around on her and tries to
start nursing. She lifts her blouse a little and the kid dives under. I
can see the hanging bulges of the lady’s breasts, these heavy swinging
mammaries, so much larger than I remember them from the store
when they were hidden under bra and blouse. They sag while the kid
sucks. The woman just stares at me. She’s on some kind of autopilot,
feeding the kid. Last meal.
I take my hat off and put it on the table and sit. I put my Grange
down, too. It just doesn’t seem right to blow the sucker away while
it’s nursing. I take out a cigarette and light it. Take a drag. The woman
watches me the way anyone watches a predator. I take another drag
on my cigarette and offer it to her.
“Smoke?”
“I don’t.” She jerks her head toward her kid.
I nod. “Ah. Right. Bad for the new lungs. I heard that, once. Can’t
remember where.” I grin. “Can’t remember when.”
She stares at me. “What are you waiting for?”
I look down at my pistol, lying on the table. The heavy machine
weight of slugs and steel, a monster weapon. Grange 12mm Recoilless
Hand Cannon. Standard issue. Stop a nitfitter in his tracks. Take out
the whole damn heart if you hit them right. Pulverize a baby. “You
had to stop taking rejoo to have the kid, right?”
She shrugs. “It’s just an additive. They don’t have to make rejoo
that way.”
“But otherwise we’d have a big damn population problem, wouldn’t
we?”
She shrugs again.
The gun sits on the table between us. Her eyes flick toward the gun,
then to me, then back to the gun. I take a drag on the cigarette. I can
tell what she’s thinking, looking at that big old steel hand cannon on
her table. It’s way out of her reach, but she’s desperate, so it looks a
lot closer to her, almost close enough. Almost.
Her eyes go back up to me. “Why don’t you just do it? Get it over
with?”
It’s my turn to shrug. I don’t really have an answer. I should be taking
pictures and securing her in the car, and popping the kid, and calling in the cleanup squad, but here we sit. She’s got tears in her eyes. I
watch her cry. Mammaries and fatty limbs and a frightening sort of

Pop Squad — 51

wisdom, maybe coming from knowing that she won’t last forever. A
contrast to Alice with her smooth smooth skin and high bright breasts.
This woman is fecund. Hips and breasts and belly fertile, surrounded
by her messy kitchen, the jungle outside. The soil of life. She seems
settled in all of this, a damp Gaia creature.
A dinosaur.
I should be cuffing her. I’ve got her and her kid. I should be shooting the kid. But I don’t. Instead, I’ve got a hard-on. She’s not beautiful
exactly, but I’ve got a hard-on. She sags, she’s round, she’s breasty and
hippy and sloppy; I can barely sit because my pants are so tight. I try
not to stare at the kid nursing. At her exposed breasts. I take another
drag on my cigarette. “You know, I’ve been doing this job for a long
time.”
She stares at me dully, doesn’t say anything.
“I’ve always wanted to know why you women do this.” I nod at the
kid. It’s come off her breast, and now the whole thing is exposed, this
huge sagging thing with its heavy nipple. She doesn’t cover up. When
I look up, she’s studying me, seeing me looking at her breast. The kid
scrambles down and watches me, too, solemn-eyed. I wonder if it can
feel the tension in the room. If it knows what’s coming. “Why the kid?
Really. Why?”
She purses her lips. I think I can see anger in the tightening of her
teary eyes, anger that I’m playing with her. That I’m sitting here, talking
to her with my Grange on her grimy table, but then her eyes go down
to that gun and I can almost see the gears clicking. The calculations.
The she-wolf gathering herself.
She sighs and scoots her chair forward. “I just wanted one. Ever
since I was a little girl.”
“Play with dolls, all that? Collectibles?”
She shrugs. “I guess.” She pauses. Eyes back to the gun. “Yeah. I guess
I did. I had a little plastic doll, and I used to dress it up. And I’d play
tea with it. You know, we’d make tea, and then I’d pour some on her
face, to make her drink. It wasn’t a great doll. Voice input, but not
much repertoire. My parents weren’t rich. ‘Let’s go shopping.’ ‘Okay,
for what?’ ‘For watches.’ ‘I love watches.’ Simple. Like that. But I liked
it. And then one day I called her my baby. I don’t know why. I did,
though, and the doll said, ‘I love you mommy.’”
Her eyes turn wet as she speaks. “And I just knew I wanted to have
a baby. I played with her all the time, and she’d pretend she was my
baby, and then my mother caught us doing it and said I was a stupid

52 — Paolo Bacigalupi

girl, and I shouldn’t talk that way, girls didn’t have babies anymore,
and she took the doll away.”
The kid is down on the floor, shoving blocks under the table. Stacking and unstacking. It catches sight of me. It’s got blue eyes and a shy
smile. I get a twitch of it, again, and then it scrambles up off the floor,
and buries its face in its mother’s breasts, hiding. It peeks out at me,
and giggles and hides again.
I nod at the kid. “Who’s the dad?”
Stone cold face. “I don’t know. I got a sample shipped from a guy I
found online. We didn’t want to meet. I erased everything about him
as soon as I got the sample.”
“Too bad. Things would have been better if you’d kept in touch.”
“Better for you.”
“That’s what I said.” I notice that the ash on my cigarette has gotten
long, a thin gray penis hanging limp off the end of my smoke. I give
it a twitch and it falls. “I still can’t get over the rejoo part.”
Inexplicably, she laughs. Brightens even. “Why? Because I’m not so
in love with myself that I just want to live forever and ever?”
“What were you going to do? Keep it in the house until—”
“Her,” she interrupts suddenly. “Keep her in the house. She is a girl
and her name is Melanie.”
At her name, the kid looks over at me. She sees my hat on the table
and grabs it. Then climbs down off her mother’s lap and carries it over
to me. She holds it out to me, arms fully extended, an offering. I try
to take it but she pulls the hat away.
“She wants to put it on your head.”
I look at the lady, confused. She’s smiling slightly, sadly. “It’s a game
she plays. She likes to put hats on my head.”
I look at the girl again. She’s getting antsy, holding the hat. She
makes little grunts of meaning at me and waves the hat invitingly. I
lean down. The girl puts the hat on my head, and beams. I sit up and
set it more firmly.
“You’re smiling,” she says.
I look up at her. “She’s cute.”
“You like her, don’t you?”
I look at the girl again, thinking. “Can’t say. I’ve never really looked
at them before.”
“Liar.”
My cigarette is dead. I stub it out on the kitchen table. She watches
me do it, frowning, pissed off that I’m messing up her messy table,

Pop Squad — 53

maybe, but then she seems to remember the gun. And I do, too. A chill
runs up my spine. For a moment, when I leaned down to the girl, I’d
forgotten about it. I could be dead, right now. Funny how we forget
and remember and forget these things. Both of us. Me and the lady.
One minute we’re having a conversation, the next we’re waiting for
the killing to start.
This lady seems like she would have been a nice date. She’s got
spunk. You can tell that. It almost comes out before she remembers
the gun. You can watch it flicker back and forth. She’s one person, then
another person: alive, thinking, remembering, then bang, she’s sitting
in a kitchen full of crusty dishes, coffee rings on her countertop and
a cop with a hand cannon sitting at the kitchen table.
I spark up another cigarette. “Don’t you miss the rejoo?”
She looks down at her daughter, holds out her arms. “No. Not a bit.”
The girl climbs back onto her mother’s lap.
I let the smoke curl out of my mouth. “But there’s no way you were
going to get away with this. It’s insane. You have to drop off of rejoo;
you have to find a sperm donor who’s willing to drop off, too, so two
people kill themselves for a kid; you’ve got to birth the kid alone, and
then you’ve got to keep it hidden, and then you’d eventually need an
ID card so you could get it started on rejoo, because nobody’s going
to dose an undocumented patient, and you’ve got to know that none
of this would ever work. But here you are.”
She scowls at me. “I could have done it.”
“You didn’t.”
Bang. She’s back in the kitchen again. She slumps in her chair, holding the kid. “So why don’t you just hurry up and do it?”
I shrug. “I was just curious about what you breeders are thinking.”
She looks at me, hard. Angry. “You know what I’m thinking? I’m
thinking we need something new. I’ve been alive for one hundred and
eighteen years and I’m thinking that it’s not just about me. I’m thinking
I want a baby and I want to see what she sees today when she wakes
up and what she’ll find and see that I’ve never seen before because
that’s new. Finally, something new. I love seeing things through her
little eyes and not through dead eyes like yours.”
“I don’t have dead eyes.”
“Look in the mirror. You’ve all got dead eyes.”
“I’m a hundred and fifty and I feel just as good as I did the day I
went on.”
“I’ll bet you can’t even remember. No one remembers.” Her eyes are

54 — Paolo Bacigalupi

on the gun again, but they come up off it to look at me. “But I do. Now.
And it’s better this way. A thousand times better than living forever.”
I make a face. “Live through your kid and all that?”
“You wouldn’t understand. None of you would.”
I look away. I don’t know why. I’m the one with the gun. I’m running
everything, but she’s looking at me, and something gets tight inside
me when she says that. If I was imaginative, I’d say it was some little
bit of old primal monkey trying to drag itself out of the muck and
make itself heard. Some bit of the critter we were before. I look at the
kid—the girl—and she’s looking back at me. I wonder if they all do
the trick with the hat, or if this one’s special somehow. If they all like
to put hats on their killers’ heads. She smiles at me and ducks her head
back under her mother’s arm. The woman’s got her eyes on my gun.
“You want to shoot me?” I ask.
Her eyes come up. “No.”
I smile slightly. “Come on. Be honest.”
Her eyes narrow. “I’d blow your head off if I could.”
Suddenly I’m tired. I don’t care anymore. I’m sick of the dirty kitchen
and the dark rooms and the smell of dirty makeshift diapers. I give
the Grange a push, shove it closer to her. “Go ahead. You going to kill
an old life so you can save one that isn’t even going to last? I’m going
to live forever, and that little girl won’t last longer than seventy years
even if she’s lucky—which she won’t be—and you’re practically already
dead. But you want to waste my life?” I feel like I’m standing on the
edge of a cliff. Possibility seethes around me. “Give it a shot.”
“What do you mean?”
“I’m giving you your shot. You want to try for it? This is your chance.”
I shove the Grange a little closer, baiting her. I’m tingling all over. My
head feels light, almost dizzy. Adrenaline rushes through me. I push
the Grange even closer to her, suddenly not even sure if I’ll fight her
for the gun, or if I’ll just let her have it. “This is your chance.”
She doesn’t give a warning.
She flings herself across the table. Her kid flies out of her arms. Her
fingers touch the gun at the same time as I yank it out of reach. She
lunges again, clawing across the table. I jump back, knocking over my
chair. I step out of range. She stretches toward the gun, fingers wide
and grasping, desperate still, even though she knows she’s already lost.
I point the gun at her.
She stares at me, then puts her head down on the table and sobs.
The girl is crying too. She sits bawling on the floor, her little face

Pop Squad — 55

screwed up and red, crying along with her mother who’s given everything in that one run at my gun: all her hopes and years of hidden
dedication, all her need to protect her progeny, everything. And now
she lies sprawled on a dirty table and cries while her daughter howls
from the floor. The girl keeps screaming and screaming.
I sight the Grange on the girl. She’s exposed, now. She’s squalling and
holding her hands out to her mother, but she doesn’t get up. She just
holds out her hands, waiting to be picked up and held by a lady who
doesn’t have anything left to give. She doesn’t notice me or the gun.
One quick shot and she’s gone, paint hole in the forehead and brains
on the wall just like spaghetti and the crying’s over and all that’s left
is gunpowder burn and cleanup calls.
But I don’t fire.
Instead, I holster my Grange and walk out the door, leaving them
to their crying and their grime and their lives.
It’s raining again, outside. Thick ropes of water spout off the eaves
and spatter the ground. All around me the jungle seethes with the
chatter of monkeys. I pull up my collar and resettle my hat. Behind
me, I can barely hear the crying anymore.
Maybe they’ll make it. Anything is possible. Maybe the kid will make
it to eighteen, get some black market rejoo and live to be a hundred
and fifty. More likely, in six months, or a year, or two years, or ten, a
cop will bust down the door and pop the kid. But it won’t be me.
I run for my cruiser, splashing through mud and vines and wet. And
for the first time in a long time, the rain feels new.

Yellow Card Man

M

achetes gleam on the warehouse floor, reflecting a red conflagration of jute and tamarind and kink-springs. They’re all
around now. The men with their green headbands and their
slogans and their wet wet blades. Their calls echo in the warehouse and
on the street. Number one son is already gone. Jade Blossom he cannot find, no matter how many times he treadles her phone number. His
daughters’ faces have been split wide like blister rust durians.
More fires blaze. Black smoke roils around him. He runs through
his warehouse offices, past computers with teak cases and iron treadles
and past piles of ash where his clerks burned files through the night,
obliterating the names of people who aided the Tri-Clipper.
He runs, choking on heat and smoke. In his own gracious office he
dashes to the shutters and fumbles with their brass catches. He slams
his shoulder against those blue shutters while the warehouse burns
and brown-skinned men boil through the door and swing their slick
red knives…
Tranh wakes, gasping.
Sharp concrete edges jam against the knuckles of his spine. A salt-slick
thigh smothers his face. He shoves away the stranger’s leg. Sweat-sheened
skin glimmers in the blackness, impressionistic markers for the bodies that shift and shove all around him. They fart and groan and turn,
flesh on flesh, bone against bone, the living and the heat-smothered
dead all together.
A man coughs. Moist lungs and spittle gust against Tranh’s face. His
spine and belly stick to the naked sweating flesh of the strangers around
him. Claustrophobia rises. He forces it down. Forces himself to lie still,
to breathe slowly, deeply, despite the heat. To taste the swelter darkness
57

58 — Paolo Bacigalupi

with all the paranoia of a survivor’s mind. He is awake while others
sleep. He is alive while others are long dead. He forces himself to lie
still, and listen.
Bicycle bells are ringing. Down below and far away, ten thousand
bodies below, a lifetime away, bicycle bells chime. He claws himself out
of the mass of tangled humanity, dragging his hemp sack of possessions
with him. He is late. Of all the days he could be late, this is the worst
possible one. He slings the bag over a bony shoulder and feels his way
down the stairs, finding his footing in the cascade of sleeping flesh.
He slides his sandals between families, lovers, and crouching hungry
ghosts, praying that he will not slip and break an old man’s bone. Step,
feel, step, feel.
A curse rises from the mass. Bodies shift and roll. He steadies himself on a landing amongst the privileged who lie flat, then wades on.
Downward ever downward, round more turnings of the stair, wading
down through the carpet of his countrymen. Step. Feel. Step. Feel. Another turn. A hint of gray light glimmers far below. Fresh air kisses his
face, caresses his body. The waterfall of anonymous flesh resolves into
individuals, men and women sprawled across one another, pillowed on
hard concrete, propped on the slant of the windowless stair. Gray light
turns gold. The tinkle of bicycle bells comes louder now, clear like the
ring of cibiscosis chimes.
Tranh spills out of the highrise and into a crowd of congee sellers,
hemp weavers, and potato carts. He puts his hands on his knees and
gasps, sucking in swirling dust and trampled street dung, grateful for
every breath as sweat pours off his body. Salt jewels fall from the tip of
his nose, spatter the red paving stones of the sidewalk with his moisture.
Heat kills men. Kills old men. But he is out of the oven; he has not been
cooked again, despite the blast furnace of the dry season.
Bicycles and their ringing bells flow past like schools of carp, commuters already on their way to work. Behind him the highrise looms, forty
stories of heat and vines and mold. A vertical ruin of broken windows
and pillaged apartments. A remnant glory from the old energy Expansion now become a heated tropic coffin without air conditioning or
electricity to protect it from the glaze of the equatorial sun. Bangkok
keeps its refugees in the pale blue sky, and wishes they would stay there.
And yet he has emerged alive, despite the Dung Lord, despite the white
shirts, despite old age, he has once again clawed his way down from
the heavens.
Tranh straightens. Men stir woks of noodles and pull steamers of

Yellow Card Man — 59

baozi from their bamboo rounds. Gray high-protein U-Tex rice gruel
fills the air with the scents of rotting fish and fatty acid oils. Tranh’s
stomach knots with hunger and a pasty saliva coats his mouth, all that
his dehydrated body can summon at the scent of food. Devil cats swirl
around the vendors’ legs like sharks, hoping for morsels to drop, hoping for theft opportunities. Their shimmering chameleon-like forms
flit and flicker, showing calico and siamese and orange tabby markings
before fading against the backdrop of concrete and crowding hungry
people that they brush against. The woks burn hard and bright with
green-tinged methane, giving off new scents as rice noodles splash into
hot oil. Tranh forces himself to turn away.
He shoves through the press, dragging his hemp bag along with him,
ignoring who it hits and who shouts after him. Incident victims crouch
in the doorways, waving severed limbs and begging from others who
have a little more. Men squat on tea stools and watch the day’s swelter
build as they smoke tiny rolled cigarettes of scavenged gold leaf tobacco
and share them from lip to lip. Women converse in knots, nervously
fingering yellow cards as they wait for white shirts to appear and stamp
their renewals.
Yellow card people as far as the eye can see: an entire race of people,
fled to the great Thai Kingdom from Malaya where they were suddenly unwelcome. A fat clot of refugees placed under the authority of
the Environment Ministry’s white shirts as if they were nothing but
another invasive species to be managed, like cibiscosis, blister rust, and
genehack weevil. Yellow cards, yellow men. Huang ren all around, and
Tranh is late for his one opportunity to climb out of their mass. One
opportunity in all his months as a yellow card Chinese refugee. And
now he is late. He squeezes past a rat seller, swallowing another rush
of saliva at the scent of roasted flesh, and rushes down an alley to the
water pump. He stops short.
Ten others stand in line before him: old men, young women, mothers, boys.
He slumps. He wants to rage at the setback. If he had the energy—if
he had eaten well yesterday or the day before or even the day before that
he would scream, would throw his hemp bag on the street and stamp
on it until it turned to dust—but his calories are too few. It is just another opportunity squandered, thanks to the ill luck of the stairwells.
He should have given the last of his baht to the Dung Lord and rented
body-space in an apartment with windows facing east so that he could
see the rising sun, and wake early.

60 — Paolo Bacigalupi

But he was cheap. Cheap with his money. Cheap with his future. How
many times did he tell his sons that spending money to make more
money was perfectly acceptable? But the timid yellow card refugee that
he has become counseled him to save his baht. Like an ignorant peasant
mouse he clutched his cash to himself and slept in pitch-black stairwells.
He should have stood like a tiger and braved the night curfew and the
ministry’s white shirts and their black batons…. And now he is late and
reeks of the stairwells and stands behind ten others, all of whom must
drink and fill a bucket and brush their teeth with the brown water of
the Chao Phraya River.
There was a time when he demanded punctuality of his employees,
of his wife, of his sons and concubines, but it was when he owned a
spring-wound wristwatch and could gaze at its steady sweep of minutes
and hours. Every so often, he could wind its tiny spring, and listen to it
tick, and lash his sons for their lazy attitudes. He has become old and
slow and stupid or he would have foreseen this. Just as he should have
foreseen the rising militancy of the Green Headbands. When did his
mind become so slack?
One by one, the other refugees finish their ablutions. A mother with
gap teeth and blooms of gray fa’ gan fringe behind her ears tops her
bucket, and Tranh slips forward.
He has no bucket. Just the bag. The precious bag. He hangs it beside
the pump and wraps his sarong more tightly around his hollow hips
before he squats under the pump head. With a bony arm he yanks the
pump’s handle. Ripe brown water gushes over him. The river’s blessing.
His skin droops off his body with the weight of the water, sagging like
the flesh of a shaved cat. He opens his mouth and drinks the gritty water,
rubs his teeth with a finger, wondering what protozoa he may swallow.
It doesn’t matter. He trusts luck, now. It’s all he has.
Children watch him bathe his old body while their mothers scavenge
through PurCal mango peels and Red Star tamarind hulls hoping to
find some bit of fruit not tainted with cibiscosis.111mt.6…. Or is it
111mt.7? Or mt.8? There was a time when he knew all the bio-engineered
plagues which ailed them. Knew when a crop was about to fail, and
whether new seedstock had been ripped. Profited from the knowledge
by filling his clipper ships with the right seeds and produce. But that
was a lifetime ago.
His hands are shaking as he opens his bag and pulls out his clothes. Is
it old age or excitement that makes him tremble? Clean clothes. Good
clothes. A rich man’s white linen suit.

Yellow Card Man — 61

The clothes were not his, but now they are, and he has kept them safe.
Safe for this opportunity, even when he desperately wanted to sell them
for cash or wear them as his other clothes turned to rags. He drags the
trousers up his bony legs, stepping out of his sandals and balancing one
foot at a time. He begins buttoning the shirt, hurrying his fingers as a
voice in his head reminds him that time is slipping away.
“Selling those clothes? Going to parade them around until someone
with meat on his bones buys them off you?”
Tranh glances up—he shouldn’t need to look; he should know the
voice—and yet he looks anyway. He can’t help himself. Once he was a
tiger. Now he is nothing but a frightened little mouse who jumps and
twitches at every hint of danger. And there it is: Ma. Standing before
him, beaming. Fat and beaming. As vital as a wolf.
Ma grins. “You look like a wire-frame mannequin at Palawan Plaza.”
“I wouldn’t know. I can’t afford to shop there.” Tranh keeps putting
on his clothes.
“Those are nice enough to come from Palawan. How did you get
them?”
Tranh doesn’t answer.
“Who are you fooling? Those clothes were made for a man a thousand
times your size.”
“We can’t all be fat and lucky.” Tranh’s voice comes out as a whisper.
Did he always whisper? Was he always such a rattletrap corpse whispering
and sighing at every threat? He doesn’t think so. But it’s hard for him to
remember what a tiger should sound like. He tries again, steadying his
voice. “We can’t all be as lucky as Ma Ping who lives on the top floors
with the Dung Lord himself.” His words still come out like reeds shushing against concrete.
“Lucky?” Ma laughs. So young. So pleased with himself. “I earn my
fate. Isn’t that what you always used to tell me? That luck has nothing
to do with success? That men make their own luck?” He laughs again.
“And now look at you.”
Tranh grits his teeth. “Better men than you have fallen.” Still the awful timid whisper.
“And better men than you are on the rise.” Ma’s fingers dart to his
wrist. They stroke a wristwatch, a fine chronograph, ancient, gold and
diamonds—Rolex. From an earlier time. A different place. A different
world. Tranh stares stupidly, like a hypnotized snake. He can’t tear his
eyes away.
Ma smiles lazily. “You like it? I found it in an antique shop near Wat

62 — Paolo Bacigalupi

Rajapradit. It seemed familiar.”
Tranh’s anger rises. He starts to reply, then shakes his head and says
nothing. Time is passing. He fumbles with his final buttons, pulls on
the coat and runs his fingers through the last surviving strands of his
lank gray hair. If he had a comb… He grimaces. It is stupid to wish. The
clothes are enough. They have to be.
Ma laughs. “Now you look like a Big Name.”
Ignore him, says the voice inside Tranh’s head. Tranh pulls his last
paltry baht out of his hemp bag—the money he saved by sleeping in
the stairwells, and which has now made him so late—and shoves it into
his pockets.
“You seem rushed. Do you have an appointment somewhere?”
Tranh shoves past, trying not to flinch as he squeezes around Ma’s
bulk.
Ma calls after him, laughing. “Where are you headed, Mr. Big Name?
Mr. Three Prosperities! Do you have some intelligence you’d like to
share with the rest of us?”
Others look up at the shout: hungry yellow card faces, hungry yellow card mouths. Yellow card people as far as the eye can see, and all of
them looking at him now. Incident survivors. Men. Women. Children.
Knowing him, now. Recognizing his legend. With a change of clothing
and a single shout he has risen from obscurity. Their mocking calls pour
down like a monsoon rain:
“Wei! Mr. Three Prosperities! Nice shirt!”
“Share a smoke, Mr. Big Name!”
“Where are you going so fast all dressed up?”
“Getting married?”
“Getting a tenth wife?”
“Got a job?”
“Mr. Big Name! Got a job for me?”
“Where you going? Maybe we should all follow Old Multinational!”
Tranh’s neck prickles. He shakes off the fear. Even if they follow it
will be too late for them to take advantage. For the first time in half a
year, the advantage of skills and knowledge are on his side. Now there
is only time.
He jogs through Bangkok’s morning press as bicycles and cycle rickshaws and spring-wound scooters stream past. Sweat drenches him. It
soaks his good shirt, damps even his jacket. He takes it off and slings
it over an arm. His gray hair clings to his egg-bald liver-spotted skull,

Yellow Card Man — 63

waterlogged. He pauses every other block to walk and recover his breath
as his shins begin to ache and his breath comes in gasps and his old
man’s heart hammers in his chest.
He should spend his baht on a cycle rickshaw but he can’t make
himself do it. He is late. But perhaps he is too late? And if he is too late,
the extra baht will be wasted and he will starve tonight. But then, what
good is a suit soaked with sweat?
Clothes make the man, he told his sons; the first impression is the
most important. Start well, and you start ahead. Of course you can win
someone with your skills and your knowledge but people are animals
first. Look good. Smell good. Satisfy their first senses. Then when they
are well-disposed toward you, make your proposal.
Isn’t that why he beat Second Son when he came home with a red tattoo of a tiger on his shoulder, as though he was some calorie gangster?
Isn’t that why he paid a tooth doctor to twist even his daughters’ teeth
with cultured bamboo and rubber curves from Singapore so that they
were as straight as razors?
And isn’t that why the Green Headbands in Malaya hated us Chinese?
Because we looked so good? Because we looked so rich? Because we spoke so
well and worked so hard when they were lazy and we sweated every day?
Tranh watches a pack of spring-wound scooters flit past, all of them
Thai-Chinese manufactured. Such clever fast things—a megajoule kinkspring and a flywheel, pedals and friction brakes to regather kinetic
energy. And all their factories owned one hundred percent by Chiu
Chow Chinese. And yet no Chiu Chow blood runs in the gutters of this
country. These Chiu Chow Chinese are loved, despite the fact that they
came to the Thai Kingdom as farang.
If we had assimilated in Malaya like the Chiu Chow did here, would
we have survived?
Tranh shakes his head at the thought. It would have been impossible.
His clan would have had to convert to Islam as well, and forsake all their
ancestors in Hell. It would have been impossible. Perhaps it was his
people’s karma to be destroyed. To stand tall and dominate the cities of
Penang and Malacca and all the western coast of the Malayan Peninsula
for a brief while, and then to die.
Clothes make the man. Or kill him. Tranh understands this, finally.
A white tailored suit from Hwang Brothers is nothing so much as a
target. An antique piece of gold mechanization swinging on your wrist
is nothing if not bait. Tranh wonders if his sons’ perfect teeth still lie in
the ashes of Three Prosperities’ warehouses, if their lovely time pieces

64 — Paolo Bacigalupi

now attract sharks and crabs in the holds of his scuttled clipper ships.
He should have known. Should have seen the rising tide of bloodthirsty
subsects and intensifying nationalism. Just as the man he followed two
months ago should have known that fine clothes were no protection. A
man in good clothes, a yellow card to boot, should have known that he
was nothing but a bit of bloodied bait before a Komodo lizard. At least
the stupid melon didn’t bleed on his fancy clothes when the white shirts
were done with him. That one had no habit of survival. He forgot that
he was no longer a Big Name.
But Tranh is learning. As he once learned tides and depth charts,
markets and bio-engineered plagues, profit maximization and how to
balance the dragon’s gate, he now learns from the devil cats who molt
and fade from sight, who flee their hunters at the first sign of danger.
He learns from the crows and kites who live so well on scavenge. These
are the animals he must emulate. He must discard the reflexes of a tiger.
There are no tigers except in zoos. A tiger is always hunted and killed.
But a small animal, a scavenging animal, has a chance to strip the bones
of a tiger and walk away with the last Hwang Brothers suit that will
ever cross the border from Malaya. With the Hwang clan all dead and
the Hwang patterns all burned, nothing is left except memories and
antiques, and one scavenging old man who knows the power and the
peril of good appearance.
An empty cycle rickshaw coasts past. The rickshaw man looks back at
Tranh, eyes questioning, attracted by the Hwang Brothers fabrics that
flap off Tranh’s skinny frame. Tranh raises a tentative hand. The cycle
rickshaw slows.
Is it a good risk? To spend his last security so frivolously?
There was a time when he sent clipper fleets across the ocean to
Chennai with great stinking loads of durians because he guessed that
the Indians had not had time to plant resistant crop strains before the
new blister rust mutations swept over them. A time when he bought
black tea and sandalwood from the river men on the chance that he
could sell it in the South. Now he can’t decide if he should ride or walk.
What a pale man he has become! Sometimes he wonders if he is actually a hungry ghost, trapped between worlds and unable to escape one
way or the other.
The cycle rickshaw coasts ahead, the rider’s blue jersey shimmering
in the tropic sun, waiting for a decision. Tranh waves him away. The
rickshaw man stands on his pedals, sandals flapping against calloused
heels and accelerates.

Yellow Card Man — 65

Panic seizes Tranh. He raises his hand again, chases after the rickshaw.
“Wait!” His voice comes out as a whisper.
The rickshaw slips into traffic, joining bicycles and the massive
shambling shapes of elephantine megodonts. Tranh lets his hand fall,
obscurely grateful that the rickshaw man hasn’t heard, that the decision of spending his last baht has been made by some force larger than
himself.
All around him, the morning press flows. Hundreds of children in
their sailor suit uniforms stream through school gates. Saffron-robed
monks stroll under the shade of wide black umbrellas. A man with a
conical bamboo hat watches him and then mutters quietly to his friend.
They both study him. A trickle of fear runs up Tranh’s spine.
They are all around him, as they were in Malacca. In his own mind,
he calls them foreigners, farang. And yet it is he who is the foreigner
here. The creature that doesn’t belong. And they know it. The women
hanging sarongs on the wires of their balconies, the men sitting barefoot
while they drink sugared coffee. The fish sellers and curry men. They
all know it, and Tranh can barely control his terror.
Bangkok is not Malacca, he tells himself. Bangkok is not Penang. We
have no wives, or gold wristwatches with diamonds, or clipper fleets
to steal anymore. Ask the snakeheads who abandoned me in the leech
jungles of the border. They have all my wealth. I have nothing. I am no
tiger. I am safe.
For a few seconds he believes it. But then a teak-skinned boy chops
the top off a coconut with a rusty machete and offers it to Tranh with
a smile and it’s all Tranh can do not to scream and run.
Bangkok is not Malacca. They will not burn your warehouses or
slash your clerks into chunks of shark bait. He wipes sweat off his face.
Perhaps he should have waited to wear the suit. It draws too much attention. There are too many people looking at him. Better to fade like a
devil cat and slink across the city in safe anonymity, instead of strutting
around like a peacock.
Slowly the streets change from palm-lined boulevards to the open
wastelands of the new foreigner’s quarter. Tranh hurries toward the river,
heading deeper into the manufacturing empire of white farang.
Gweilo, yang guizi, farang. So many words in so many languages for
these translucent-skinned sweating monkeys. Two generations ago when
the petroleum ran out and the gweilo factories shut down, everyone assumed they were gone for good. And now they are back. The monsters of
the past returned, with new toys and new technologies. The nightmares

66 — Paolo Bacigalupi

his mother threatened him with, invading Asiatic coasts. Demons truly;
never dead.
And he goes to worship them: the ilk of AgriGen and PurCal with
their monopolies on U-Tex rice and TotalNutrient Wheat; the bloodbrothers of the bio-engineers who generipped devil cats from storybook inspiration and set them loose in the world to breed and breed
and breed; the sponsors of the Intellectual Property Police who used
to board his clipper fleets in search of IP infringements, hunting like
wolves for unstamped calories and generipped grains as though their
engineered plagues of cibiscosis and blister rust weren’t enough to keep
their profits high…
Ahead of him, a crowd has formed. Tranh frowns. He starts to run,
then forces himself back to a walk. Better not to waste his calories,
now. A line has already formed in front of the foreign devil Tennyson
Brothers’ factory. It stretches almost a li, snaking around the corner, past
the bicycle gear logo in the wrought-iron gate of Sukhumvit Research
Corporation, past the intertwined dragons of PurCal East Asia, and
past Mishimoto & Co., the clever Japanese fluid dynamics company
that Tranh once sourced his clipper designs from.
Mishimoto is full of windup import workers, they say. Full of illegal
generipped bodies that walk and talk and totter about in their herkyjerky way—and take rice from real men’s bowls. Creatures with as many
as eight arms like the Hindu gods, creatures with no legs so they cannot
run away, creatures with eyes as large as teacups which can only see a
bare few feet ahead of them but inspect everything with enormous
magnified curiosity. But no one can see inside, and if the Environment
Ministry’s white shirts know, then the clever Japanese are paying them
well to ignore their crimes against biology and religion. It is perhaps
the only thing a good Buddhist and a good Muslim and even the farang
Grahamite Christians can agree on: windups have no souls.
When Tranh bought Mishimoto’s clipper ships so long ago, he didn’t
care. Now he wonders if behind their high gates, windup monstrosities
labor while yellow cards stand outside and beg.
Tranh trudges down the line. Policemen with clubs and spring guns
patrol the hopefuls, making jokes about farang who wish to work for farang. Heat beats down, merciless on the men lined up before the gate.
“Wah! You look like a pretty bird with those clothes.”
Tranh starts. Li Shen and Hu Laoshi and Lao Xia stand in the line,
clustered together. A trio of old men as pathetic as himself. Hu waves a
newly rolled cigarette in invitation, motioning him to join them. Tranh

Yellow Card Man — 67

nearly shakes at the sight of the tobacco, but forces himself to refuse
it. Three times Hu offers, and finally Tranh allows himself to accept,
grateful that Hu is in earnest, and wondering where Hu has found this
sudden wealth. But then, Hu has a little more strength than the rest of
them. A cart man earns more if he works as fast as Hu.
Tranh wipes the sweat off his brow. “A lot of applicants.”
They all laugh at Tranh’s dismay.
Hu lights the cigarette for Tranh. “You thought you knew a secret,
maybe?”
Tranh shrugs and draws deeply, passes the cigarette to Lao Xia. “A
rumor. Potato God said his elder brother’s son had a promotion. I
thought there might be a niche down below, in the slot the nephew
left behind.”
Hu grins. “That’s where I heard it, too. ‘Eee. He’ll be rich. Manage fifteen clerks. Eee! He’ll be rich.’ I thought I might be one of the fifteen.”
“At least the rumor was true,” Lao Xia says. “And not just Potato God’s
nephew promoted, either.” He scratches the back of his head, a convulsive movement like a dog fighting fleas. Fa’ gan’s gray fringe stains the
crooks of his elbows and peeps from the sweaty pockets behind his ears
where his hair has receded. He sometimes jokes about it: nothing a little
money can’t fix. A good joke. But today he is scratching and the skin
behind his ears is cracked and raw. He notices everyone watching and
yanks his hand down. He grimaces and passes the cigarette to Li Shen.
“How many positions?” Tranh asks.
“Three. Three clerks.”
Tranh grimaces. “My lucky number.”
Li Shen peers down the line with his bottle-thick glasses. “Too many
of us, I think, even if your lucky number is 555.”
Lao Xia laughs. “Amongst the four of us, there are already too many.”
He taps the man standing in line just ahead of them. “Uncle. What was
your profession before?”
The stranger looks back, surprised. He was a distinguished gentleman,
once, by his scholar’s collar, by his fine leather shoes now scarred and
blackened with scavenged charcoal. “I taught physics.”
Lao Xia nods. “You see? We’re all overqualified. I oversaw a rubber
plantation. Our own professor has degrees in fluid dynamics and materials design. Hu was a fine doctor. And then there is our friend of the
Three Prosperities. Not a trading company at all. More like a multinational.” He tastes the words. Says them again, “Multi-national.” A
strange, powerful, seductive sound.

68 — Paolo Bacigalupi

Tranh ducks his head, embarrassed. “You’re too kind.”
“Fang pi.” Hu takes a drag on his cigarette, keeps it moving. “You were
the richest of us all. And now here we are, old men scrambling for young
men’s jobs. Every one of us ten thousand times overqualified.”
The man behind them interjects, “I was executive legal council for
Standard & Commerce.”
Lao Xia makes a face. “Who cares, dog fucker? You’re nothing now.”
The banking lawyer turns away, affronted. Lao Xia grins, sucks hard
on the hand-rolled cigarette and passes it again to Tranh. Hu nudges
Tranh’s elbow as he starts to take a puff. “Look! There goes old Ma.”
Tranh looks over, exhales smoke sharply. For a moment he thinks
Ma has followed him, but no. It is just coincidence. They are in the
farang factory district. Ma works for the foreign devils, balancing their
books. A kink-spring company. Springlife. Yes, Springlife. It is natural
that Ma should be here, comfortably riding to work behind a sweating
cycle-rickshaw man.
“Ma Ping,” Li Shen says. “I heard he’s living on the top floor now. Up
there with the Dung Lord himself.”
Tranh scowls. “I fired him, once. Ten thousand years ago. Lazy and
an embezzler.”
“He’s so fat.”
“I’ve seen his wife,” Hu says. “And his sons. They both have fat on
them. They eat meat every night. The boys are fatter than fat. Full of
U-Tex proteins.”
“You’re exaggerating.”
“Fatter than us.”
Lao Xia scratches a rib. “Bamboo is fatter than you.”
Tranh watches Ma Ping open a factory door and slip inside. The
past is past. Dwelling on the past is madness. There is nothing for him
there. There are no wrist watches, no concubines, no opium pipes or
jade sculptures of Quan Yin’s merciful form. There are no pretty clipper
ships slicing into port with fortunes in their holds. He shakes his head
and offers the nearly spent cigarette to Hu so that he can recover the
last tobacco for later use. There is nothing for him in the past. Ma is in
the past. Three Prosperities Trading Company is the past. The sooner
he remembers this, the sooner he will climb out of this awful hole.
From behind him, a man calls out, “Wei! Baldy! When did you cut
the line? Go to the back! You line up, like the rest of us!”
“Line up?” Lao Xia shouts back. “Don’t be stupid!” He waves at the
line ahead. “How many hundreds are ahead of us? It won’t make any

Yellow Card Man — 69

difference where he stands.”
Others begin to attend the man’s complaint. Complain as well. “Line
up! Pai dui! Pai dui!” The disturbance increases and police start down
the line, casually swinging their batons. They aren’t white shirts, but
they have no love for hungry yellow cards.
Tranh makes placating motions to the crowd and Lao Xia. “Of course.
Of course. I’ll line up. It’s of no consequence.” He makes his farewells
and plods his way down the winding yellow card snake, seeking its
distant tail.
Everyone is dismissed long before he reaches it.
A scavenging night. A starving night. Tranh hunts through dark alleys
avoiding the vertical prison heat of the towers. Devil cats seethe and
scatter ahead of him in rippling waves. The lights of the methane lamps
flicker, burn low and snuff themselves, blackening the city. Hot velvet
darkness fetid with rotting fruit swaddles him. The heavy humid air sags.
Still swelter darkness. Empty market stalls. On a street corner, theater
men turn in stylized cadences to stories of Ravana. On a thoroughfare,
swingshift megodonts shuffle homeward like gray mountains, their
massed shadows led by the gold trim glitter of union handlers.
In the alleys, children with bright silver knives hunt unwary yellow
cards and drunken Thais, but Tranh is wise to their feral ways. A year
ago, he would not have seen them, but he has the paranoid’s gift of
survival, now. Creatures like them are no worse than sharks: easy to
predict, easy to avoid. It is not these obviously feral hunters who churn
Tranh’s guts with fear, it is the chameleons, the everyday people who
work and shop and smile and wai so pleasantly—and riot without
warning—who terrify Tranh.
He picks through the trash heaps, fighting devil cats for signs of food,
wishing he was fast enough to catch and kill one of those nearly invisible
felines. Picking up discarded mangos, studying them carefully with his
old man’s eyes, holding them close and then far away, sniffing at them,
feeling their blister rusted exteriors and then tossing them aside when
they show red mottle in their guts. Some of them still smell good, but
even crows won’t accept such a taint. They would eagerly peck apart a
bloated corpse but they will not feed on blister rust.
Down the street, the Dung Lord’s lackeys shovel the day’s animal leavings into sacks and throw them into tricycle carriers: the night harvest.
They watch him suspiciously. Tranh keeps his eyes averted, avoiding
challenge, and scuffles on. He has nothing to cook on an illegally stolen

70 — Paolo Bacigalupi

shit fire anyway, and nowhere to sell manure on the black market. The
Dung Lord’s monopoly is too strong. Tranh wonders how it might be to
find a place in the dung shovelers’ union, to know that his survival was
guaranteed feeding the composters of Bangkok’s methane reclamation
plants. But it is an opium dream; no yellow card can slither into that
closed club.
Tranh lifts another mango and freezes. He bends low, squinting. Pushes
aside broadsheet complaints against the Ministry of Trade and handbills
calling for a new gold-sheathed River Wat. He pushes aside black slime
banana peels and burrows into the garbage. Below it all, stained and torn
but still legible, he finds a portion of what was once a great advertising
board that perhaps stood over this marketplace: —ogistics. Shipping.
Tradin— and behind the words, the glorious silhouette of Dawn Star:
one part of Three Prosperities’ tri-clipper logo, running before the
wind as fast and sleek as a shark: a high-tech image of palm-oil spun
polymers and sails as sharp and white as a gull’s.
Tranh turns his face away, overcome. It’s like unearthing a grave and
finding himself within. His pride. His blindness. Fom a time when he
thought he might compete with the foreign devils and become a shipping magnate. A Li Ka Shing or a reborn Richard Kuok for the New
Expansion. Rebuild the pride of Nanyang Chinese shipping and trading.
And here, like a slap in the face, a portion of his ego, buried in rot and
blister rust and devil-cat urine.
He searches around, pawing for more portions of the sign, wondering
if anyone treadles a phone call to that old phone number, if the secretary whose wages he once paid is still at his desk, working for a new
master, a native Malay perhaps, with impeccable pedigree and religion.
Wondering if the few clippers he failed to scuttle still ply the seas and
islands of the archipelago. He forces himself to stop his search. Even if
he had the money he would not treadle that number. Would not waste
the calories. Could not stand the loss again.
He straightens, scattering devil cats who have slunk close. There is
nothing here in this market except rinds and unshoveled dung. He has
wasted his calories once again. Even the cockroaches and the blood
beetles have been eaten. If he searches for a dozen hours, he will still find
nothing. Too many people have come before, picking at these bones.
Three times he hides from white shirts as he makes his way home, three
times ducking into shadows as they strut past. Cringing as they wander
close, cursing his white linen suit that shows so clearly in darkness. By

Yellow Card Man — 71

the third time, superstitious fear runs hot in his veins. His rich man’s
clothes seem to attract the patrols of the Environment Ministry, seem
to hunger for the wearer’s death. Black batons twirl from casual hands
no more than inches away from his face. Spring guns glitter silver in
the darkness. His hunters stand so close that he can count the wicked
bladed disk cartridges in their jute bandoliers. A white shirt pauses
and pisses in the alley where Tranh crouches, and only fails to see him
because his partner stands on the street and wants to check the permits
of the dung gatherers.
Each time, Tranh stifles his panicked urge to tear off his too-rich
clothes and sink into safe anonymity. It is only a matter of time before
the white shirts catch him. Before they swing their black clubs and make
his Chinese skull a mash of blood and bone. Better to run naked through
the hot night than strut like a peacock and die. And yet he cannot quite
abandon the cursed suit. Is it pride? Is it stupidity? He keeps it though,
even as its arrogant cut turns his bowels watery with fear.
By the time he reaches home, even the gas lights on the main thoroughfares of Sukhumvit Road and Rama IV are blackened. Outside
the Dung Lord’s tower, street stalls still burn woks for the few laborers
lucky enough to have night work and curfew dispensations. Pork tallow
candles flicker on the tables. Noodles splash into hot woks with a sizzle.
White shirts stroll past, their eyes on the seated yellow cards, ensuring
that none of the foreigners brazenly sleep in the open air and sully the
sidewalks with their snoring presence.
Tranh joins the protective loom of the towers, entering the nearly
extra-territorial safety of the Dung Lord’s influence. He stumbles toward
the doorways and the swelter of the highrise, wondering how high he
will be forced to climb before he can shove a niche for himself on the
stairwells.
“You didn’t get the job, did you?”
Tranh cringes at the voice. It’s Ma Ping again, sitting at a sidewalk
table, a bottle of Mekong whiskey beside his hand. His face is flushed
with alcohol, as bright as a red paper lantern. Half-eaten plates of food
lie strewn around his table. Enough to feed five others, easily.
Images of Ma war in Tranh’s head: the young clerk he once sent
packing for being too clever with an abacus, the man whose son is fat,
the man who got out early, the man who begged to be rehired at Three
Prosperities, the man who now struts around Bangkok with Tranh’s last
precious possession on his wrist—the one item that even the snakeheads
didn’t steal. Tranh thinks that truly fate is cruel, placing him in such

72 — Paolo Bacigalupi

proximity to one he once considered so far beneath him.
Despite his intention to show bravado, Tranh’s words come out as a
mousy whisper. “What do you care?”
Ma shrugs, pours whiskey for himself. “I wouldn’t have noticed you
in the line, without that suit.” He nods at Tranh’s sweat-damp clothing.
“Good idea to dress up. Too far back in line, though.”
Tranh wants to walk away, to ignore the arrogant whelp, but Ma’s leavings of steamed bass and laap and U-Tex rice noodles lie tantalizingly
close. He thinks he smells pork and can’t help salivating. His gums ache
for the idea that he could chew meat again and he wonders if his teeth
would accept the awful luxury…
Abruptly, Tranh realizes that he has been staring. That he has stood
for some time, ogling the scraps of Ma’s meal. And Ma is watching him.
Tranh flushes and starts to turn away.
Ma says, “I didn’t buy your watch to spite you, you know.”
Tranh stops short. “Why then?”
Ma’s fingers stray to the gold and diamond bauble, then seem to
catch themselves. He reaches for his whiskey glass instead. “I wanted a
reminder.” He takes a swallow of liquor and sets the glass back amongst
his piled plates with the deliberate care of a drunk. He grins sheepishly.
His fingers are again stroking the watch, a guilty furtive movement. “I
wanted a reminder. Against ego.”
Tranh spits. “Fang pi.”
Ma shakes his head vigorously. “No! It’s true.” He pauses. “Anyone
can fall. If the Three Prosperities can fall, then I can. I wanted to remember that.” He takes another pull on his whiskey. “You were right
to fire me.”
Tranh snorts. “You didn’t think so then.”
“I was angry. I didn’t know that you’d saved my life, then.” He shrugs.
“I would never have left Malaya if you hadn’t fired me. I would never
have seen the Incident coming. I would have had too much invested in
staying.” Abruptly, he pulls himself upright and motions for Tranh to
join him. “Come. Have a drink. Have some food. I owe you that much.
You saved my life. I’ve repaid you poorly. Sit.”
Tranh turns away. “I don’t despise myself so much.”
“Do you love face so much that you can’t take a man’s food? Don’t
be stuck in your bones. I don’t care if you hate me. Just take my food.
Curse me later, when your belly is full.”
Tranh tries to control his hunger, to force himself to walk away, but
he can’t. He knows men who might have enough face to starve before

Yellow Card Man — 73

accepting Ma’s scraps, but he isn’t one of them. A lifetime ago, he might
have been. But the humiliations of his new life have taught him much
about who he really is. He has no sweet illusions, now. He sits. Ma beams
and pushes his half-eaten dishes across the table.
Tranh thinks he must have done something grave in a former life
to merit this humiliation, but still he has to fight the urge to bury his
hands in the oily food and eat with bare fingers. Finally, the owner of
the sidewalk stall brings a pair of chopsticks for the noodles, and fork
and spoon for the rest. Noodles and ground pork slide down his throat.
He tries to chew but as soon as the food touches his tongue he gulps
it down. More food follows. He lifts a plate to his lips, shoveling down
the last of Ma’s leavings. Fish and lank coriander and hot thick oil slip
down like blessings.
“Good. Good.” Ma waves at the night stall man and a whiskey glass
is quickly rinsed and handed to him.
The sharp scent of liquor floats around Ma like an aura as he pours.
Tranh’s chest tightens at the scent. Oil coats his chin where he has made
a mess in his haste. He wipes his mouth against his arm, watching the
amber liquid splash into the glass.
Tranh once drank cognac: XO. Imported by his own clippers. Fabulously expensive stuff with its shipping costs. A flavor of the foreign
devils from before the Contraction. A ghost from utopian history,
reinvigorated by the new Expansion and his own realization that the
world was once again growing smaller. With new hull designs and
polymer advances, his clipper ships navigated the globe and returned
with the stuff of legends. And his Malay buyers were happy to purchase
it, whatever their religion. What a profit that had been. He forces down
the thought as Ma shoves the glass across to Tranh and then raises his
own in toast. It is in the past. It is all in the past.
They drink. The whiskey burns warm in Tranh’s belly, joining the
chilies and fish and pork and the hot oil of the fried noodles.
“It really is too bad you didn’t get that job.”
Tranh grimaces. “Don’t gloat. Fate has a way of balancing itself. I’ve
learned that.”
Ma waves a hand. “I don’t gloat. There are too many of us, that’s
the truth. You were ten-thousand-times qualified for that job. For any
job.” He takes a sip of his whiskey, peers over its rim at Tranh. “Do you
remember when you called me a lazy cockroach?”
Tranh shrugs, he can’t take his eyes off the whiskey bottle. “I called
you worse than that.” He waits to see if Ma will refill his cup again.

74 — Paolo Bacigalupi

Wondering how rich he is, and how far this largesse will go. Hating that
he plays beggar to a boy he once refused to keep as a clerk, and who
now lords over him… and who now, in a show of face, pours Tranh’s
whiskey to the top, letting it spill over in an amber cascade under the
flickering light of the candles.
Ma finishes pouring, stares at the puddle he has created. “Truly the
world is turned upside down. The young lord over the old. The Malays
pinch out the Chinese. And the foreign devils return to our shores like
bloated fish after a ku-shui epidemic.” Ma smiles. “You need to keep your
ears up, and be aware of opportunities. Not like all those old men out
on the sidewalk, waiting for hard labor. Find a new niche. That’s what
I did. That’s why I’ve got my job.”
Tranh grimaces. “You came at a more fortuitous time.” He rallies,
emboldened by a full belly and the liquor warming his face and limbs.
“Anyway, you shouldn’t be too proud. You still stink of mother’s milk
as far as I’m concerned, living in the Dung Lord’s tower. You’re only the
Lord of Yellow Cards. And what is that, really? You haven’t climbed as
high as my ankles, yet, Mr. Big Name.”
Ma’s eyes widen. He laughs. “No. Of course not. Someday, maybe. But
I am trying to learn from you.” He smiles slightly and nods at Tranh’s
decrepit state. “Everything except this postscript.”
“Is it true there are crank fans on the top floors? That it’s cool up
there?”
Ma glances up at the looming highrise. “Yes. Of course. And men with
the calories to wind them as well. And they haul water up for us, and men
act as ballast on the elevator—up and down all day—doing favors for
the Dung Lord.” He laughs and pours more whiskey, motions Tranh to
drink. “You’re right though. It’s nothing, really. A poor palace, truly.
“But it doesn’t matter now. My family moves tomorrow. We have our
residence permits. Tomorrow when I get paid again, we’re moving out.
No more yellow card for us. No more payoffs to the Dung Lord’s lackeys.
No more problems with the white shirts. It’s all set with the Environment
Ministry. We turn in our yellow cards and become Thai. We’re going to
be immigrants. Not just some invasive species, anymore.” He raises his
glass. “It’s why I’m celebrating.”
Tranh scowls. “You must be pleased.” He finishes his drink, sets the
tumbler down with a thud. “Just don’t forget that the nail that stands
up also gets pounded down.”
Ma shakes his head and grins, his eyes whiskey bright. “Bangkok isn’t
Malacca.”

Yellow Card Man — 75

“And Malacca wasn’t Bali. And then they came with their machetes
and their spring guns and they stacked our heads in the gutters and sent
our bodies and blood down the river to Singapore.”
Ma shrugs. “It’s in the past.” He waves to the man at the wok, calling
for more food. “We have to make a home here, now.”
“You think you can? You think some white shirt won’t nail your
hide to his door? You can’t make them like us. Our luck’s against us,
here.”
“Luck? When did Mr. Three Prosperities get so superstitious?”
Ma’s dish arrives, tiny crabs crisp-fried, salted and hot with oil for Ma
and Tranh to pick at with chopsticks and crunch between their teeth,
each one no bigger than the tip of Tranh’s pinkie. Ma plucks one out
and crunches it down. “When did Mr. Three Prosperities get so weak?
When you fired me, you said I made my own luck. And now you tell
me you don’t have any?” He spits on sidewalk. “I’ve seen windups with
more will to survive than you.”
“Fang pi.”
“No! It’s true! There’s a Japanese windup girl in the bars where my
boss goes.” Ma leans forward. “She looks like a real woman. And she
does disgusting things.” He grins. “Makes your cock hard. But you don’t
hear her complaining about luck. Every white shirt in the city would
pay to dump her in the methane composters and she’s still up in her
highrise, dancing every night, in front of everyone. Her whole soulless
body on display.”
“It’s not possible.”
Ma shrugs. “Say so if you like. But I’ve seen her. And she isn’t starving. She takes whatever spit and money come her way, and she survives.
It doesn’t matter about the white shirts or the Kingdom edicts or the
Japan-haters or the religious fanatics; she’s been dancing for months.”
“How can she survive?”
“Bribes? Maybe some ugly farang who wallows in her filth? Who
knows? No real girl would do what she does. It makes your heart stop.
You forget she’s a windup, when she does those things.” He laughs, then
glances at Tranh. “Don’t talk to me about luck. There’s not enough luck
in the entire Kingdom to keep her alive this long. And we know it’s not
karma that keeps her alive. She has none.”
Tranh shrugs noncommittally and shovels more crabs into his
mouth.
Ma grins. “You know I’m right.” He drains his whiskey glass and slams
it down on the table. “We make our own luck! Our own fate. There’s a

76 — Paolo Bacigalupi

windup in a public bar and I have a job with a rich farang who can’t find
his ass without my help! Of course I’m right!” He pours more whiskey.
“Get over your self-pity, and climb out of your hole. The foreign devils
don’t worry about luck or fate, and look how they return to us, like a
newly engineered virus! Even the Contraction didn’t stop them. They’re
like another invasion of devil cats. But they make their own luck. I’m
not even sure if karma exists for them. And if fools like these farang can
succeed, than we Chinese can’t be kept down for long. Men make their
own luck, that’s what you told me when you fired me. You said I’d made
my own bad luck and only had myself to blame.”
Tranh looks up at Ma. “Maybe I could work at your company.” He
grins, trying not to look desperate. “I could make money for your lazy
boss.”
Ma’s eyes become hooded. “Ah. That’s difficult. Difficult to say.”
Tranh knows that he should take the polite rejection, that he should
shut up. But even as a part of him cringes, his mouth opens again,
pressing, pleading. “Maybe you need an assistant? To keep the books?
I speak their devil language. I taught it to myself when I traded with
them. I could be useful.”
“There is little enough work for me.”
“But if he is as stupid as you say—,”
“Stupid, yes. But not such a stupid melon that he wouldn’t notice
another body in his office. Our desks are just so far apart.” He makes
a motion with his hands. “You think he would not notice some stick
coolie man squatting beside his computer treadle?”
“In his factory, then?”
But Ma is already shaking his head. “I would help you if I could. But
the megodont unions control the power, and the line inspector unions
are closed to farang, no offense, and no one will accept that you are a
materials scientist.” He shakes his head. “No. There is no way.”
“Any job. As a dung shoveler, even.”
But Ma is shaking his head more vigorously now, and Tranh finally
manages to control his tongue, to plug this diarrhea of begging. “Never
mind. Never mind.” He forces a grin. “I’m sure some work will turn up.
I’m not worried.” He takes the bottle of Mekong whiskey and refills
Ma’s glass, upending the bottle and finishing the whiskey despite Ma’s
protests.
Tranh raises his half-empty glass and toasts the young man who has
bested him in all ways, before throwing back the last of the alcohol in
one swift swallow. Under the table, nearly invisible devil cats brush

Yellow Card Man — 77

against his bony legs, waiting for him to leave, hoping that he will be
foolish enough to leave scraps.
Morning dawns. Tranh wanders the streets, hunting for a breakfast
he cannot afford. He threads through market alleys redolent with fish
and lank green coriander and bright flares of lemongrass. Durians lie
in reeking piles, their spiky skins covered with red blister rust boils.
He wonders if he can steal one. Their yellow surfaces are blotched and
stained, but their guts are nutritious. He wonders how much blister rust
a man can consume before falling into a coma.
“You want? Special deal. Five for five baht. Good, yes?”
The woman who screeches at him has no teeth, she smiles with her
gums and repeats herself. “Five for five baht.” She speaks Mandarin to
him, recognizing him for their common heritage though she had the
luck to be born in the Kingdom and he had the misfortune to be set
down in Malaya. Chiu Chow Chinese, blessedly protected by her clan
and King. Tranh suppresses envy.
“More like four for four.” He makes a pun of the homonyms. Sz for
sz. Four for death. “They’ve got blister rust.”
She waves a hand sourly. “Five for five. They’re still good. Better than
good. Picked just before.” She wields a gleaming machete and chops the
durian in half, revealing the clean yellow slime of its interior with its
fat gleaming pits. The sickly sweet scent of fresh durian boils up and
envelopes them. “See! Inside good. Picked just in time. Still safe.”
“I might buy one.” He can’t afford any. But he can’t help replying. It
feels too good to be seen as a buyer. It is his suit, he realizes. The Hwang
Brothers have raised him in this woman’s eyes. She wouldn’t have spoken
if not for the suit. Wouldn’t have even started the conversation.
“Buy more! The more you buy, the more you save.”
He forces a grin, wondering how to get away from the bargaining
he should never have started. “I’m only one old man. I don’t need so
much.”
“One skinny old man. Eat more. Get fat!”
She says this and they both laugh. He searches for a response, something to keep their comradely interaction alive, but his tongue fails
him. She sees the helplessness in his eyes. She shakes her head. “Ah,
grandfather. It is hard times for everyone. Too many of you all at once.
No one thought it would get so bad down there.”
Tranh ducks his head, embarrassed. “I’ve troubled you. I should go.”
“Wait. Here.” She offers him the durian half. “Take it.”

78 — Paolo Bacigalupi

“I can’t afford it.”
She makes an impatient gesture. “Take it. It’s lucky for me to help
someone from the old country.” She grins. “And the blister rust looks
too bad to sell to anyone else.”
“You’re kind. Buddha smile on you.” But as he takes her gift he again
notices the great durian pile behind her. All neatly stacked with their
blotches and their bloody weals of blister rust. Just like stacked Chinese
heads in Malacca: his wife and daughter mouths staring out at him, accusatory. He drops the durian and kicks it away, frantically scraping his
hands on his jacket, trying to get the blood off his palms.
“Ai! You’ll waste it!”
Tranh barely hears the woman’s cry. He staggers back from the fallen
durian, staring at its ragged surface. Its gut-spilled interior. He looks
around wildly. He has to get out of the crowds. Has to get away from
the jostling bodies and the durian reek that’s all around, thick in his
throat, gagging him. He puts a hand to his mouth and runs, clawing at
the other shoppers, fighting through their press.
“Where you go? Come back! Huilai!” But the woman’s words are
quickly drowned. Tranh shoves through the throng, pushing aside women with shopping baskets full of white lotus root and purple eggplants,
dodging farmers and their clattering bamboo hand carts, twisting past
tubs of squid and serpent head fish. He pelts down the market alley like
a thief identified, scrambling and dodging, running without thought
or knowledge of where he is going, but running anyway, desperate to
escape the stacked heads of his family and countrymen.
He runs and runs.
And bursts into the open thoroughfare of Charoen Krung Road.
Powdered dung dust and hot sunlight wash over him. Cycle rickshaws
clatter past. Palms and squat banana trees shimmer green in the bright
open air.
As quickly as it seized him, Tranh’s panic fades. He stops short, hands
on his knees, catching his breath and cursing himself. Fool. Fool. If you
don’t eat, you die. He straightens and tries to turn back but the stacked
durians flash in his mind and he stumbles away from the alley, gagging
again. He can’t go back. Can’t face those bloody piles. He doubles over
and his stomach heaves but his empty guts bring up nothing but strings
of drool.
Finally he wipes his mouth on a Hwang Brothers sleeve and forces
himself to straighten and confront the foreign faces all around. The sea
of foreigners that he must learn to swim amongst, and who all call him

Yellow Card Man — 79

farang. It repels him to think of it. And to think that in Malacca, with
twenty generations of family and clan well-rooted in that city, he was
just as much an interloper. That his clan’s esteemed history is nothing
but a footnote for a Chinese expansion that has proven as transient as
nighttime cool. That his people were nothing but an accidental spillage
of rice on a map, now wiped up much more carefully than they were
scattered down.
Tranh unloads U-Tex Brand RedSilks deep into the night, offerings
to Potato God. A lucky job. A lucky moment, even if his knees have become loose and wobbly and feel as if they must soon give way. A lucky
job, even if his arms are shaking from catching the heavy sacks as they
come down off the megodonts. Tonight, he reaps not just pay but also
the opportunity to steal from the harvest. Even if the RedSilk potatoes
are small and harvested early to avoid a new sweep of scabis mold—the
fourth genetic variation this year—they are still good. And their small
size means their enhanced nutrition falls easily into his pockets.
Hu crouches above him, lowering down the potatoes. As the massive
elephantine megodonts shuffle and grunt, waiting for their great wagons
to be unloaded, Tranh catches Hu’s offerings with his hand hooks and
lowers the sacks the last step to the ground. Hook, catch, swing, and
lower. Again and again and again.
He is not alone in his work. Women from the tower slums crowd
around his ladder. They reach up and caress each sack as he lowers it to
the ground. Their fingers quest along hemp and burlap, testing for holes,
for slight tears, for lucky gifts. A thousand times they stroke his burdens,
reverently following the seams, only drawing away when coolie men
shove between them to heft the sacks and haul them to Potato God.
After the first hour of his work, Tranh’s arms are shaking. After three,
he can barely stand. He teeters on his creaking ladder as he lowers each
new sack, and gasps and shakes his head to clear sweat from his eyes as
he waits for the next one to come down.
Hu peers down from above. “Are you all right?”
Tranh glances warily over his shoulder. Potato God is watching, counting the sacks as they are carried into the warehouse. His eyes occasionally
flick up to the wagons and trace across Tranh. Beyond him, fifty unlucky
men watch silently from the shadows, any one of them far more observant than Potato God can ever be. Tranh straightens and reaches up to
accept the next sack, trying not to think about the watching eyes. How
politely they wait. How silent. How hungry. “I’m fine. Just fine.”

80 — Paolo Bacigalupi

Hu shrugs and pushes the next burlap load over the wagon’s lip. Hu
has the better place, but Tranh cannot resent it. One or the other must
suffer. And Hu found the job. Hu has the right to the best place. To rest
a moment before the next sack moves. After all, Hu collected Tranh for
the job when he should have starved tonight. It is fair.
Tranh takes the sack and lowers it into the forest of waiting women’s
hands, releases his hooks with a twist, and drops the bag to the ground.
His joints feel loose and rubbery, as if femur and tibia will skid apart
at any moment. He is dizzy with heat, but he dares not ask to slow the
pace.
Another potato sack comes down. Women’s hands rise up like tangling
strands of seaweed, touching, prodding, hungering. He cannot force
them back. Even if he shouts at them they return. They are like devil cats;
they cannot help themselves. He drops the sack the last few feet to the
ground and reaches up for another as it comes over the wagon’s lip.
As he hooks the sack, his ladder creaks and suddenly slides. It chatters
down the side of the wagon, then catches abruptly. Tranh sways, juggling the potato sack, trying to regain his center of gravity. Hands are all
around him, tugging at the bag, pulling, prodding. “Watch out—”
The ladder skids again. He drops like a stone. Women scatter as he
plunges. He hits the ground and pain explodes in his knee. The potato
sack bursts. For a moment he worries what Potato God will say but then
he hears screams all around him. He rolls onto his back. Above him,
the wagon is swaying, shuddering. People are shouting and fleeing. The
megodont lunges forward and the wagon heaves. Bamboo ladders fall
like rain, slapping the pavement with bright firecracker retorts. The beast
reverses itself and the wagon skids past Tranh, grinding the ladders to
splinters. It is impossibly fast, even with wagon’s weight still hampering it. The megodont’s great maw opens and suddenly it is screaming,
a sound as high and panicked as a human’s.
All around them, other megodonts respond in a chorus. Their cacophony swamps the street. The megodont surges onto its hind legs, an
explosion of muscle and velocity that breaks the wagon’s traces and flips
it like a toy. Men cartwheel from it, blossoms shaken from a cherry tree.
Maddened, the beast rears again and kicks the wagon. Sends it skidding
sidewise. It slams past Tranh, missing him by inches.
Tranh tries to rise but his leg won’t work. The wagon smashes into a
wall. Bamboo and teak crackle and explode, the wagon disintegrating
as the megodont drags and kicks it, trying to win free completely. Tranh
drags himself away from the flying wagon, hand over hand, hauling

Yellow Card Man — 81

his useless leg behind him. All around, men are shouting instructions,
trying to control the beast, but he doesn’t look back. He focuses on the
cobbles ahead, on getting out of reach. His leg won’t work. It refuses
him. It seems to hate him.
Finally he makes it into the shelter of a protective wall. He hauls
himself upright. “I’m fine,” he tells himself. “Fine.” Gingerly he tests his
leg, setting weight on it. It’s wobbly, but he feels no real pain, not now.
“Mei wenti. Mei wenti,” he whispers. “Not a problem. Just cracked it.
Not a problem.”
The men are still shouting and the megodont is still screaming, but
all he can see is his brittle old knee. He lets go of the wall. Takes a step,
testing his weight, and collapses like a shadow puppet with strings gone
slack.
Gritting his teeth, he again hauls himself up off the cobbles. He props
himself against the wall, massaging his knee and watching the bedlam.
Men are throwing ropes over the back of the struggling megodont,
pulling it down, immobilizing it, finally. More than a score of men are
working to hobble it.
The wagon’s frame has shattered completely and potatoes are spilled
everywhere. A thick mash coats the ground. Women scramble on their
knees, clawing through the mess, fighting with one another to hoard
pulped tubers. They scrape it up from the street. Some of their scavenge
is stained red, but no one seems to care. Their squabbling continues. The
red bloom spreads. At the blossom’s center, a man’s trousers protrude
from the muck
Tranh frowns. He drags himself upright again and hops on his one
good leg toward the broken wagon. He catches up against its shattered
frame, staring. Hu’s body is a savage ruin, awash in megodont dung and
potato mash. And now that Tranh is close, he can see that the struggling
megodont’s great gray feet are gory with his friend. Someone is calling
for a doctor but it is half-hearted, a habit from a time when they were
not yellow cards.
Tranh tests his weight again but his knee provides the same queer
jointless failure. He catches up against the wagon’s splintered planking
and hauls himself back upright. He works the leg, trying to understand
why it collapses. The knee bends, it doesn’t even hurt particularly, but it
will not support his weight. He tests it again, with the same result.
With the megodont restrained, order in the unloading area is restored.
Hu’s body is dragged aside. Devil cats gather near his blood pool, feline
shimmers under methane glow. Their tracks pock the potato grime in

82 — Paolo Bacigalupi

growing numbers. More paw impressions appear in the muck, closing
from all directions on Hu’s discarded body.
Tranh sighs. So we all go, he thinks. We all die. Even those of us who
took our aging treatments and our tiger penis and kept ourselves strong
are subject to the Hell journey. He promises to burn money for Hu, to
ease his way in the afterlife, then catches himself and remembers that he
is not the man he was. That even paper Hell Money is out of reach.
Potato God, disheveled and angry, comes and studies him. He frowns
suspiciously. “Can you still work?”
“I can.” Tranh tries to walk but stumbles once again and catches up
against the wagon’s shattered frame.
Potato God shakes his head. “I will pay you for the hours you worked.”
He waves to a young man, fresh and grinning from binding the megodont. “You! You’re a quick one. Haul the rest of these sacks into the
warehouse.”
Already, other workers are lining up and grabbing loads from within
the broken wagon. As the new man comes out with his first sack, his
eyes dart to Tranh and then flick away, hiding his relief at Tranh’s incapacity.
Potato God watches with satisfaction and heads back to the warehouse.
“Double pay,” Tranh calls after Potato God’s retreating back. “Give me
double pay. I lost my leg for you.”
The manager looks back at Tranh with pity, then glances at Hu’s body
and shrugs. It is an easy acquiescence. Hu will demand no reparation.
It is better to die insensate than to feel every starving inch of collapse;
Tranh pours his leg-wreck money into a bottle of Mekong whiskey. He
is old. He is broken. He is the last of his line. His sons are dead. His
daughter mouths are long gone. His ancestors will live uncared for in the
underworld with no one to burn incense or offer sweet rice to them.
How they must curse him.
He limps and stumbles and crawls through the sweltering night streets,
one hand clutching the open bottle, the other scrabbling at doorways
and walls and methane lamp posts to keep himself upright. Sometimes
his knee works; sometimes it fails him completely. He has kissed the
streets a dozen times.
He tells himself that he is scavenging, hunting for the chance of sustenance. But Bangkok is a city of scavengers, and the crows and devil
cats and children have all come before him. If he is truly lucky, he will

Yellow Card Man — 83

encounter the white shirts and they will knock him into bloody oblivion,
perhaps send him to meet the previous owner of this fine Hwang Brothers suit that now flaps ragged around his shins. The thought appeals
to him.
An ocean of whiskey rolls in his empty belly and he is warm and
happy and carefree for the first time since the Incident. He laughs and
drinks and shouts for the white shirts, calling them paper tigers, calling
them dog fuckers. He calls them to him. Casts baiting words so that any
within earshot will find him irresistable. But the Environment Ministry’s
patrols must have other yellow cards to abuse, for Tranh wanders the
green-tinged streets of Bangkok alone.
Never mind. It doesn’t matter. If he cannot find white shirts to do the
job, he will drown himself. He will go to the river and dump himself in
its offal. Floating on river currents to the sea appeals to him. He will end
in the ocean like his scuttled clipper ships and the last of his heirs. He
takes a swig of whiskey, loses his balance, and winds up on the ground
once again, sobbing and cursing white shirts and green headbands, and
wet machetes.
Finally he drags himself into a doorway to rest, holding his miraculously unbroken whiskey bottle with one feeble hand. He cradles it to
himself like a last bit of precious jade, smiling and laughing that it is
not broken. He wouldn’t want to waste his life savings on the cobblestones.
He takes another swig. Stares at the methane lamps flickering overhead. Despair is the color of approved-burn methane flickering green
and gaseous, vinous in the dark. Green used to mean things like coriander and silk and jade and now all it means to him is bloodthirsty men
with patriotic headbands and hungry scavenging nights. The lamps
flicker. An entire green city. An entire city of despair.
Across the street, a shape scuttles, keeping to the shadows. Tranh leans
forward, eyes narrowed. At first he takes it for a white shirt. But no. It
is too furtive. It’s a woman. A girl. A pretty creature, all made up. An
enticement that moves with the stuttery jerky motion of…
A windup girl.
Tranh grins, a surprised skeleton rictus of delight at the sight of this
unnatural creature stealing through the night. A windup girl. Ma Ping’s
windup girl. The impossible made flesh.
She slips from shadow to shadow, a creature even more terrified of
white shirts than a yellow card geriatric. A waifish ghost-child ripped
from her natural habitat and set down in a city which despises every-

84 — Paolo Bacigalupi

thing she represents: her genetic inheritance, her manufacturers, her
unnatural competition—her ghostly lack of a soul. She has been here
every night as he has pillaged through discarded melon spines. She has
been here, tottering through the sweat heat darkness as he dodged white
shirt patrols. And despite everything, she has been surviving.
Tranh forces himself upright. He sways, drunken and unsteady, then
follows, one hand clutching his whiskey bottle, the other touching walls,
catching himself when his bad knee falters. It’s a foolish thing, a whimsy,
but the windup girl has seized his inebriated imagination. He wants
to stalk this unlikely Japanese creature, this interloper on foreign soil
even more despised than himself. He wants to follow her. Perhaps steal
kisses from her. Perhaps protect her from the hazards of the night. To
pretend at least that he is not this drunken ribcage caricature of a man,
but is in fact a tiger still.
The windup girl travels through the blackest of back alleys, safe in
darkness, hidden from the white shirts who would seize her and mulch
her before she could protest. Devil cats yowl as she passes, scenting
something as cynically engineered as themselves. The Kingdom is
infested with plagues and beasts, besieged by so many bio-engineered
monsters that it cannot keep up. As small as gray fa’ gan fringe and as
large as megodonts, they come. And as the Kingdom struggles to adapt,
Tranh slinks after a windup girl, both of them as invasive as blister rust
on a durian and just as welcome.
For all her irregular motion, the windup girl travels well enough. Tranh
has difficulty keeping up with her. His knees creak and grind and he
clenches his teeth against the pain. Sometimes he falls with a muffled
grunt, but still he follows. Ahead of him, the windup girl ducks into new
shadows, a wisp of tottering motion. Her herky-jerky gait announces
her as a creature not human, no matter how beautiful she may be. No
matter how intelligent, no matter how strong, no matter how supple
her skin, she is a windup and meant to serve—and marked as such by
a genetic specification that betrays her with every unnatural step.
Finally, when Tranh thinks that his legs will give out for a final time
and that he can continue no longer, the windup girl pauses. She stands
in the black mouth of a crumbling highrise, a tower as tall and wretched
as his own, another carcass of the old Expansion. From high above,
music and laughter filter down. Shapes float in the tower’s upper-story
windows, limned in red light, the silhouettes of women dancing. Calls
of men and the throb of drums. The windup girl disappears inside.

Yellow Card Man — 85

What would it be like to enter such a place? To spend baht like water
while women danced and sang songs of lust? Tranh suddenly regrets
spending his last baht on whiskey. This is where he should have died.
Surrounded by fleshly pleasures that he has not known since he lost his
country and his life. He purses his lips, considering. Perhaps he can bluff
his way in. He still wears the raiment of the Hwang Brothers. He still
appears a gentleman, perhaps. Yes. He will attempt it, and if he gathers
the shame of ejection on his head, if he loses face one more time, what
of it? He will be dead in a river soon anyway, floating to the sea to join
his sons.
He starts to cross the street but his knee gives out and he falls flat
instead. He saves his whiskey bottle more by luck than by dexterity.
The last of its amber liquid glints in the methane light. He grimaces
and pulls himself into a sitting position, then drags himself back into a
doorway. He will rest, first. And finish the bottle. The windup girl will
be there for a long time, likely. He has time to recover himself. And if
he falls again, at least he won’t have wasted his liquor. He tilts the bottle
to his lips then lets his tired head rest against the building. He’ll just
catch his breath.
Laughter issues from the highrise. Tranh jerks awake. A man stumbles
from its shadow portal: drunk, laughing. More men spill out after
him. They laugh and shove one another. Drag tittering women out
with them. Motion to cycle rickshaws that wait in the alleys for easy
drunken patrons. Slowly, they disperse. Tranh tilts his whiskey bottle.
Finds it empty.
Another pair of men emerges from the highrise’s maw. One of them
is Ma Ping. The other a farang who can only be Ma’s boss. The farang
waves for a cycle rickshaw. He climbs in and waves his farewells. Ma
raises his own hand in return and his gold and diamond wristwatch
glints in the methane light. Tranh’s wristwatch. Tranh’s history. Tranh’s
heirloom flashing bright in the darkness. Tranh scowls. Wishes he could
rip it off young Ma’s wrist.
The farang’s rickshaw starts forward with a screech of unoiled bicycle
chains and drunken laughter, leaving Ma Ping standing alone in the
middle of the street. Ma laughs to himself, seems to consider returning
to the bars, then laughs again and turns away, heading across the street,
toward Tranh.
Tranh shies into the shadows, unwilling to let Ma catch him in such
a state. Unwilling to endure more humiliation. He crouches deeper in
his doorway as Ma stumbles about the street in search of rickshaws.

86 — Paolo Bacigalupi

But all the rickshaws have been taken for the moment. No more lurk
below the bars.
Ma’s gold wristwatch glints again in the methane light.
Pale forms glazed green materialize on the street, three men walking,
their mahogany skin almost black in the darkness, contrasting sharply
against the creased whites of their uniforms. Their black batons twirl
casually at their wrists. Ma doesn’t seem to notice them at first. The white
shirts converge, casual. Their voices carry easily in the quiet night.
“You’re out late.”
Ma shrugs, grins queasily. “Not really. Not so late.”
The three white shirts gather close. “Late for a yellow card. You should
be home by now. Bad luck to be out after yellow card curfew. Especially
with all that yellow gold on your wrist.”
Ma holds up his hands, defensive. “I’m not a yellow card.”
“Your accent says differently.”
Ma reaches for his pockets, fumbles in them. “Really. You’ll see.
Look.”
A white shirt steps close. “Did I say you could move?”
“My papers. Look—”
“Get your hands out!”
“Look at my stamps!”
“Out!” A black baton flashes. Ma yelps, clutches his elbow. More blows
rain down. Ma crouches, trying to shield himself. He curses, “Nimade
bi!”
The white shirts laugh. “That’s yellow card talk.” One of them swings
his baton, low and fast, and Ma collapses, crying out, curling around
a damaged leg. The white shirts gather close. One of them jabs Ma in
the face, making him uncurl, then runs the baton down Ma’s chest,
dragging blood.
“He’s got nicer clothes than you, Thongchai.”
“Probably snuck across the border with an assful of jade.”
One of them squats, studies Ma’s face. “Is it true? Do you shit jade?”
Ma shakes his head frantically. He rolls over and starts to crawl away.
A black runnel of blood spills from his mouth. One leg drags behind
him, useless. A white shirt follows, pushes him over with his shoe and
puts his foot on Ma’s face. The other two suck in their breath and step
back, shocked. To beat a man is one thing… “Suttipong, no.”
The man called Suttipong glances back at his peers. “It’s nothing.
These yellow cards are as bad as blister rust. This is nothing. They all
come begging, taking food when we’ve got little enough for our own,

Yellow Card Man — 87

and look.” He kicks Ma’s wrist. “Gold.”
Ma gasps, tries to strip the watch from his wrist. “Take it. Here. Please.
Take it.”
“It’s not yours to give, yellow card.”
“Not… yellow card,” Ma gasps. “Please. Not your Ministry.” His hands
fumble for his pockets, frantic under the white shirt’s gaze. He pulls out
his papers and waves them in the hot night air.
Suttipong takes the papers, glances at them. Leans close. “You think
our countrymen don’t fear us, too?”
He throws the papers on the ground, then quick as a cobra he strikes.
One, two, three, the blows rain down. He is very fast. Very methodical.
Ma curls into a ball, trying to ward off the blows. Suttipong steps back,
breathing heavily. He waves at the other two. “Teach him respect.” The
other two glance at each other doubtfully, but under Suttipong’s urging,
they are soon beating Ma, shouting encouragement to one another.
A few men come down from the pleasure bars and stumble into the
streets, but when they see white uniforms they flee back inside. The white
shirts are alone. And if there are other watching eyes, they do not show
themselves. Finally, Suttipong seems satisfied. He kneels and strips the
antique Rolex from Ma’s wrist, spits on Ma’s face, and motions his peers
to join him. They turn away, striding close past Tranh’s hiding place.
The one called Thongchai looks back. “He might complain.”
Suttipong shakes his head, his attention on the Rolex in his hand.
“He’s learned his lesson.”
Their footsteps fade into the darkness. Music filters down from the
highrise clubs. The street itself is silent. Tranh watches for a long time,
looking for other hunters. Nothing moves. It is as if the entire city has
turned its back on the broken Malay-Chinese lying in the street. Finally,
Tranh limps out of the shadows and approaches Ma Ping.
Ma catches sight of him and holds up a weak hand. “Help.” He tries
the words in Thai, again in farang English, finally in Malay, as though
he has returned to his childhood. Then he seems to recognize Tranh.
His eyes widen. He smiles weakly, through split bloody lips. Speaks
Mandarin, their trade language of brotherhood. “Lao pengyou. What
are you doing here?”
Tranh squats beside him, studying his cracked face. “I saw your
windup girl.”
Ma closes his eyes, tries to smile. “You believe me, then?” His eyes are
nearly swollen shut, blood runs down from a cut in his brow, trickling
freely.

88 — Paolo Bacigalupi

“Yes.”
“I think they broke my leg.” He tries to pull himself upright, gasps and
collapses. He probes his ribs, runs his hand down to his shin. “I can’t
walk.” He sucks air as he prods another broken bone. “You were right
about the white shirts.”
“A nail that stands up gets pounded down.”
Something in Tranh’s tone makes Ma look up. He studies Tranh’s face.
“Please. I gave you food. Find me a rickshaw.” One hand strays to his
wrist, fumbling for the timepiece that is no longer his, trying to offer
it. Trying to bargain.
Is this fate? Tranh wonders. Or luck? Tranh purses his lips, considering. Was it fate that his own shiny wristwatch drew the white shirts and
their wicked black batons? Was it luck that he arrived to see Ma fall? Do
he and Ma Ping still have some larger karmic business?
Tranh watches Ma beg and remembers firing a young clerk so many
lifetimes ago, sending him packing with a thrashing and a warning
never to return. But that was when he was a great man. And now he is
such a small one. As small as the clerk he thrashed so long ago. Perhaps
smaller. He slides his hands under Ma’s back, lifts.
“Thank you,” Ma gasps. “Thank you.”
Tranh runs his fingers into Ma’s pockets, working through them
methodically, checking for baht the white shirts have left. Ma groans,
forces out a curse as Tranh jostles him. Tranh counts his scavenge, the
dregs of Ma’s pockets that still look like wealth to him. He stuffs the
coins into his own pocket.
Ma’s breathing comes in short panting gasps. “Please. A rickshaw.
That’s all.” He barely manages to exhale the words.
Tranh cocks his head, considering, his instincts warring with themselves. He sighs and shakes his head. “A man makes his own luck, isn’t that
what you told me?” He smiles tightly. “My own arrogant words, coming
from a brash young mouth.” He shakes his head again, astounded at his
previously fat ego, and smashes his whiskey bottle on the cobbles. Glass
sprays. Shards glint green in the methane light.
“If I were still a great man…” Tranh grimaces. “But then, I suppose
we’re both past such illusions. I’m very sorry about this.” With one
last glance around the darkened street, he drives the broken bottle into
Ma’s throat. Ma jerks and blood spills out around Tranh’s hand. Tranh
scuttles back, keeping this new welling of blood off his Hwang Brothers
fabrics. Ma’s lungs bubble and his hands reach up for the bottle lodged
in his neck, then fall away. His wet breathing stops.

Yellow Card Man — 89

Tranh is trembling. His hands shake with an electric palsy. He has
seen so much death, and dealt so little. And now Ma lies before him,
another Malay-Chinese dead, with only himself to blame. Again. He
stifles an urge to be sick.
He turns and crawls into the protective shadows of the alley and pulls
himself upright. He tests his weak leg. It seems to hold him. Beyond the
shadows, the street is silent. Ma’s body lies like a heap of garbage in its
center. Nothing moves.
Tranh turns and limps down the street, keeping to the walls, bracing
himself when his knee threatens to give way. After a few blocks, the
methane lamps start to go out. One by one, as though a great hand is
moving down the street snuffing them, they gutter into silence as the
Public Works Ministry cuts off the gas. The street settles into complete
darkness.
When Tranh finally arrives at Surawong Road, its wide black thoroughfare is nearly empty of traffic. A pair of ancient water buffalo
placidly haul a rubber-wheeled wagon under starlight. A shadow farmer
rides behind them, muttering softly. The yowls of mating devil cats
scrape the hot night air, but that is all.
And then, from behind, the creak of bicycle chains. The rattle of wheels
on cobbles. Tranh turns, half-expecting avenging white shirts, but it is
only a cycle rickshaw, chattering down the darkened street. Tranh raises
a hand, flashing newfound baht. The rickshaw slows. A man’s ropey
limbs gleam with moonlit sweat. Twin earrings decorate his lobes, gobs
of silver in the night. “Where you going?”
Tranh scans the rickshaw man’s broad face for hints of betrayal, for
hints that he is a hunter, but the man is only looking at the baht in Tranh’s
hand. Tranh forces down his paranoia and climbs into the rickshaw’s
seat. “The farang factories. By the river.”
The rickshaw man glances over his shoulder, surprised. “All the
factories will be closed. Too much energy to run at night. It’s all black
night down there.”
“It doesn’t matter. There’s a job opening. There will be interviews.”
The man stands on his pedals. “At night?”
“Tomorrow.” Tranh settles deeper into his seat. “I don’t want to be
late.”

