Patrice Sarath

Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Dedication
Acknowledgements
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten
Eleven
Twelve
Thirteen
Fourteen

Fifteen
Sixteen
Seventeen
Eighteen
BLAST FROM THE PAST
Kate took a breath. “Okay,” she said. “I . . .”
Her voice trailed off as her mother slowed for
a red light. Kate caught sight of someone
standing in the long shadows on the side of
the road, and she turned to look as her
mother stopped the car.
Tall, dark, longish-haired. His clothes . . .
His clothes were Aeritan clothes.
Time stopped. She looked up, her eyes drawn
upward without her control. He looked back
at her, his eyes as black as his lank hair.
“Go! Go! Drive!” Kate heard the screaming,
realized it was herself.
“Kate!” The car jerked forward but slammed
to a stop as Mrs. Mossland realized cross
traffic was still streaming.
“Drivedrivedrivedrive! Mom, please go!”
How had he come here? How had he gotten
through?
“Kate, my God . . . What is it?”

The light turned finally, and the car sped
forward, Mrs. Mossland trying to talk to
Kate, and Kate lost in her tears.
“It was the general, Mom. It was him.”
Ace Books by Patrice Sarath
GORDATH WOOD
RED GOLD BRIDGE
For Kim,
who is off on her own great adventure
Acknowledgments
Thanks to my first readers of the fine Austin
writers’ group Cryptopolis: Steve Wilson,
Matthew Bey, David Chang, Patrick Sulli
van, Sharon Casteel, Jane Hixon, and Fred
Stanton—where would I be without you guys!
I also want to thank the Cryptopolis North
writers Martin Owton and Gaie Sebold for
their comments and suggestions. And always,
my thanks and love go to Ben, Kim, and
Aidan. You guys are the best family a writer
could have.
One
The evening sun set through the tall trees that
ringed Red Gold Bridge. Shafts of sunlight

shot through to the ground, turning the stone
of the stronghold a deeper shade of gold.
Spray from the forest stream that cut beneath
the stone arch, rebuilt now after the winter’s
war, was caught in the sun, and a perpetual
rainbow dazzled in the mist.
Joe and Arrim trudged across the arch of the
bridge, Joe feeling weariness deep in his
bones. The road was already in shadow
behind them, and the mountain rose ahead,
the wall and the great gate rising thirty feet
over their heads. A slice of the setting sun
illuminated the red gold of the stone, and the
iron and wood of the gate caught some of the
glow.
Off to the side was the smaller postern gate,
the one everyone used these days. The two
guardians headed that way, threading
through the steady stream of smallholders
heading back to their forest holdings. Once
the smallholders would not have dared to
travel the Wood when the sun was so near to
setting. It was thanks to Arrim and Joe that
they could now.
Small men and women in their drab forest
clothes gave them half bows and shy smiles.

Arrim bowed back, the movement coming
easily to him. Joe had introduced his own
custom. He shook hands with one or two
people he had come to recognize on his
patrols through the woods that kept the forest
settled and quiet.
The forestholders came to the stronghold on
the banks of the Aeritan River to trade every
few days, bringing in baskets of mushrooms,
dried fish, and dyes made from the plants
that grew in clearings only they knew. They
brought in freshwater pearls and smoked eels,
thick clay, the charcoal and firewood that
would be used by smiths to fire their forges,
and the spicy roots that were used to make
vesh, what Joe called the national drink of
Aeritan. Their goods were prized all over
Aeritan, and the forestholders traded them
for what they needed: forged tools, textiles,
and food, mostly protein they couldn’t get for
themselves. The forestholders lived in dark,
secret clearings in the Wood and knew the
forest better than Joe and Arrim. They stayed
away from the portal at its center, though.
They left that for the guardians.
Waiting his turn to duck through the postern

gate, Joe caught movement and looked up.
Lady Sarita was watching them from over the
wall, thirty feet up.
Like him, she wore the clothes from her old
life, T-shirt and jeans. She held a cup in her
hand. Vesh, probably. He heard that she had
missed it, back in New York. He waved and
smiled.
Of course, she didn’t wave back; she wouldn’t
have, even when she was Mrs. Hunt, owner of
Hunter’s Chase, and he was just the barn
handyman.
Then Lord Tharp joined her, and Joe’s grin
faded. He hurried after Arrim and ducked
through the low arch inside the wall. Instantly
he was plunged into darkness, the only light a
narrow swath coming from the courtyard
inside the wall. Even though Lady Sarita had
come back to Tharp after years of living on
the other side—and it hadn’t been too bad a
life there, that’s for sure—she and her
husband stalked around one another like a
pair of pissed-off cats. Joe didn’t work for
Lord Tharp, but he didn’t want to make him
hotter than he already was, where his wife
was concerned.

Man’s got a serious problem, if he thinks he
can keep her on a short leash. Joe hadn’t
known Mrs. Hunt before she was Mrs. Hunt,
so to speak, but she had run her stables at a
profit by keeping a tight hand on the wheel.
She wasn’t the kind to put up with someone
trying to run her the same way.
His stomach cramped with hunger. He looked
forward to a hot meal, his first in a half
month, and a bed with blankets and furs
instead of a thin bedroll on a mattress of
leaves. Arrim threw him a look as they
emerged into the courtyard, already half in
darkness. Joe shook his head at his look of
inquiry.
“Just thinking of a good hot meal.”
“Thank the forest god that’s all we have to
worry about tonight.” He grinned. “And
maybe a girl who thinks to curry favor with
the forest god by being sweet to a guardian.
Your Corinna, even.”
Corinna worked in the kitchens and had her
eye on Joe almost since the day he came to
Red Gold Bridge. She was a broad,
pleasant-faced woman about his age, and she
had made her interest clear. And Lynn could

be on the moon, for all they could ever be
together. So far, though, Joe had just been
friendly and nothing more. He made a
noncommittal noise.
“I’m gonna clean up. See you at the kitchens.”
Joe dumped his gear in his guardian’s
chamber on the inside wall of the stronghold.
He stretched, welcoming the relief of the pack
off his shoulders. Guardians didn’t carry
much, just a bedroll, dried food, and water,
but the constant weight put a strain on his
shoulders. His old boots were not meant for
walking, but he was loathe to give them up.
They were in much better shape than Arrim’s
hobnailed boots, and guardians didn’t exactly
draw a salary with which to buy new shoes.
The job was its own reward, which sucked as
far as Joe was concerned. He had never made
much money back home, but at least he had
been able to buy the essentials. Now he got
room and board after a fact, but little else.
He stripped his shirt and washed himself at
the basin of clean water left for him in the
small room. The soap was a lumpy chunk that
hardly raised a lather. Be nice to have a

shower, he reflected, rinsing off and drying
himself with a threadbare cloth. A nice hot
shower and a good close shave, instead of
using a straight razor that he about cut his
own throat with. Instead he got standup
baths, long nights out in the weather, jerky
for breakfast, and biscuits for dinner.
And the beer was bad, too.
Still, it was like the woods knew him. When he
set foot in the forest, the woods called to him
as if he were home. He sure never saw woods
like this where he grew up in central Texas,
just thorny mesquite and papery cedar. Not
even the cotton-woods back home that lined
the creek beds with green were forest like this
one. Here the trees closed out the sun. Only
small shafts of sunlight reached the damp,
cool ground that smelled of decaying leaves.
The meadows were bright with green and
yellow grasses, and in spring they were
studded with a small purple flower like the
bluebonnets back home. Creeks ran all
summer long, even in the drought of August,
or what he felt was probably August. He
forgot the new season names that he had
learned, and he had lost track of time. All he

knew was, it was summer now, and the
gordath had settled down. All last winter
though, things had been bad, and Joe wasn’t
sure he was going to be able to take it.
Back then, the gordath had racked the woods,
each earthquake cracking the frozen ground
and breaking up stone. He and Arrim trod
softly, letting their minds reach out to touch
the uneasy portal, and slowly, slowly, it closed
up. Finally, there was nothing left but traces
of the gordath’s fury.
He and Arrim marked where trees had fallen
and let the forest smallholders salvage them
for firewood and for their new houses. One
smallholding had been completely destroyed,
its houses fallen and the trees toppled as if a
missile had flattened the little hamlet. When
they came upon it, Joe had been struck by the
quietness of the small settlement. It had still
been winter, and the snow covered up the
fallen houses, but someone had raised a pile
of stones to the dead, leaves scattered across
the top and around its foot. Joe stood
shivering in the cold, but a strange sad peace
held the tiny village, as if it were still being
soothed.

“The forest will grow up around it,” Arrim
said, startling him out of his sad revery.
“Vines will cover all this, and saplings will
rise from the forest floor.”
“That’s it?” Joe said. He thought of funerals
back home and of memorials on the side of
dangerous roads, their crosses faithfully
marked with plastic flowers.
Arrim pointed to the cairn. “This is all the
forest god requires. Then he takes back his
own.”
Joe still felt the situation called for
something, so he fashioned a small cross,
lashing it together with a bit of string from
his supplies, and laid it against the snowy pile
of rock. Maybe it would confuse the forest
god and maybe it wouldn’t, but he liked to
think of the little cross there, slowly decaying
and returning to the forest, the emblem of a
foreign god. He hadn’t been religious back
home. He wasn’t sure what had happened to
him here in Red Gold Bridge, except they had
gods for everyone and everything, it seemed.
It was just another way he was learning to
think in Aeritan.
The little village was not the only victim of the

gordath. Joe began to recognize other places,
older places, that had once been cleared and
were now vine-covered, their sentinel trees
standing around a rough clearing, old stones
in a rough pattern humping under a growth
of moss. Last winter had not been the first
time the gordath flung itself open in a burst
of energy, nor the first time the forest god
took back its own. Gordath Wood was full of
these mementos to the dangerous portal that
hid at its heart.
Joe finished washing up and put his old
T-shirt back on, the material worn and faded.
It was only a matter of time before it fell
apart completely, and he would have to turn
to Aeritan clothes. One of the smallholders
had patched it for him once when he and
Arrim had stopped in on their holding in the
western part of the Wood. She had taken one
look at his outlandish T-shirt and his jeans,
and laughed outright, shaking her head.
“Give me that for mending,” she scolded, and
he looked startled, but he slipped the shirt off
over his head. She sat down and mended a
tear under the arm while he sipped vesh and
the kids giggled at his pale skin. She bit off

the thread and handed it back to him. “Come
back with enough cloth, and I will make a
proper set of clothes for you.”
He looked at the heavy trousers everyone else
wore and hoped that his jeans held out for a
while. He knew that a shirt like Arrim’s
would suit him better. He knew why he
resisted, though, and it was for the same
reason that Mrs. Hunt wore her rich lady’s
version of his outfit.
Forget the portal; once the clothes were gone
and they went native, they could never go
back.
The door opened, and Arrim ducked in.
“I have a bad feeling,” the guardian said.
Shit. Arrim’s bad feelings tended to come
true.
“What? What is it?”
Arrim grinned. “That they’ll run out of bread
in the kitchens before we get there,
Guardian.”
Joe rolled his eyes and pushed past him.
“Arrim, where I come from, you know what
we call people who make jokes like that?”
“Funny?”
“Stupid.”

Red Gold Bridge was no longer at war, but
the stronghold still felt like a barracks. The
courtyard was full of men and horses and
oxen. You had to be careful where you
walked, and the stench of unwashed people
and manure overwhelmed Joe. He was used to
the forest, not this. The stronghold was a
major port on the river, and it attracted
everybody who wanted to do business
throughout Aeritan. There were merchants
from other holdings, many of them women
with their hair neatly tucked under kerchiefs,
and farmers, wagon ers, coopers,
wheelwrights, armsmen. Everyone fell back to
let the guardians walk through, but this time
it was different. The forestholders respected
and liked the guardians. The strongholders
mixed their deference with suspicion.
Guardians were neither lords nor
smallholders, and their relationship to the
woods made everyone uneasy. The stronghold
had been built as a way to hold off the
gordath, after all, and its denizens never got
over their wariness.
The kitchens were full of bustle, too, the

business of feeding the stronghold never
ending. Joe and Arrim threaded their way to
a table, grabbing fresh flat bread, puffed and
golden from the skillet, and bowls of the rich,
spicy poultry stew that the Red Gold Bridge
kitchens were famous for. The stew was like
vesh, in that the combination of herbs and
spices were exotic yet familiar, comforting in
their fullness. He piled soft smoked cheese on
top of the stew along with some sweet onions
that reminded Joe of the 1015 onions the
Aggies grew back home, and odds and ends to
round out the meal. Corinna looked up from
the dough she kneaded and smiled in
greeting.
“Good day to you, Master Guardian,” she
said. Arrim, not subtle, elbowed Joe. Joe
ignored him.
“Hi, Corinna,” he said. He nodded at the
bread. “Looks good.” She beamed. She
reminded him of home, too; her hair and eyes
had a Hispanic look to them. She could be one
of his cousins. And just like he felt nothing
for his cousins, he felt nothing for her. Not
her fault; she just wasn’t Lynn.
Joe and Arrim stood at the hearth, scooping

up stew with their flat bread as spoons. They
weren’t the only scavengers in the kitchens.
There were a few kids and a handful of
Captain Tal’s guard, sitting by themselves at
the old scarred wooden table over by the wall.
They gave Joe and Arrim hard looks and
turned back to their beer and soup. That was
another thing. He reckoned he could do with
friends about as much as anybody. It was
hard to be either looked up to or distrusted.
He ate, thinking it would be good to get out of
the stronghold and back to the woods, even
though they had just arrived. That’s where,
after all those years of being on the move, he
felt he belonged the most. He could feel the
restlessness of the gordath even now, like an
extra heart beating alongside his. As soon as
he concentrated, the thrumming ceased.
Sometimes he wasn’t sure what the gordath
wanted from him.
He glanced around and saw Corinna looking
at him. She smiled and ducked her head a bit
shyly.
“Should we prepare a handfasting?” Arrim
said, half teasing, half in earnest. “She’s a
pretty one, a good cook, give you good

babies.”
Once he had thought about that with Lynn.
She was the first woman he ever imagined he
could settle down with. The gordath had
other ideas though.
“I guess I should get my footing first, before I
think about marrying,” Joe said evasively.
Arrim snorted.
“Marrying, now? You’re a guardian, not one
of the lords.” At Joe’s blank look, he said,
“Marriage is for the Council, not us. We
handfast—promise, before the grass god.”
“Yeah, I don’t know that I get the difference,
Arrim, but no, I’m not planning that far
ahead.”
One of Tal’s guards got up, and with an
ostentatious look at the two guardians, he
went over to Corinna, giving her a winning
smile. She smiled back, blushed, and they had
a conversation over the bread, with him
swiping a loaf from the oven, tossing it to take
the heat out of it, and her giving him a mock
scolding.
“She’s trying to make you jealous, that one,”
Arrim said, and Joe rolled his eyes. He’d had
enough.

“Jesus, Arrim, give it a rest. You like her, you
talk to her.”
Joe pushed past the guards more roughly
than he had to and left the kitchen behind.
Almost immediately the temperature
plunged. Joe made his way through the stone
fortress, automatically heading back to the
outer walls. He was restless, the thought of
the mountain overhead oppressing him. He
paused on the top of the stairs that led up to
the walkway on the wall. The air had turned
thick with twilight, the barest of sunsets
filtering through the shadows. He could hear
the rush of the river like a distant wind. He
turned south to go down the other set of
stairs, his boots tapping softly on the ancient
stone. He was the only person on the walls.
The walkway led around the rose tower,
which jutted out from the mountain, its own
winding stairs carved out of stone and
patched with mortar. Climbing rosebushes
trailed up along the wall. In the spring they
were thick with small white wild roses. Lynn
had been imprisoned in that tower.
Joe stopped along the gallery, leaning on the
wall. It was his favorite place in the

stronghold. Here a series of columns faced out
toward the river, light and air entering in
through the arched openings. The setting sun
made the river sparkle until his eyes hurt.
Across the river the Aeritan headlands rose
above the banks and faded into the distance.
He could see the barest line of a road, white
against the dark hills, dipping and curving
along the line of the terrain.
It was hard, missing Lynn. They had only had
a few short months to get to know each other.
Sometimes he dreamed about her apartment
over the barn at Hunter’s Chase, its white
curtains wafting in the breeze from the open
windows while they made love in the evening
after the day’s work was through. He told
himself not to think about it, but it was no
good. She was an ache that was ever-present.
Only the gordath had more of a hold on him,
and he knew that the gordath would use his
yearning for Lynn as a wedge to pry itself
open.
Can’t see her, can’t hold her, he thought. But
he could still go visit an old friend.
Red Gold Bridge’s stables were in twilight

except for a couple of glowing lanterns
secured firmly by the main barn doors and
the last remnants of the sun coming in
through the high windows. A few grooms
played a complicated game of cards and dice
near the entrance, where the sun still lit up
their table. They looked up.
“Guardian,” one said in greeting. They were
used to him.
“Evening,” Joe said. He jerked his head at the
big box stall on the side with the best light
and the best air flow. “Just going to have a
talk with Pride.”
“One of these days you’ll have to sit in with
us,” another groom said, as he always did.
To be fleeced within an inch of his life, for
sure. Joe knew he would be lucky to come out
of a game with his boots, his belt, and his
shirt.
“On payday,” Joe promised, as he always
replied. They laughed and let him be.
Pride. They didn’t call him Dungiven here.
The town the big Irish hunter had been
named for didn’t exist in this world, so the
stallion had been rechristened Pride.
Dungiven had heard his voice, and the big

horse turned around in his stall to greet him,
his liquid eyes catching a bit of light. He
snorted out, whuffing gently against Joe, his
oaty breath warm and thick. The horse’s
muzzle was dark, the black turning to gray
and then almost white. His nostrils flared,
and his ears pricked. Joe rubbed his big
cheek, and the horse snorted again.
Mindful of the grooms’ presence, he didn’t
say aloud what he was thinking. I miss her,
too. He didn’t know horses the way Lynn did,
but he sometimes thought that Dungiven
looked over his shoulder first before looking
at him, as if expecting Lynn to be right there
beside him.
Dungiven snorted again, and his ears cocked
forward, just as the grooms exploded out of
their seats. Joe turned as Mrs. Hunt came in.
She acknowledged the grooms and their
startled cries of “My lady!” with a graceful
nod, but she came straight over to Joe and
Dungiven.
Joe tried to keep his expression neutral. If she
were here, Lord Tharp wouldn’t be far
behind, and he didn’t want to have to deal
with the man and his jealousy. Hearing them

fight or watching as they punished each other
with icy silences was bad enough. She never
should of come back. He wondered why she
did. She could have just pointed him and
Arrim in the right direction, after all. Likely
it had been out of guilt for opening up the
gordath all those years ago and causing a war
over her disappearance. He and Arrim had
talked about it and decided that they better
keep her away from the woods in case she had
a change of heart and started things up all
over again.
She stopped a few feet away from him. He
didn’t know if she had come here to talk or
just to take in the horse, like him, so he waited
for her to make the first move.
“Joe,” she said in her even voice.
“Ma’am,” he said courteously.
She didn’t say anything for a while. He
studied her, her face lost in the dim light. She
came up on Dungiven’s off side and laid her
hand against the stallion’s neck. The horse’s
skin quivered, but he stayed still, one ear
tilted back—not flattened, as when a horse is
angry, but attentive.
“You come here often,” she said. It was a

statement, but it was so close to a come-on he
almost laughed. She couldn’t have known
that. Or maybe, since she had lived seven
years in New York, she knew exactly what it
meant.
“Yes, ma’am,” he said. “I just like to keep an
eye on him.” Dungiven was one of them, after
all. He didn’t say that to Mrs. Hunt though.
He didn’t think she would like being lumped
together with the barn handyman and a
horse.
She gave a small laugh, and he could sense the
grooms’ shock. “He reminds me of home as
well.”
Busted, he thought. She knew exactly why he
came to the stables, and it wasn’t just to
check on the big horse. But her words
bespoke a dangerous homesickness. Aware of
the grooms’ interest, Joe tried to be tactful.
He kept his voice low.
“Ma’am, best you don’t think of New York as
home.”
She looked at him over the horse’s mane.
“Perhaps,” she said, and he knew that would
be the most he would get. She gave the horse a
final pat and turned to face Joe head-on, her

expression lost in the darkness of night.
“I should go. Eyvig will wonder where I am,
and I know you are not comfortable with me
here.”
He was about to protest, even though she had
the right of it, when she forestalled him.
“Sometimes, I just need someone to call me
Mrs. Hunt. Or ma’am.”
He heard the smile in her voice, overlaid with
the faintest of tears, so he gave her what she
needed.
“Good night, Mrs. Hunt.”
“Good night, Joe.”
He watched her go, the grooms so shocked at
the familiarity of their conversation that their
card game was forgotten. Joe sighed. Their
meeting would be all over the stronghold in
no time; the only thing that ran faster than
the river in Red Gold Bridge was gossip. God
only knew how Lord Tharp would take it.
Well, he and Arrim would be out in the woods
soon enough, and Tharp would just have to
stew.
Joe woke in his small cell, groggy and
disoriented, with only the faintest memory of

a dream to disturb him. He lay shivering with
the blankets kicked half off, the rest a tangle,
and tried to figure things out. It was
pitch-black, the small fire on the hearth
having gone out while he slept, and the
darkness pressed down on him. His vision
played tricks on him, making him think he
could see sparks and flickers of light, so he
closed his eyes. The cold stronghold air
rushed over his bare chest, chilling him.
What woke me? He couldn’t remember his
dream except for a sense of foreboding. He
sat up, untangling himself from the twisted
blankets, and groped for his candle and rough
matches. He scratched the match on the wall,
and the light flared, the acrid smell of sulfur
making his eyes water. He lit the candle and
set it into the sconce on the side of the bed.
The darkness retreated sullenly as his eyes
adjusted.
Even before he reached out, he could sense it.
The gordath was open.
“Shit,” Joe swore under his breath. A
sorry-ass excuse for a guardian he was. It
should have been the first thing he thought
of. He reached out tentatively. It wasn’t like

the last winter, when he first encountered a
full-on gordath that had been out of control
for months. Back then, the power was like a
roaring turbine, overwhelming, dangerous,
malevolent. This felt urgent but distant.
His gear sat at the foot of the bed. Joe put his
feet on the floor and cursed again at the cold.
He searched for his socks, found them, and
put them on, then his jeans and shirt. It was
too cold to stay naked, and he wasn’t about to
cower under the covers until morning. As he
drew on his boots, he tried to shake the last
remnants of sleep from his head. He grabbed
the candle, holding it carefully so as not to
drip wax down onto his fingers, and pushed
open his door, just as Arrim stood about to
open it, dressed and ready to go with his own
candle, his pack slung over his shoulder.
“Good,” the other man said, with no other
preamble. He jerked his head. “Let’s go,
Guardian.”
Joe grabbed his pack, glad he had kept it
ready. He followed Arrim, their flickering
candlelight throwing crazy shadows on the
wall, glistening where the walls were damp.
He wasn’t sure whether to be pissed off or

worried. A little of both, he thought. He
didn’t know what time it was, but if he wasn’t
going to get a full night’s sleep after two
weeks of deadheading through the woods, he
was going to have to have a come-to-Jesus
talk with whoever was messing around with
the gordath.
And if it were Mrs. Hunt, he was going to be
seriously pissed.
The tall, narrow house stood in a clearing in
Gordath Wood between three tall trees, its
rough stone weathered by time. It looked
ancient, as if it were older than the forest
itself. Narrow, vertical slits scarred the old
stone. Its slate roof was broken. Where leaves
had fallen and decayed, creating soil, a
garden of moss and other plants grew among
the slate. The house looked like a tor, a jagged
mountain upthrust from the forest floor. The
gordath, the portal between the worlds, was
centered on this house. Joe knew that it lived
in two places, at the end of a run-down lane
in hunt country in upstate New York, and
here, in Aeritan. Once the guardians lived
here, Arrim had told him, but they had

abandoned the house to live in Red Gold
Bridge between patrols. He didn’t say why,
but Joe figured that it was because the
guardians felt the same thing he felt every
time he was near the place. The power of the
gordath was most on edge here, most alive,
most conducive to opening. It was dangerous
to be too close to it, even if your job was to
keep it closed.
The clearing was quiet, dark. It was high
summer in Aeritan, but the forest stayed cool.
“What do you think?” he asked Arrim,
keeping his voice low.
Arrim gestured toward the door. “Make sure
no one’s here. I want to take a look around
the clearing.”
Joe pushed open the heavy wooden door,
putting his shoulder behind it as the door
stuck. The wood scraped across the threshold
with a dull squeak. The bottom floor was a
bare room, and the cold from the stone floor
seeped into his old boots. A fireplace hulked
at one corner, debris collecting on the hearth.
There were a few remaining cartons that had
once held shells for the guns that Bahard had
run from New York to Aeritan, but the boxes

were empty, and the cardboard had gotten
clammy and fallen apart. The guns
themselves—well, no one knew what had
happened to them. The Aeritan Council had
confiscated what they could at the end of last
year’s war, but Joe knew how that went.
Plenty of guns to go around. At least there
was a shortage of ammunition, and he
doubted that Aeritan had the technology to
make more. The smiths and metalwrights
were good, but there was only so much they
could do, and making modern ammo was
beyond their capabilities. Nothing to stop a
little reverse engineering, though, he thought.
An enterprising Aeritan engineer could
probably figure out how to make a decent
facsimile of a modern gun if they took one
apart.
The air inside was cold, and the house felt
abandoned. Joe headed up the narrow stairs.
Cold light spilled in on the landing, more
debris in the corners and beneath the
windows. At the top, he pushed open a door
to one room. Empty.
The gathering emptiness in the house pressed
down on him, and the gordath throbbed

along with his heartbeat. It lived, he thought.
Maybe it wasn’t like a human, or even an
animal, but it lived.
He thought he could perceive an extra edge
this time, a malevolent intention. It wanted to
be open, and it knew Joe was its enemy.
Joe opened the next door and looked around.
Something compelled him, and he stepped
over to the narrow window, leaning on the
rough sill to get a better view. The ground
was very far below. To his eyes, everything
looked ordinary. There was the clearing, and
the door in the ground to the root cellar—he
could just make out the iron ring half
submerged in fallen leaves that pulled the
door up and open. The trees shot straight up
into the overcast sky.
He frowned into the distance, between the
trees. For a second something flickered, and
he thought he could see . . .
Then it was gone, and he couldn’t tell if he
had really seen telephone wires or if it had
just been his eyes trying to make familiar
sense of tree branches. He knew better than to
look again. To distract himself and break the
gordath’s hold, he turned away from the

window. In the corner of the room stood a
cask hidden by shadows and covered with
debris that had blown in from the weather
over the past seasons. It wasn’t that big; it
stood about knee-high on four ornately
carved legs. Joe went over and brushed off
the leaves and dirt composting on it. It looked
like a lady’s jewelry box, even had a pretty
little clasp on it. He tried to lift the lid, but it
stuck. The lock was mostly decorative,
though, and no match for his knife. He
gouged at the lock and snapped it free. The
lid creaked open.
Joe stared down at the stacks of American
currency neatly arrayed inside the chest.
“ Joe! ”
Arrim’s voice rose faintly from the clearing,
startling Joe. He came back to himself and
hesitated. The money’s worthless here, he told
himself. Only good for starting a fire, or
maybe stuffing inside a lumpy straw mattress.
So why he wanted to grab it and stow it in his
pack was beyond him.
He went over to the window. Arrim looked up
at him. “Find anything?” he called out.

“Nothing,” Joe shouted back. “Nobody’s been
here in months.”
At least, not since Mark Ballard hid his
payment for running guns between New York
and Aeritan on the Aeritan side of the
gordath. It was better than a bank and easier
than laundering money. No one who would
know what it was worth would ever find it,
and it was safe until Mark needed it. Until
now.
And I can’t take it. Carry that money around
long enough, and he would go crazy. Carry
that money, and it would take no effort at all
for the gordath to open, unlocked by greed,
desire, and homesickness. He should burn it,
but he knew he wouldn’t. Instead, he lowered
the lid to the little chest and left it behind.
He came down the stairs again to find Arrim
kneeling in the clearing. The guardian swept
his hand over the dirt and twigs as if he were
looking for something. Joe watched him,
puzzled. The master guardian could be
closemouthed with his secrets. Joe could ask
him what he was looking for, and all he might
get was a vague, “I don’t know,” or “What do
you think?” It was maddening, and it forced

Joe to rely on his own intuition, which, he
suspected, was the point.
Arrim stood. “All right,” he said. “Ready?”
Joe nodded. He closed his eyes, gathering his
strength.
“Don’t get lost in the woods,” the
forestholders said. “You never know where
you will end up.” The gordath reached out
and gathered in solitary travelers before they
knew they had been taken. That’s what had
happened to Lynn last year when she rode
Dungiven home through the Wood by
herself. Probably didn’t even know what had
happened to her, Joe thought. Not till she
came to Red Gold Bridge, and probably not
even then . . . He mentally shook himself and
refocused. As if it knew it was being thwarted,
the gordath hummed harder, but that could
have just been because Joe was concentrating
now. He could feel Arrim gathering his own
strength, and their breathing synchronized.
He and Arrim and the gordath all breathed
together the same, until he lost track of just
which one he was.
When he first closed the gordath back in the
winter, he knew instinctively what to do. The

gordath had been out of control, but in a way,
that made it easier—brute force answered
with brute force. He and Arrim had joined
forces, and the gordath backed down, folded
in on itself, and closed up. This time it was
like trying to hold water in his cupped hands.
He couldn’t get a handle on it. The more he
tried to grab hold and force it to stay still, the
less control he had. Sweat ran down his face
and soaked his shirt.
“Dammit,” he muttered, losing the
connection. He could hear Arrim shift beside
him and knew that the guardian was having
the same trouble. Joe tried again, and his
shallow trance broke even more easily this
time. Joe opened his eyes and looked up,
disgusted. Arrim snapped a curse of his own.
He looked at Joe, his wild hair damp and
matted.
“What’s going on?” Joe said, frustration
leaking out of his voice. “Why can’t we close
it?” He thought of the money and felt a pang
of guilt. Dammit, is this my fault?
Next to him, Arrim muttered, “Forest god. I
think I know what’s happening.
Thrice-bedamned meddlers.”

“Arrim, you aren’t making any sense.”
“We’re trying to close the wrong gordath.”
“The wrong—” Joe stared at the other
guardian.
Something zinged over their head and
thunked into a nearby tree. A crossbow bolt.
After the first moment of paralysis, Joe and
Arrim turned and bolted for the door. The
clearing erupted as armed men swarmed out
of the woods. Bolts thunked past them,
breaking on the stone walls of the house or
thudding into the door. Joe recognized they
were deliberately shooting high. Men shouted,
and Joe and Arrim hit the door at the same
time, scrabbling for the bar and pushing.
They weren’t fast enough. First Joe was
hauled back and then Arrim, and they were
dropped to the ground, a sword at Arrim’s
throat, a loaded crossbow at Joe’s. His chest
heaved as he struggled to control his
breathing, a rock pressing into his back. The
treetops almost closed out the sun, the sky
white with summer heat. Where the hell is
Tal? Wasn’t that the way it always
was—never a cop around when you needed
one?

There were about a dozen men, dressed in
rough leather and metal armor. They were
masked, all were armed, and about six of
them had crossbows, cocked and ready. His
hunting knife and Arrim’s old machete, used
when they deadheaded through the woods,
were taken, and then they were pulled up
roughly and their hands tied behind their
backs.
When they were secure, one man approached
them. He was masked like all the others, but
his armor was finer, his boots sturdy and
well-made. You can always tell a lord in
Aeritan, Joe thought. Just look at the shoes.
Of course, not even Lord Tharp carried a
handgun the way this man did.
The leader spoke through his mask, his words
muffled. “Guardians. Do as you are told, and
you won’t be harmed.”
Joe glanced over at Arrim. The man nodded.
He was pale and kept swallowing. Joe knew
how he felt. This was bad. They were in big
trouble.
It got worse. Another man stepped up next to
the leader, dressed in hunting camo and
carrying a nice hunting rifle that Joe would

have coveted when he was younger.
“Joe Felz,” said Mark Ballard with a grin. He
was bearded and shaggy, and he looked like
he had seen better days, but the unearned
cockiness was still there, although Joe had to
admit, the rifle backed him up. “Never
thought I’d see you here. This must be a step
up, right? You got tired of shoveling horse
shit?”
Joe nodded at him cordially. “Mark. Still
brownnosing?”
Furious, Mark swung on him, but the leader
pulled him back by the collar of his heavy
hunting jacket, now stained and weathered
after a year or more of constant use. The
leader stood in front of Mark. He didn’t say
anything. He didn’t have to. Mark pointed at
Joe.
“If he mouths off to me again, I’ll kick his
ass.”
The masked lord said, “If you disobey my
orders again, I’ll have Drav kick yours.”
Joe guessed that the man he referred to was
the hulking guard who turned around at his
name. Drav grinned under his mask, and
Mark folded. Joe shook his head. It was cold

comfort that Mark Ballard was barely better
off than him and Arrim, but he’d take his
comfort any way he knew how.
The leader jerked his head at the house. “Go
find your coin and hurry and don’t take long.
We are far from welcome here.”
Coin, huh? Uh-oh.
Mark sulked, but he went into the house. Joe
waited, his skin prickling. He had no doubt
what Mark was looking for, but what the man
thought he was going to use American money
for in Aeritan, he had no idea.
The clearing stayed quiet while they waited on
Mark. Joe looked around, taking in their
kidnappers. They were professional soldiers.
He and Arrim were well and truly screwed.
They all watched as the pretty little chest
sailed out of the top floor window and fell to
the forest floor, its legs and lid smashed open.
When Mark came out again, he was whistling.
He ruffled the last of the stacks before
shoving the money into his pack.
“Sweet,” he said cheerfully. “A hundred
grand, just like I left it. Hear that, Felz? Hare
and I are going into business together, and
you and your buddy here are going to help.”

“Don’t use my name.” The
leader—Hare—spoke tight little words that
screamed of rage. Mark looked startled.
“What? It’s not even your real name.”
Joe barely kept from rolling his eyes. Shut up,
man, he thought, but he knew Mark wouldn’t.
Hare’s voice was still barely under control
when he spoke again.
“Are you through, Lord Bahard? Maybe you
would like to visit Red Gold Bridge again, and
tell Lord Tharp of our plans? Or perhaps we
can take our leave, now that we have what we
need, and get on with it.”
Mark just shrugged. “Yeah, I got what I
wanted. You have the guardians. We’re set.”
Joe and Arrim were pushed into line,
separated by several guards, and hustled off.
Crap, Joe thought. What have we gotten
ourselves into?
Two
Night had fallen over Hunter’s Chase. Lynn
finished her walk-through of the hill barn,
peeking in on the horses drowsily finishing
their hay, a few already dozing. The warmth
of the barn, with its aroma of wood shaving

bedding and oats, the heavy scent of horses
and manure, enveloped her. She took a last
look around, turned off the light, and pulled
the heavy doors together. Outside, the stars
twinkled faintly in a light-drenched sky. It
never really got dark anymore, not even out
in the country. She remembered the night on
the plains in Aeritan, the stars a cold, burning
swath across a strange sky.
Was Joe looking at those stars? Was Crae?
Sometimes, lying in bed alone, she thought of
the choice she could have made with Crae,
implicit in their stolen kisses. She could have
stayed in Aeritan with him, and then only one
man would have haunted her sleep, not two.
Maybe it was better not to have to make the
choice. Sure, it was the coward’s way out, but
how could she be happy with Crae if she knew
it meant she could never be with Joe?
Unwillingly she let herself turn to the barn
apartment, its windows dark and lifeless. She
had loved Joe. She was pretty sure he had
loved her.
If I had to do it over, she told him silently, I
never would have ridden home through the
woods last year. Not if it meant never seeing you

again.
And as a consolation prize, she got Hunter’s
Chase. Now that had been a surprise, when
Lady Sarita signed over the stables to her. In
a couple of ways, the gift had been more of a
curse. The business of running the stables had
been a sobering experience. Lynn sometimes
felt the harder she worked, the faster she fell
behind. On the other hand, the beauty of the
place seeped into her, and she felt blessed that
she had the guardianship of it. There was no
other word, she reflected, even if guardian
had taken on a load of new meanings since
last year.
The air was cool, flowing, the heat from the
midsummer day long gone. The cool raised
goose bumps on her bare arms. Lynn rubbed
her arms absently as she headed down the
gravel path to the house, its warm lights
inviting. Headlights caught her eye as a car
turned up the drive, rumbling slowly over to
the main barn.
Whoever it was parked next to Joe’s old car,
still sitting there from last year, Queen
Anne’s lace growing up around the wheels.
Lynn tsked in annoyance. It didn’t look like a

client’s car. Who would be coming to the
barn at this hour?
She walked over as the person got out of the
old station wagon.
“Can I help you?” she called out.
The woman turned, her features indistinct.
“Are you Katherine Hunt?” she said, her
accent tinged with something foreign.
Lynn’s blood ran cold.
“She isn’t here anymore,” she said carefully.
“I’m Lynn Romano. I own Hunter’s Chase.”
The woman sighed. There was just enough
light for Lynn to make her out. She was older,
in her fifties, her face fleshy and strong. She
had once been very beautiful and still had
remnants of it.
“Then maybe you can help me,” she said, and
Lynn began to peg the accent. “I’m really
looking for Joe Felz. I’m Isabella Felz. He’s
my son.”
You are an idiot, Lynn, she told herself as she
brought in two cups of coffee, decaf for Mrs.
Felz. She should have told her Joe was gone,
and she had no idea where, and sent her on
her way. The woman sat in the living room in

the low light, looking around at all the silver
cups and ribbons, the photos of horses past
and present, the old elegant furniture that
had Mrs. Hunt’s stamp all over it. She smiled
at Lynn’s approach.
“Oh, thank you,” she said. “You are being
very kind.”
“I wish I could help you,” Lynn said, taking
the other chair. “But Joe left last year.”
“He didn’t say where he was going.” It wasn’t
a question.
Lynn shook her head, forced herself to sip so
she wouldn’t say too much. Mrs. Felz sighed.
“That was him. He never told us where he
was, even as a boy. He had a tree fort in the
cot tonwoods along the creek, and he’d sleep
up there for days. The day he got his license
was the day I knew we wouldn’t be seeing him
for much longer.”
Tears stung Lynn’s eyes. She had known
nothing about Joe.
“We got mail from an address in Connecticut,
so I started there. I drove up all last week. But
his landlord said that Joe had been in jail,
that he had murdered someone. And he
didn’t know what happened to him, that he

thought he might have jumped bail.” Mrs.
Felz put down her coffee and groped for a
tissue from her pocket. She cried for a few
minutes, and her next words were almost
indecipherable. “He couldn’t have. Not my
Joe.” She looked at Lynn. “Is that what you
meant, when you said he left?”
Lynn didn’t know what to say. “No,
I—well—” She stopped, warning bells going
off in her head. Whatever lie she told could
only get her deeper in trouble, and this
mother, who had driven all the way up from
Texas, was not about to leave any stone
unturned. “I knew Joe, and he wouldn’t have
killed anyone. He worked with me, and he was
a good man.” I loved him, and I wish I could
tell you that. It was hard; every step was
dangerous.
She found a tissue from the box on the table
between them and handed it to Mrs. Felz. The
woman blew her nose and wiped it.
“Why didn’t he take his car?” she said
thickly.
“His—car?”
“That’s his car, isn’t it? The one I parked
next to? If he was running away, I mean.”

Lynn didn’t say anything, pressing her lips
tightly shut. Blood hammered in her temples.
At her silence, Mrs. Felz looked up.
“Yes, it’s his car.”
A frown furrowed deep between the woman’s
eyebrows. “So why didn’t he take it?”
“I don’t know.” At Mrs. Felz’s confusion,
Lynn threw up her hands. “I don’t know! He
went away, and I don’t know what happened
to him. I wish I did. Like you, I hope every day
that he’s okay.”
“Oh,” Mrs. Felz said. A smile appeared.
“You’re the girl.”
“I beg your pardon?”
“I talked to him last summer—he called. He
hardly ever did that. He told us he met
someone. His daddy was upset, of course,
because he knew it was one more thing to
keep Joe from coming back, but I was happy
for him.”
“He told you about me?”
“Not much, but I could tell he was happy.”
Despite herself, Lynn smiled. Mrs. Felz
started crying again.
“I’m so sorry. I am just so worried about him,
and I miss him, and I want him to come

home.”
If he did his job right, he would never come
home.
Joe’s mother got herself together and stood.
“Thank you. You’ve been very helpful. Do
you mind telling me how to find a motel?”
There was nothing for miles, and she would
surely get lost on the country roads trying to
find her way to town. Lynn sighed.
“I have a better idea,” she said.
It was strange to see a light in the apartment
over the barn. Lynn watched it until it flicked
off, and then she went up to her own
bedroom. She had made sure the apartment
was kept clean, in part because she knew that
at some point she was going to need a barn
manager. It was perfect for Joe’s mom. Mrs.
Felz carried up her small case and thanked
Lynn as if she had given her a suite at a fancy
hotel.
As she crawled into bed she thought, This is a
very bad idea. Very bad. Mrs. Felz was asking
all the right questions. It was only a matter of
time before she started to put things together.
She’d never get the right answer, of course,

only the logical one—that Joe was dead and
Lynn had something to do with it. She stared
up at the ceiling, lost in the darkness, and
listened to the beat of her heart.
Oh, Joe, she thought. I wish you were here.
Driving home from the horse show, Kate
rested her head against the window of her
mom’s car, the cool of the summer afternoon
pleasant against her skin. She was still in
show clothes—midnight blue jacket,
fawn-colored breeches, and white shirt—but
her stock was unpinned, and her hair hung in
limp strands around her face. She had tossed
her boots in the backseat, along with a few
ribbons she had won with Allegra, the
Hunter’s Chase mare she was riding for
Lynn. Her stocking feet were propped up on
the dashboard.
It had been a good show. The mare was
difficult and moody, nothing like her sweet
Mojo. But Mojo had died on the battlefield
outside Red Gold Bridge, and so Kate had
been working with the difficult horse. The
riding mostly made her parents happy. She
figured that way they could think everything

was back to normal. And it had gotten fun
again, but she could already tell it was no
longer her whole life, the way it used to be.
B.A.—Before Aeritan, she thought.
She moved restlessly against her seat belt. Her
back itched. Her mom glanced at her.
“Are you okay, honey? We can call Dr.
Gilbert if the skin grafts are bothering you.
She said there are some things she can give
you.”
“It’s not that bad. I probably just got some
dust down my shirt.”
“Well, take a shower when you get home.”
Kate nodded, rubbing her forehead against
the window. Her mom went on, keeping an
eye on traffic, “So, did you get a chance to
look at those college Web sites I bookmarked?
And you also want to take a look at your
résumé. I was talking with Miranda Bolton,
and she said Sophie has been putting together
a portfolio of all of her extracurriculars, and I
think that’s something we should do, too. It’s
not too early to start, and we don’t want to
leave it till too late.”
“I know,” Kate said, trying to face down
rising panic. “I just—it’s hard to think about

all of that.” Every time she thought of junior
year—the make-or-break year, as everyone
kept on saying ominously—she wanted to run
shrieking for the woods.
“Well, you know, it’s something colleges want
nowadays. Your grades are good, your test
scores are good, but Harv—colleges are
looking for something extra. And I’m afraid
that you’ve spent so much time on riding, that
hasn’t left much time for putting in
community service.”
Well, let’s see. I extracted bullets from bodies
without anesthesia and sewed them up, I helped
set broken legs, I made all sorts of medicines
and drafts to fight infections that soldiers died
from anyway, I rode a horse into battle as a
courier, and I stole a car. What would Harvard
think of that?
Kate took a breath. “Okay,” she said. “I . . .”
Her voice trailed off as her mother slowed for
a red light. Kate caught sight of someone
standing in the long shadows on the side of
the road, and she turned to look as her
mother stopped the car.
Tall, dark, longish-haired. His clothes . . .
His clothes were Aeritan clothes.

Time stopped. She looked up, her eyes drawn
upward without her control. He looked back
at her, his eyes as black as his lank hair.
“Go! Go, Mommy, go! Drive!” Kate heard the
screaming, realized it was herself.
“Kate!” The car jerked forward but slammed
to a stop as Mrs. Mossland realized cross
traffic was still streaming.
“Drivedrivedrivedrive! Mom, please go!”
How had he come here? How had he gotten
through?
“Kate, my God . . . What is it?”
The light turned finally, and the car sped
forward, Mrs. Mossland trying to talk to
Kate, and Kate lost in her tears.
“It was the general, Mom. It was him.”
She knew her mom was talking to her dad in
the kitchen downstairs. Unable to sit still, she
paced around her bedroom in her old pajama
bottoms and a tank top, her hair wet from
her shower. Pictures of Mojo stared at her
from shelf space all over the room,
intermixed with blue ribbons and silver cups,
horse posters and model horses, and a few
stuffed animals from her childhood.

When she first got back from Aeritan, she
had walked around her room this way for
hours, everything unfamiliar, her anxiety
making her pace like a racehorse. Only
gradually, when her brain reset to Earth
mode, could she be soothed and take comfort
again from her memories.
Sighting General Marthen made her feel as if
she were back in camp once more.
Colar sat at her computer desk, still in his
shorts and T-shirt from lacrosse practice. His
forearms were thick from practice—well, she
thought, she supposed that they were pretty
well- muscled from swordsmanship, too.
“You sure?” he said.
She sighed, adjusting her tank top strap. “I
don’t know. Sometimes—sometimes I think I
see him everywhere. But this was different.
Only, he was in the long shadows—and he, it
just—”
“You can’t keep something like the portal
closed forever,” he said thoughtfully.
“Why would he come here?” She felt another
jolt when she remembered the way he looked
at her through the windows of her mom’s car.
When he had her beaten in the center of

camp, he kept his eyes on her the whole time.
She felt an overflowing of rage and despair,
of hatred and helplessness, once again. I will
kill him, she thought. I have to kill him. But
she couldn’t; he was a general, a warrior. She
couldn’t hold her own against him. She
glanced at Colar. He’d fight for me, she
thought, and in the next moment she
thought, No. Because he would lose, too. He
was a warrior, but he was also a kid.
And what am I, a princess who needs a
champion? If Marthen were here, she needed
to deal with him herself.
“He came because of you,” Colar said
practically. For a second his face went hard,
and he looked like his father, Lord Terrick.
“I don’t want him.”
Colar laughed a little. He swiveled in the
computer chair. “The first thing we need to
do,” he said, “is find out if it was really him.”
“How do we do that?”
He grinned. “We scout.”
When Kate met Colar last year, he had been a
scout in the general’s army. From his look of
anticipation, it seemed like one of the things
he might be homesick for. Lacrosse and

basketball were okay, but Colar was so much
older than the rest of the kids their age. So
was she, for that matter. It got hard to sit in
class last spring after everything that had
happened in camp.
They both looked up at the sound of footsteps
on the stairs. Her dad knocked and poked his
head in. “Kate, we need to talk. Cole, can you
excuse us, please?”
“Yes, sir,” Colar said automatically, getting
up, and Kate caught her dad’s pained
expression. No matter how often he had
invited Colar to call him David, he wouldn’t.
He called his own dad sir. He was hardly
going to be so familiar with her dad. Even if
the Mosslands had become his parents now,
or foster parents at least.
Except, if she had seen General Marthen, then
somehow he had gotten through. And if he
went through, then Colar could go home
again. I could go back, too, she dared to think,
and for a moment she almost forgot to
breathe. Did she want that? Could she want
that?
When Colar left, her dad took his spot at the
desk. “Your mom told me what you thought

you saw,” he said finally.
“I saw him,” Kate said. The lump in her
throat made the words hard to get out. “You
have to believe me.”
“Kate . . .” He sighed, raked his hands
through his hair. “Kate, we can barely believe
what happened to you last winter. Now this?
Look, it’s time to move on. You can’t keep
going back to this—this story.”
“What, you think I’m making it up out of
some sick need? My back, Dad! You saw my
back! You saw what happened, what he
ordered them to do to me!”
“Kate, calm down. Look, it’s not that simple.
Even if he is here, how do we go to the police
about him? No one will believe it, and that
means no one will take it seriously.”
“You mean no one will take you seriously,”
she said, bitterness in her voice. A part of her
knew that it was to their credit her parents
had taken in Colar. They’d had to call in a lot
of favors and lie to a lot of people about
where he came from to make it happen. After
all, he was a boy from nowhere, with no
record of his past, of his parents, of even ever
being in “the system.” It took a lot for her

parents to make a new life for him, a
legitimate life.
They never once said a word about what that
meant for her mother’s career trajectory as
an influential prosecutor or her father’s plans
to be named CEO of a Fortune 500 company.
One whisper about the son fostered under
strange circumstances, and it could all be over
for them.
She knew all this, and it still hurt that they
wouldn’t believe her about what happened
last year.
“So what you’re saying,” she began through
her tears, “is that because no one else will
believe us, you won’t believe me.”
“Kate, I do—your mom and I, we do believe
you. But you have to understand how
far-fetched this all is. And you said that thing
was closed, that no one else could come
through. And now—this general is here? How
are we supposed to take this?” He drew a
breath. “Your mother and I have decided. We
should have done this sooner, but better late
than never.”
They’re sending Colar away. She stared with
dawning horror at her father.

“We think you need to see a therapist.”
Colar of Terrick, heir to the House of Terrick
in Aeritan, but now just Cole Mossland, went
downstairs to the kitchen. Something smelled
good, and he was reminded of the kitchens
back home. The cooks labored all day for the
people of Terrick, the householders and the
lords, visiting villagers, and wandering
peddlers, men-at-arms looking for work,
farmers, crafters, others. The kitchen at
Terrick was never quiet and never dull. As a
kid and even just before he went to war with
his father, he liked to sit in the kitchen and
hear the wanderers’ tales, especially in the
winter when the land was shut down by sleet
and ice.
Here the kitchen was empty more often than
not. The Mossland family usually lived on
takeout. Colar liked Indian, himself. Its spices
and scents were the most like home.
Tonight Mrs. Mossland was cooking. Kate
told him her mom used to cook all the time,
that she loved it and could putter in the
kitchen all day, stirring, chopping, tasting. It
was her rest and her joy, just as his own

mother loved to work the wool from their
sheep into thread and then cloth, dying,
weaving, shaping. She had special songs for
each part of the work that she said worked
the blessing of the grass god’s daughter into
every fiber. He didn’t think Mrs. Mossland
sang to work blessings into her food.
Mrs. Mossland looked up at his approach.
She and Kate had the same fine, straight hair
and the same nose and mouth, but Kate’s eyes
were her father’s, as was the cast of her face.
Mrs. Mossland’s face was flushed from the
heat of the pots. Steam rose from a bubbling
pot of pasta, and in a gleaming skillet she was
sautéing shrimp in butter, garlic, and wine.
His mouth watered.
“Oh, hi, Cole,” she said. She made an
apologetic face. “Is David still upstairs with
Kate?”
Colar nodded. “Can I help?” he asked. He
hadn’t known till he came here that he liked
to cook. Back home his only role in the
kitchen had been to run in, steal dinner, and
run out with his brothers and sister, the cooks
shouting at their backs.
“Sure. Do you want to put together a salad?”

She nodded at the butcher block table where
all the ingredients waited, freshly washed.
The knives were dull again. No one in the
family seemed to know how to keep them
sharp except for Colar. He got out the
sharpener and set to work, the dull scraping
the only sound between them. Mrs. Mossland
seemed almost lost in thought, but he could
tell what was on her mind the way she kept
glancing at the kitchen door.
The silence didn’t bother him. He honed the
knives and thought about what Kate had
discovered. The general had come through,
looking for her, most likely. His cheeks heated
as he remembered what the scouts had talked
about, how the general had taken Kate to
bed. He himself had seen her coming from the
general’s tent late at night. And the general
had her flogged when he found out she and
Colar had kissed. My fault, he thought, but he
couldn’t stop thinking about her, and it was
all mixed up with some idea of stealing her
from the general.
Instead, it had gotten her so badly beaten that
she would bear the scars for life, even with
the skin grafts the doctors here had

performed.
“Cole?” Mrs. Mossland said, and he startled.
He loosened his grip on the knife. The knife
was sharp. He set to chopping bell peppers.
So he could go back. The question was, did he
want to? There was no place for the son of the
lord of Terrick in this country, to be sure, but
that didn’t mean there wasn’t a place for
Cole Mossland, age seventeen, foster son of
the House of Mossland.
School, for one. Going to school was a foreign
experience. He had never been with so many
people his own age, all in one place. And what
they learned! He could read and write in
Aeritan, but the math he was learning now
was far beyond anything he ever could have
been taught, even in Brythern, the seat of
learning. As for science, he couldn’t ask half
the questions he longed to, because most of
the time they were so elementary they were
about things everyone else here already knew.
But he devoured the books, once his brain
reset from going through the portal and he
could learn to read again. There were so
many marvels here that he had thought of
them as magic when he first encountered

them. But it wasn’t magic. It was technology,
and it could be used by anyone, developed by
anyone, and the basic principles were taught
in his books.
Could he leave this behind? He dressed the
salad and put the bowl on the table. The
shrimp scampi waited, steaming in a bowl of
hot pasta, and Mrs. Mossland pulled bread
from the oven. The table was set; there were
even small glasses of wine for Colar and Kate.
“Ah, there you are,” Mrs. Mossland said with
false brightness as Kate and her father came
in. Both were subdued. Kate looked as if she
had been crying. “I thought we were going to
have to send out a scouting party.”
Kate and Colar exchanged glances as they slid
into their seats. The chatter continued, light
and inconsequential, throughout dinner, but
Colar’s thoughts were far away, to a life he
had thought closed to him.
Three
The high windows of the house at Trieve,
some paned with wavering glass, glinted in
the rising sun. The fields at the foot of the
terraced steps were wreathed in early

morning mist, a soft gray just tinged with the
palest yellow. Crae’s breath smoked, even
though it was high summer. Trieve was a
mountain holding, and the air kept its chill.
He wrapped his half cloak around himself,
slung his crossbow and bolts over his back, a
sword hanging in the scabbard at his belt,
and headed for the barn. The old building
hulked in the dawn light. It was older than
the house itself and had once served as the
house for Trieve’s lords, when they had been
holders themselves. Now it loomed in the mist,
an ancient structure of stone and timber.
He pushed open the great door and was
enveloped in the smell of the byre: horses,
cows, manure, hay. Crae sneezed.
“Good morning, my lord,” said one of his
men.
“ ’Morning to you,” Crae said. The cows
lowed, their bags heavy with milk, and the
men chivvied them outside to the milking
barn on the lower terrace. The cows went
willingly; they needed the relief. Crae
watched them go and then pushed open the
half door to his horse’s box.
“So there boy,” he said. The gelding nickered

at him. He was one of Stavin’s horses,
actually. Hero. Stavin’s daughter Tevani had
named him. The big chestnut horse, his coat
and mane a red brown, was tall and sturdy,
tall enough for Crae, who stood a head taller
than his friend had.
Not a day went by that Crae didn’t think of
Stavin and his death on a snowy road on the
outskirts of Red Gold Bridge, or his
friendship, or the fact that everything he now
called his own once belonged to Stavin.
Hero was well-groomed already. The grooms
had brushed him and picked out his feet.
Crae lifted them anyway out of old habit.
When he was captain at Red Gold Bridge, a
year and another life ago, he was only
Captain Crae, and if he didn’t take care of his
own mount, no one else would.
He tacked the horse up himself. Hero fought
the bit sulkily, tossing his head, then settled
down, and Crae led him out. He knew that
the horse enjoyed his early morning rides as
much as Crae did, who liked to scout the
lands surrounding the house as he used to
patrol around Red Gold Bridge. He cleared
the barn and mounted up, just as a little voice

called out to him.
“Lord Crae!” Tevani came running up,
slowing as she had been taught before she got
too close to the horse’s hooves. She waited,
hands on her hips, at four years old looking
like her mother and father both. She wore
thick leggings under her thick skirt, a
half-buttoned shirt over all, which still had
butter and crumbs from her breakfast on it.
Her face, too, it looked like. And her hair . . .
Crae winced. Jessamy, her mother, was likely
looking for her at this minute, ready with a
wet cloth, a hairbrush, and a scolding. “I
want to go, too!”
He leaned down to talk to her. “You’re
covered with butter, Tevani. Lady Jessamy
will want you to go back to the house and get
cleaned.”
Tevani smeared herself more in trying to wipe
up her breakfast. “Lord Crae, please take me
with you. Please? Mama is only busy with
Jori, and Calyne tells me I must be a good
girl, and it’s easier to be good when I’m
riding. And Snowflake is too small,” she
added, referring to her pony and preempting
his suggestion.

If he took her up he would only incur
Jessamy’s wrath all the more—not that it was
hard to do. But she looked so forlorn, and he
had always been too easy with her. I must be
sterner, he thought, but it never seemed to be
the right time. Stavin had always spoiled her
rotten, too.
“All right,” Crae said. “But only for a little,
and then you must go into the house.
Agreed?”
She hopped up and down. “Yes! You are the
best lord of Trieve after my father!”
She couldn’t have seen him wince. He
dismounted, picked her up, and swung her
into the saddle. He mounted again behind
her. She immediately took the reins, her
hands at the proper angles. Hero snorted and
threw up his head but obeyed when Crae
added pressure behind the girth.
“Can we gallop?” she said as they went down
the terraced slope, Hero half sitting before
jumping down each level. Tevani rode it well
for someone whose legs were so short she
couldn’t really straddle the saddle. She was a
good little rider though. Born to it, fearless,
with an instinctive sureness in her that horses

responded to. Not sure where that came from,
Crae thought. Stavin didn’t have the
attentiveness, and Jessamy was an indifferent
horsewoman.
“Not downhill, Tev. Maybe at the bottom.”
“Here?” she asked at the next level.
“The bottom, Tev. When we reach the road.”
She giggled at each of Hero’s little jumps, and
Crae decided that the company wasn’t so bad
after all. She chattered happily, and he
listened with half an ear, as the fog burned
off and the sun rose behind them, making
their shadows impossibly long.
When they reached the road, Crae took the
reins and pulled up Hero to let the horse rest.
It was hard riding the terrace. Downhill
required concentration and balance. Uphill
was even worse, not just because of the incline
but because each level was at just the right
height and length to keep most horses from
taking a comfortable stride, especially one
carrying an armed rider.
It was an effective defense.
After a bit he let Tevani have the reins again,
and they began walking along the road,
Hero’s hooves clopping pleasantly along the

hard-packed dirt. A tumbledown stone wall,
holding back uncultivated scrub and second
growth, followed roughly along the road as it
wound around the foot of the hill, meeting a
rougher road that undulated through the
scrub, lost in the sunrise and the fog. He knew
that road. More than half a year ago he had
ridden it with Lynna. It led to the plains, and
beyond that Red Gold Bridge, and beyond
that, Gordath Wood. And beyond that, he
thought, to somewhere else, where she now
lived and he could not go.
Hero snorted and shied. Crae thought he
heard a crack or a rustle, and old habits
leaped to the fore. Even as Tevani giggled at
the sudden movement, he reached behind
himself for the crossbow, cursing his ill luck
for bringing her. She hampered him—she
could be in danger—he could not load a
crossbow with her in front of him.
All of this he thought in a flash as he caught
Hero behind the girth with his heel and faced
the sound.
Just a stray sheep, he thought, even as a head
peeked over the tumbledown stone wall, and
then another. Not crows. Not crows.

They were crows. Holdless, ragged men, they
had been plaguing the countryside for months
after the war set off by Red Gold Bridge.
Crae could not ride fast enough up the
terraces without being swarmed by crows. He
would have to hold them off so that Tevani
could escape.
Crae swung over Hero’s haunches, crossbow
up, knowing that he was doomed. He drew his
sword with his other hand and spared a
glance for the girl, her small face white and
frightened now. She had the reins. Her little
legs were in perfect position.
“Ride, Tevani!” he roared. He smacked Hero
on the hindquarters, and the horse squealed
and bolted, Tevani’s scream as high-pitched.
She stayed on, though, as Hero carried them
both away from danger.
As the crows boiled over the wall at him, he
could think of only one thing: if they didn’t
kill him, Jessamy surely would.
There were six crows. Crae dropped his
useless crossbow but took two of the bolts
from the quiver, holding them point out, the
sword in the other hand. The crows carried

staffs and mauls. He took in all the
information he could, backing up to the
terrace to keep any from getting behind him.
They came on, grinning, the odds in their
favor. They were all ragged and skinny, their
teeth brown and broken. Lordless men, he
thought. Lawless men. A murder of crows.
Two broke ahead and attacked, swinging
their makeshift weapons, no less deadly for all
that, and nearly taking one another out
before they reached Crae. He grinned, too.
That was the problem with mobs: they could
be as dangerous to one another as they could
to their prey.
He ducked a swinging maul, the momentum
taking the man around with it, and brought
up the crossbow bolt. It caught the man in the
back, and he screamed. Crae took the other
man with his sword through his belly, coming
in under the staff. It smacked down on his
arm, but by then he had already skewered the
crow, and the blow lacked force. Crae kicked
the man off his sword and back at his fellows.
The rest came on, but by then he had killed or
maimed the two.
They gave wordless cries of rage and fear.

Crae roared back. A staff caught him a
ringing blow, and light crashed in his head.
He stumbled backward, knocked off his feet.
He lost his sword and cursed himself for
giving them another weapon, a good weapon.
He struggled up, only to be knocked down
again. His right arm was useless, and a maul
crashed down on his shin. Forest god, help me
...
No. There was no forest god here.
Our Father, who art in heaven . . .
Where had those words come from?
Lynn had said them in the forest when they
had come upon the smallholding that had
been crushed by the earthshaking. She had
summoned her god from across the portal to
help the forest god lay the dead to rest.
He had to summon . . . he had to summon his
own god. But he had no god. Not the forest
god of Red Gold Bridge, or the sky god of
Wessen. Nor the gods of any lowly captains . .
. Crae scrabbled for his remaining crossbow
bolt and drove it upward, catching one of his
attackers in the thigh. The man screamed and
dropped back.
Three. I can take three. He pushed himself

backward and grabbed the maul by the
middle of the shaft. He could hardly lift it,
one-handed, but the crows fell back.
“I am Lord Crae,” he said. He pushed to his
feet, balancing on his good leg, shaking with
effort. “This is my land. Mine!” He lifted the
maul over his head, barely able to control it,
the weight almost taking him over backward.
He roared again, as wordless as the crows. “I
am lord of Trieve! I summon the lord’s god! I
am Crae of Trieve!”
Something happened. Something changed.
The light was different. The crows were
different. A blazing went through him. The
pain faded, though he knew that was just the
blood pumping hard in his veins. When he
had been raised by the Council and given
lordship over Trieve, they had told him, “It is
the will of the high god.” He had felt nothing
then.
Now he felt it, the high god’s will, like a light
going on inside his head. Trieve was his, but
more, he was Trieve’s.
Had Stavin ever felt this? Had Jessamy?
He roared again. “This is my land! Begone!”
They backed away and fled, leaving behind

their two dead and one maimed. The man he
had hamstrung tried to crawl off, and Crae
watched his laboring progress. He lowered the
maul and let it drop, and looked with dazed
disinterest at the blood dripping between his
fingers.
As he stood there, a thundering of hoofbeats
rose up behind him, and Trieve’s men—his
men—galloped down the terraces to his
rescue. They saw the crows, and some gave
chase, shouting. Another went to kill the man
still crawling, his sword raised.
Crae held up a hand. “Wait.”
They all turned to look at him, at the bloody,
ruined figure of their lord. “Bring him to the
house. I want to talk to him.”
Then everything went black.
When he woke again, he was in his own bed in
his own chamber. It had been the one he had
been used to when he guested at Trieve as
Captain Crae, Lord Stavin’s common friend.
It had not seemed right to move into Stavin’s
chamber, even though it was his now. And he
and Jessamy, though married, did not share a
bed. She had been near to giving birth to

Stavin’s son at the time of their wedding for
one, and Jori was still a babe. Crae looked
around, awareness of the present coming
back to him. The horse doctor Truarch was
there and Calyne, Trieve’s housekeeper. His
arm was bandaged and splinted. He used his
other hand to feel his head. Bandaged as well.
The horse doctor bent over him when he saw
Crae move.
“Stay still,” he ordered. “You almost got
killed.”
“I know,” Crae whispered. It was all his voice
could do. He turned his head. “Tevani?”
Calyne came up to him, putting a cool,
careworn hand against his cheek.
“Fine, fine, Lord Crae,” she said, her eyes
wet. “She was frightened, but she rode
straight home and told us you needed help.
She’s been begging us to let her see you.”
His mouth moved tiredly in a smile. “Tell her
in a few days.” He didn’t want her to see him
like this. He remembered something else.
“Does the crow live?”
Calyne and Truarch exchanged glances. The
horse doctor replied. “He lives, Lord Crae,
but we don’t understand . . .”

Crae hardly did himself. “Where is he?”
“In the storeroom by the kitchen. It has the
only lock, and Vanar, the blacksmith from the
village, gave us a stout chain as well.”
Crae nodded. “Keep him as well as you can.”
He fought the weariness, managing to ask one
more thing. “Jessamy?”
“She wants to let you rest,” Calyne said, a
little tremulously.
“I need to talk to her.”
“She . . . the baby . . . Lord Crae, you are still
not well, and she is still tired, and her brother
is coming . . .”
“Send her in.”
It would enrage her to be summoned, but he
needed to talk with her. Enough of this
pussyfooting around. Trieve will suffer if I do
not take up my lordship. He remembered little
of the battle, but he knew what had
happened. He had called on the high god, and
the high god had answered.
He slept a bit then and was roused by voices
and the crying of the baby boy. Crae opened
his eyes, and there was Jessamy sitting by his
bed, hushing the baby and studiously not
looking at him.

He waited until she looked up. Her color rose,
and he saw that her kerchief was askew. She
never could keep it right as a good lady
should. Her shining brown hair peeked out
over her forehead. Her brown eyes met his,
her mouth straight with displeasure.
“Well, are you satisfied?” she snapped.
“Taking her out there with you, then leaving
her to ride home by herself for help? She’s
four years old, Crae! You endangered her life.
You have no idea of all the things that could
have happened to her.”
“Do you want to go home to Favor?” he said.
He still could only whisper, and she had to
lean forward to catch his words. When they
struck home, her lips parted. She paled.
“Are you sending me away?”
The baby squalled, and she looked down at
him, soothing him with a broken whisper.
Crae made an impatient movement with his
good hand, though he couldn’t do much.
“Not . . . what I meant,” he managed. “I
meant . . . is Trieve your home? Or is Favor?”
Her brother was lord of Favor. He had been
on the other side of the Aeritan war, siding
with the Council. Jessamy’s husband had

sided with Lord Tharp and Red Gold Bridge.
The rift had driven the family apart.
“Trieve is my home, Crae. You can’t—you
can’t mean to send me away. The
Council—when we married, that voided the
Council resolution against me.”
“I’m not sending you away. Listen.” He was
losing his strength. “Something happened
when the crows attacked. I called on the high
god—and he came.”
Her voice was impatient. “Of course. When
the Council elevated you, you took the high
god as your god. That is what the summoning
is.”
“No.” He struggled to speak. “This was
different. I felt nothing when the Council
named me lord.” He couldn’t explain to her
what he felt, and not just because he had no
strength. “Tell me of the summoning.”
She sighed and rolled her eyes. “When we are
called, or summoned, we become lord in the
place of our father—or sometimes our
mother, though that is rare. Lady Wessen, I
believe, is the only one of her generation.
Regardless. My brother became Favor. I did
not. If I had been, I would have been Lady

Favor. But, Crae, you know this, because
when the Council called you, that was the
same as being summoned.”
No, it was nothing like. The Council ritual
had been nothing like being summoned, if his
battle with the crows were any indication.
And Stavin, who would talk about anything,
had never once mentioned his summoning.
Crae’s head hurt, and he struggled to keep
awake. He was not naive. He knew all men
nudged their gods along sometimes and made
sure they moved in the right directions. But
he had to get to the bottom of this.
“Did Stavin . . . ever speak to you of his
summoning?”
“Oh, Crae, for goodness’ sake. Why would
he?”
His eyes closed, and he sank closer to sleep. He
tried one last time. “Jessamy, which of the
children will be Lord of Trieve after me?”
She was silent for a long time, and he opened
his eyes and peered at her. She had the grace
to turn away from him when she saw he was
looking at her.
“Of . . . of course, if you have . . . a child,
perhaps that child . . .” Her voice faded away.

He knew what she meant without her having
to say the words out loud. To protect her own
children’s right, Jessamy would see to it that
he never had children. He had been elevated
to lordship, but it was a sham, or supposed to
be. The lords expected that he would die
without issue and leave no legacy.
His weakness was a mercy, and he gave in to
it. He heard her get up and the door close
behind her, and then sleep overtook him,
drowning his bitterness.
At length he healed, but slowly. It took days
for the headaches to fade and the bruises to
turn from violent purple to green and yellow,
and weeks more before his leg began to heal.
Truarch had set his leg in a complicated
cradle of bandages and splints, keeping the
bone straight so it wouldn’t reknit awry. Crae
knew it would never be the same, despite all
of Truarch’s good care. He would be the
crippled lord ever on. Well, he could still
shoot a crossbow. That was his strength. So
long as he could still shoot, he could still lead.
Tevani came in to see him, brought by
Calyne. The little girl ran to him and buried

her face in his side.
“I’m sorry, Lord Crae,” she said tremulously.
“Tevani! Don’t take such liberties—” Calyne
scolded, but Crae raised his hand and
shushed her.
“You did well, chick,” he said. “You were
very brave. Did you ride hard?”
She lifted her head and nodded, her cheeks
wet. She looked so like Stavin. She is the
closest I will ever have to a child, Crae
thought. So I will raise her as I see fit. “Hero is
your horse now. See you take care of him well,
and he will take care of you.”
The little girl stared at him, her tears
forgotten.
“Yes, Lord Crae,” she said.
She cannot call me father, he thought. So it
will have to do.
It didn’t take long for Jessamy to hear what
he had done. She came in as he was helped to
his feet by the horse doctor, her kerchief and
her skirts flying.
“How dare you,” she said, and her voice
shook with her anger. “How dare you make
such a decision! She is my daughter! You
cannot do this!”

Crae looked at the doctor and the
housekeeper, and with a gesture he motioned
them to leave. They hesitated, looking from
him to her and then backed away, hastily
gathering up the doctor’s draughts and
nostrums.
“That is well,” Jessamy said. She rolled up
her sleeves. “It is time we had this out.” She
squared her shoulders. “I’ve overlooked you
spoiling her, because high god knows—” She
caught herself at the invocation but then went
on. “High god knows with the death of her
father, she could use some extra kindness. But
this. This? First you let her ride out with you,
with no men, no weapons to speak of, nothing
to protect her with, and now you give her her
father’s warhorse?”
“He’s not a warhorse,” Crae pointed out
mildly.
“What are you thinking?! She barely comes
up to its knees. And you give it to her!”
“She proved she could ride the horse. He’s
worthy of her. A lord’s daughter . . .”
“But not your daughter.”
The words rang in the chamber. He let them
settle between them like the dust motes

slanting in the window. The sunlight fell over
his bed, across the floor, and over the large
chest that held his gear. Jessamy looked
around, and he saw that she could see the
mean chamber for what it was.
“So. You’ve made it clear, you are lord here
now. But the children are mine to raise.”
Crae began to feel dizzy again, so he sat on
the bed. He doubted the weakness was lost on
her.
“I am lord,” he agreed. “And it is time I take
up my duties. I left it too long, out of respect
for Stavin and you. But the
land—Trieve—doesn’t care about the lords
who’ve gone before, Jessamy. It only cares
about the now. I wonder . . .” He stopped for
a moment, lost in thought. What if Stavin had
not died? Would he ever have been
summoned, perhaps to another land? Favor,
or Kenery, or even Red Gold Bridge?
He looked at her, his unwilling wife. It had
been long since he had been with any woman,
and the last time he had so much as kissed one
had been Lynna. And they had both known,
even then, that they could never be with one
another, and their love would be for nothing.

Now he wanted to bed his best friend’s
wife—no, his own wife—with as great an
urgency. And he had no doubt she had a
revulsion of him that was as equally great as
his desire. But they had to come together.
Trieve demanded it. They could not rule
together if they could not pull together.
“If I were not Crae, could you treat me as
lord?” he said.
“I treat you as I would any lord,” she replied
stiffly.
“No. You treat me as if I am still the upstart
captain, your husband’s disreputable friend.
For that alone you cannot forgive me, let
alone live with me.”
“I told you, I cannot love again. Not like that.
Not the way I did with Stavin.” She said it
quickly, as if she had practiced it for this
moment. He expected that she had prepared
for a lifetime of rejections, at least until he
stopped asking. And then she could scorn him
for seeking love elsewhere.
“I’m not asking it of you.”
She stared at him. “Then what are you
asking, if not—?”
He lifted his shoulders. “True. I am asking

you to bed me, but not as Stavin’s
replacement. Not even as Captain Crae.”
“You know that it—that’s impossible.”
“As your husband. Lord of Trieve.”
She bit her lip. He waited, watching her war
with herself. She could not be happy with her
lonely bedchamber. She was young still, and
Stavin had often been indiscreet about the
secrets of his marriage bed.
“What of your wounds?” she said finally.
“They will heal.”
“Now?” she managed, swallowing.
“Jessamy.”
“I just—I need more time.”
“We don’t have a lot more time,” he said,
emphasizing the we. “We have a holding to
rule. As husband and wife. Why do you think
the crows came here, Jessamy? They are
lawless men, lordless men. They seek lordless
lands. If we are at odds, Jessamy, what of
Trieve?”
She hesitated and then finally said, “I—can’t.
Not right now. Or even soon. But I will think
about it.”
He watched her rush off, and he sighed. He
couldn’t force her, nor did he want to. I didn’t

choose you either, he thought resentfully, as
she fumbled the door closed behind her.
Alone, he lay back on his bed, resting. The
pain had come back, and he wanted to let it
ebb before he walked down to visit the
captured crow.
The captured man’s accommodations were a
bed of straw in a storeroom off the kitchens.
He was shackled to the wall and given food
and water and a chamber pot. From the smell
of his small prison, the chamber pot had not
been emptied in a while.
One of the kitchen boys opened the door
when he saw Crae coming. Crae still walked
heavily with the aid of a stick. He nodded to
the young boy, but inwardly he cringed.
I need a proper guard, such as I had in Red
Gold Bridge, he thought. He had been
neglecting his duties as lord, and now he
needed to make up for lost time. Crae ducked
into the small storeroom. The smell of waste
and unwashed prisoner came over him. A
window high above let in some light, and a
few candles burned on the wall. Not a prison
such as in Red Gold Bridge, but a bad one

nonetheless.
The man was crippled from Crae’s crossbow
bolt, but no one had been able to come near
him to tend his wound, and it festered. He
stared sullenly at the lord through fallen
tangled hair, his face narrow and pinched
under a wild beard. It was hard to tell how
old he was.
“Do you have a name?” Crae asked.
Nothing.
“What brought you to Trieve?”
Silence.
“Why did you attack me?”
Again, silence.
“Who is your lord?”
The man raised his head. His eyes burned in
the dim light. His face had a sheen of sweat
under the beard, the sign of a fever. The
wound would take him if he didn’t get help.
“The lord of all Aeritan is the lord of crows.”
Aeritan hadn’t had a high king for more than
three hundred years. The man raved. Crae
tried again.
“But someone leads you. Who is he?”
“The god of crows.”
There is no god of crows, Crae almost said but

held his tongue. Were these men called, as he
had been? To what purpose would a god call
forth lawless men?
“Were you summoned?”
The man grinned, his teeth a crooked, mashed
mess. It was why it was so hard to understand
his words. “He whispers to us, tells us we can
do what we want to all the pretty lords and
ladies. And we do. We kill and we ravage, and
our god laughs.”
Crae looked down at his prisoner, sickness in
his gut. He had kept him alive almost on a
whim, to find out something about the
lordless men. Now he wasn’t sure if that
hadn’t been a mistake.
Still, he had to find out the secrets of the
crows. He waited, and the man stopped his
tormented giggling. He is a man, Crae
thought. Not a creature. But he acts like a
creature of the dark tales. High god, help me
uncover this thing. Feeling as if he were
groping in the dark, he said, “Will you let our
surgeon treat your leg?”
The man looked up, surprise in his ravaged
face. His lips parted as if he meant to speak,
but the words wouldn’t come. Yet there’s

intelligence there, Crae thought. He stumped
backward to the door, and said to the boy,
“Fetch Truarch.” The boy ran off.
While they waited, the man was silent, his
eyes on Crae. The wait seemed an eternity. At
length the horse doctor turned up, carrying
his kit. He looked at Crae with surprise and
no little respect.
“He says he will let you treat him now,” he
told Truarch.
“Lord Crae—” Truarch swallowed what he
was about to say. Instead he knelt next to the
crow. Crae knew the bravery that took. The
crow, though, never attacked, not even when
Truarch cleaned the wound, as excruciatingly
painful as that must have been. When
Truarch finished, wrapping a bandage
around the leg, the man’s face was gray with
pallor, but he had neither fought nor
screamed nor tried to bite.
Truarch stood, and the crow fell back,
exhausted. Crae himself felt as if he had just
run all of the terraces to the house, so intent
he had been on Truarch’s work and the
crow’s pain.
“Crow,” he said, and the man turned toward

him. “I give you guesting in the House of
Trieve.”
He thought later that of all the things he had
done, that had been the high god’s doing the
most. The crow’s eyes flew open, as did the
doctor’s and the boy’s, the only other two
who had heard him. Guesting was the
obligation of the lord, and it was not granted
lightly. It would be all over Trieve in an hour,
what he had done; a part of him thought of
Jessamy’s reaction with wryness. He gestured
to the others, and they left the crow to his
meager cell.
He was still thinking about it when he
returned to his chamber after the night meal.
Jessamy did not join him, and he ate in the
kitchen with some of the men, discussing his
plans for a guard. Trieve had been able to call
up all of three hundred fighting men when
Stavin threw in his lot with Red Gold Bridge
last year. Nearly all of them had died, in part
because they were mostly farmers and
smallholders. Stavin had never seen to the
training of his men.
Crae had discovered that Stavin had not done

much to keep Trieve well in hand. No, I knew
that before, he thought. But it was not my
place—the place of a captain—to say anything,
even though we were friends.
They sat at the table long into the night, over
tankards of Trieve’s good beer and some
stronger drink, talking over his plans.
“Swords, crossbows, hand-to-hand fighting,”
he said, ticking off what they had to learn.
The grooms and the housemen leaned
forward, eyes shining, and Crae grinned. The
boy who sat watch at the door to the crow’s
prison was with his father, hanging on his
elders’ every word. It was good to know that
they didn’t lack for will, even if they had no
training. “It makes no sense for only lords to
learn to fight.” His grin faded, and he nodded
at the storeroom door. There was naught but
silence coming from the crow. “They are our
enemy now.”
“We only ever heard tales of them before,” a
young farmer said, in for the night from one
of the far villages. “Tales the children
frightened each other with. Now the tales are
constant; they rove everywhere and fear
nothing.”

“When you go back to your village, let
everyone know I need men,” Crae said. “We’ll
start training tomorrow.” His head went dizzy
again, and he grimaced. He needed a captain
for this task, but he would have to get them
started. He could not delay before he could
engage an experienced soldier.
“Are you well, sir?” someone said. They
looked at him anxiously. It was a different
sight than when he had first arrived as lord.
They had been cautious then, not sure of who
he was and what he meant for Trieve and for
them. Now they put their hope in him and
needed him to be well.
“I will be,” he said. He had to be.
He was more than a little drunk when he
limped back up the stairs to his chamber, his
leg aching from his exertions. He pushed open
the door and stared in surprise. The room was
bare. The hearth had been swept. His bed had
been stripped, and his chest of belongings,
with his clothes and his gear, was gone.
“Oh, sir,” said Calyne, hurrying up with an
armful of linens. “Lady Jessamy had asked us
to clear out your old room and be moved to

Lord Stav—the lord’s chamber.”
She had, had she? Jessamy had made some
sort of statement with the move, but for the
life of him, he could not figure out what it
could be. He turned and followed Calyne.
Stavin’s room was large, with two glazed
windows overlooking the terraces. A few
candles burned in sconces over the bed, and
Crae couldn’t help breaking out in a grin at
the grandness. This bed was long enough for
his lanky frame, and its carved bedposts rose
to the high ceiling. His humble chest sat
against one wall, and a huge desk dominated
the other. The books on Trieve’s history that
he had been reading before the attack had
been placed on a bookshelf above it.
He had to steel himself to cross the threshold.
It felt like a desecration; he felt like an
imposter, even with the summoning still
quivering somewhere below his heartbeat.
Calyne left him, and he undressed in the
semidarkness. Hardly knowing what
compelled him, although he knew he was
drunk and restless and lonely, he opened his
chest. Even in the half dark he knew what he
was looking for and found it beneath the rest

of his clothes and papers. Far below at the
bottom he felt for the cold little thing that
Lynna had brought with her to Red Gold
Bridge. It was wrapped in her white shirt, the
one she wore all the way to Trieve when they
looked for a guardian last winter. He knew it
by heart, its fine material and plain buttons,
and the neatly sewn-up tear in the sleeve. He
had made that tear himself when her arm had
been broken by a crow’s heavy staff and he’d
had to make sure the bone did not pierce the
skin. She couldn’t wear the shirt after her
arm had been set. And so he had kept it in his
chest, neatly wrapped around the cold black
device.
He pulled it out. The little device felt
strangely light yet substantial. It was made of
metal, or glass, or some other smooth
material. It was hinged at one end but he
dared not lift the narrow lid. The last time it
was open the thing shrieked to wake the dead.
He had managed to silence it, but he didn’t
know how, and he wasn’t sure he could do it
again.
If Lynna knew he had it, she never mentioned
it. She had, after all, left it behind as a

distraction when she made her escape from
Red Gold Bridge.
Both Lynna and the stranger man Bahard
had said the devices could be used to call
upon someone. Bahard had said they didn’t
work in Aeritan, though. Too bad; he was
almost befuddled enough by drink to try. He
could see himself opening up the small device
and calling out her name. Lynna. Lynn. If he
summoned, would she come?
And if she answered, what then? He was
married, a lord. She could have no place here,
nor he with her, in her country.
He wrapped up the little object in the shirt
and replaced them both at the bottom of the
chest. Then he put himself into his solitary
bed, hoping he woke without as much of a
hangover as he seemed to be in store for.
Four
The underpass where the black road crossed
over the highway was filled with litter and
stank of men, excrement, and whiskey.
Marthen’s nose twitched as the smells finally
reached him in his stupor. He moved his hand
feebly, his first thought for his small jug of

harsh whiskey. It was still there, tucked next
to his side. His next move was for the
handgun. It, too, still rested in his trousers
pocket, heavy and substantial against his side.
Relieved, he opened his eyes and looked
straight up at the concrete bridge above him.
Pigeons cooed and strutted, their perch
stained with droppings. The saddle created an
uncomfortable pillow and strained his neck.
The bridge hummed with the rush of traffic
overhead, the rhythmic thudding of tires over
the concrete seams echoing along with his
aching head.
Carefully, he turned his head first to the left.
Nearby, a handful of men squatted over their
few belongings: ragged blankets, bags stuffed
with cans, a wheeled basket. He turned his
head the other way, his tangled hair falling
into his eyes so it took a moment for his vision
to clear.
“Nice saddle,” came a voice in his ear.
A pair of dark blue eyes, bright like a bird’s,
peered back at him, inches from his face.
Marthen waited for his close-range vision to
clear. The man continued to stare at him. He
had gray hair, a lined and sunken face, and a

bulbous drunkard’s nose. Once Marthen
could gauge men as well as he could run a
battle. Now he couldn’t tell if this man were a
simpleton as well as a drunkard. He waved his
hand peevishly.
“Help me up,” he ordered, his voice raspy.
The man put an arm under Marthen’s
shoulder and lifted him, then scooted back to
give him room. Marthen waited for the world
to stop spinning and then said carefully,
“Where am I?”
“Under a 684 overpass. Or as I like to call it,
the crossroads of despair.”
Marthen stared at him. Those were not the
words of a simpleton. A strange feeling came
over him, one he couldn’t identify. “Is that in
North Salem?”
The man snorted. “Close enough. Why? You
rich?” He glanced at the saddle.
Rich? Like a noble? He looked at the man
more closely.
“No, not rich.” Not noble. “I must find
someone.”
It sounded so weak to himself that he half
expected the man to laugh at him. His strange
acquaintance remained solemn.

“They won’t have you,” he said.
It was Marthen’s turn to laugh, a dry little
croak. “That was made clear to me.” Lord
Terrick’s parting words had assured him he
would stand in his way if Marthen attempted
to petition the Council for Kate Mossland. He
knew he would be blocked in this world as
well. No matter. He had been boxed in before
and slipped free.
Marthen had traveled months to find her. He
had sold his warhorse, then his gear, and
finally his sword, all for whispers of this
portal, rumors in dark places paid for by coin
passed secretively from hand to hand.
He kept the saddle and the gun. The saddle
was all that remained of Kate Mossland in
Aeritan. The gun was a gift from the
Brythern lord Hare. Marthen knew that Hare
played his own game, and the gun was meant
to set Marthen in motion as if he were the
lord’s playing piece. Marthen took pleasure in
thwarting him. He would use the gun for his
own purposes.
Marthen fumbled for the small jug of
whiskey. It still had a few swallows. The
man’s eyes were fixated on the bottle now.

Marthen handed it over, and the man took a
small sip. Marthen felt a surge of the old
triumph. He wished he still had Grayne, his
competent aide-de-camp, but his lieutenant
had left him many months ago. Then again, it
hardly mattered. Grayne would be all at sea
in this strange world, no better than Marthen
himself.
“I saw her. She was in a—car,” he said, using
the unfamiliar word that he had learned from
her last year. “I came for her, and saw her,
but I don’t know where she went or how to
find her again.”
It had been unbelievable. He had stepped out
of the gordath in the woods and into this new
world. He hadn’t walked far before he saw
the marvels of the world she came from, the
brightness, the smells, the rush of noise, the
cars moving so quickly on the roads so black
and smooth.
He waited on the side of the road, hungover,
weak, and unsure, still disoriented from his
passage through the gordath, when a car
slowed and stopped near where he stood on
the verge, half in the trees. And through the
glass of the window he saw her, and she saw

him. Their eyes caught. He took in her
burgeoning surprise, the realization, and the
fear.
The car sped off, but not before he thought he
saw her scream.
It was another day before he understood his
impossible luck and how he could not be so
lucky again. Not even the soldier’s god—not
any god—would be able to find her in this
place. He was on his own.
He wasn’t sure how he ended up underneath
this bridge, but maybe it was another kind of
luck.
“You don’t look like the romantic type,” his
new friend said. He handed back the jug, and
again his eyes fixed on it.
“No.” Marthen took a much smaller sip but
didn’t hand it back. “Help me find her.”
The man jerked his gaze away from the
whiskey back to Marthen’s face. “What?
Jesus, you at least need a name.”
“I have a name. Is that all I need?”
“Shit, man. I don’t know. You have an
address? Where she lives?”
“She lives here.”
The man gave him all of his attention now. “If

she lives here, she isn’t going to give you the
time of day. Who is she? Ex-wife? I’m telling
you, you mess with the townies, more than
just asking for a buck, you are in trouble.”
They had gotten some attention now from the
other men under the bridge. Marthen
thought it was like the old stories about crows
who lived under bridges and accosted
travelers on their paths with riddles. These
men were not crows, though. They were
drunkards and broken, sad and lost, but they
didn’t have the madness of the crows.
Once he commanded an army of tens of
thousands of men, including the wild crows of
Aeritan. Now he had these sorry men.
He made himself stand up. The overpass
stretched overhead, and the rushing traffic
was like the wind in the high pines of Temia,
the thudding of the tires like a drumbeat.
They all looked at him, and he felt again the
fullness that came when he addressed his
army before battle. He began softly, and they
had to strain to hear him over the cooing of
the pigeons and the incessant traffic.
“So you are pent up beneath this bridge,” he
said. “You hide here, you drink here, you

stink here.”
Someone laughed, and someone else shushed
him. He looked at the man who had first
helped him. He already thought of him as his
lieutenant. The man’s attention was fixed
wholeheartedly on him now.
“How are you called?”
The man blinked uncertainly.
“Gary.” Close enough to Grayne. The soldier
god was smiling on him—or laughing.
Marthen bent low.
“Do you like your prison, Gary? Your
crossroads of despair?”
Gary had a strange expression, as if he knew
what Marthen was doing, and he was falling
for it anyway. He is no simpleton, Marthen
thought. But I have no need of simpletons. At
least not in my lieutenants.
Gary leaned in low, too, and their
conversation became private. “I don’t know
what you think you are doing, but you are
crazy if you think you can start a revolution.
These guys are hard up, but they’d sell their
own mother for a drink or a hit. If you cause
enough trouble, you will bring the cops down
on all of us, and believe me, this is paradise

compared to a real jail.”
“So you do like your prison,” Marthen said,
loud enough for the others to hear. “Do you
want to stay?”
“I—no! That’s not what I mean . . .” Gary
trailed off uncertainly.
“Anyone else? Anyone else want to stay under
this bridge until they come to roust you out?
Burn you out?”
There was a rumbling of discontent.
“I’m looking for a woman,” he told them.
“She is not yet full grown and lives with her
parents. Her name is Kate Mossland. Help me
find her.” He paused. He could see their
confusion and indecision, and he contained
his impatience. Once he had commanded
crows, and that took promises and strength
and cunning. He could bend these men to his
will. Once he had Kate Mossland, he could
still use these men for his purposes. This time,
his army would not be disbanded.
From the back someone held up his hand. He
was still young, his face not as weathered as
the rest of the men, but it was fair on its way
to becoming that way.
“So, you mean she’s still a teenager? ’Cause,

yeah, school’s out, but all the kids hang out by
the lake in the summer.” He glanced around
and shrugged. “I could show you where.”
“Lynn! One of the horses is loose,” Mrs. Felz
called from the kitchen. Lynn glanced over
from the living room, where she was going
through the mail. Bills, insurance—who knew
there was so much expense to owning a horse
farm?
“I’m coming,” she called back and hurried
out the front door. She looked down the
drive, where the kitchen window overlooked
the entrance to the farm. Sure enough, there
was a chestnut horse meandering along the
drive, browsing on the tall weeds along the
verge.
It wasn’t one of hers. Someone must have lost
a horse from a neighboring farm, and it
wandered over here.
“Shoot,” she said, half under her breath. She
didn’t like strange horses coming through.
Whose ever it turned out to be would be
informed, in as friendly a way as possible,
that they needed to keep their gates shut. She
headed back through the kitchen, grabbing a

halter and lead rope from the hook in the
mudroom, and let herself out the back. Mrs.
Felz followed, wiping her hands on a dish
towel. She had been doing the dishes.
That was another thing; it seemed like Mrs.
Felz planned on staying. First she tidied up
the barn apartment, then she took Lynn’s
house in hand, and now she just made herself
useful. Lynn couldn’t bring herself to tell her
to leave, and Mrs. Felz seemed perfectly
happy to do things. When Lynn brought it up
tentatively, Joe’s mom had just smiled and
said, “If it’s all right with you, I’ll stay till I
wear out my welcome. My husband,
Abel—well, let’s just say it’s more peaceful
here right now than home.” Lynn lost her
courage and left it like that.
She walked up to the horse, keeping her stride
slow but purposeful. The horse kept grazing,
but it swiveled its ears toward her to keep
track of her progress. It was a gelding, and it
was starving. Its backbone stuck up, and its
ribs showed. Automatically she registered its
conformation—probably part quarter horse
with maybe some Thoroughbred. It was a
little more than fifteen hands, too small for

her but a good solid size. Smallish feet, the
head the shape that quarter horse breeders
called the bulldog type, with its short jowls
and wide forehead. Nice-looking horse. Too
bad she wanted to kill its owner for letting it
starve half to death.
“Hi,” she said, when she got close enough.
“Hey there, boy. I’ve got something better for
you in the barn.” She held the halter and lead
rope behind her back in case he was
halter-shy. He raised his head and looked at
her and snorted. He was clearly uneasy but
hadn’t tried to trot off. She stopped and
waited, turning her head to the side. She
wasn’t a horse whis perer, but sometimes if
you just didn’t look a horse in the eye, horses
found it easier to approach you. She breathed
easily as if she had nothing better to do than
stand in the sun, just as if she were a horse
herself. Then she ambled forward a few steps,
not quite toward the horse. He made to turn
on his haunches but she placed herself in
front of him. He turned the other way, but
she was there, too, all the time still far enough
away that she was no threat.
The moment he gave in, she knew. He lowered

his head, swiveled his ears at half alert, and
waited. She came up to him, put the halter on,
and patted him soothingly. He had cuts all
over his face and flanks, some quite deep, as if
he had been flayed. They were recent, too,
scabbed over but still fresh. Lynn gasped a
little. What had happened to him? Who could
have done this?
“Okay, boy, easy, easy,” she said. “Let’s head
over to the barn, and I’ll get you water, hay.
You want a carrot? I can get you a carrot.”
He waited patiently, flicking an ear at her
nonsense, and she clucked to him and started
leading him back up to the barn. She would
put the word out about who might have
starved, beaten, and misplaced a perfectly
good horse, but she wasn’t sure what she
would come up with. She was confident that
none of her neighbors were the type to treat a
horse this way.
So what about her other neighbors, the ones
who were a bit less—local? She frowned and
stopped, taking another long look at the
strange chestnut. In Aeritan, horses were no
pam pered luxury. She had never seen one
treated as badly as this one, however. For

instance, Crae had been good with horses. He
hadn’t coddled Briar, and granted, the poor
creature had been shot out from underneath
him, but he had been a good man with that
horse.
She knew one way to find out. She slid a hand
down the horse’s foreleg, leaning slightly
against his shoulder. Obediently he lifted his
leg when she came to his hoof. She took one
look at the crudely made horseshoe, so clearly
not a modern model, and set his foot down
again.
“Shoot,” she said again.
Either someone was making hand-forged,
piece-of-crap horseshoes in some sort of weird
bid for authenticity—
Or the gordath was open again.
The sound of a car coming up the drive made
her turn around. She didn’t recognize the car,
a dark green Jaguar; had one of her clients
gotten a new one?
The Jag parked in a cloud of dust, and a man
got out. He was middle-aged, balding,
wearing a polo and khaki slacks. It took her a
moment, and then she placed him. What was
Mike Garson doing here? He was the owner

of the Continental, the restaurant and bar
that the riders, owners, and grooms all hung
out at. He had been Mark Ballard’s boss.
Lynn grimaced. The less she had to think of
Mark Ballard, the better. She looked at the
skinny starved chestnut and pinched the
bridge of her nose. Garson came over to her.
He glanced at the horse, who was clearly not a
show horse, and a look of distaste crossed his
face before he pasted on a smile and held out
his hand.
“Well, Lynn Romano,” he said. “Just the
person I wanted to see. Mike Garson. I don’t
know that we’ve met before, though I know
you from your patronage of my little
restaurant.”
She reached out and took his hand with his
artificially strong handshake, and said, “Mr.
Garson.”
“Oh, call me Mike. I don’t have much use for
formality. You know, Mark Ballard used to
talk about you all the time. He was quite
taken with you, you know.”
Enough that he tried to have me killed so as not
to ruin your little gunrunning scheme. Perhaps
some of that crossed her face, because Garson

stepped back. The horse, too, caught the
tension and threw up his head and snorted.
“I need to get him to the barn,” Lynn said
shortly.
“Fine, fine, I’ll just wait at the house.”
Actually, why don’t you just leave. She clucked
to the horse and left Garson behind, hoping
he got the message.
She didn’t have enough grooms to run the
farm the way Mrs. Hunt had run it, when
Lynn was barn manager, so she brought the
chestnut gelding into the stall for new horses,
an isolated loose box in the far corner of the
lower barn. She would have Dr. Cotter come
and vet him out and also do a Coggins test . .
. Damn strays, she thought. She pulled apart a
fresh bale of hay and gave him a flake and
put fresh water in the bucket. The horse took
a long drink, Lynn watching to make sure she
wouldn’t have to pull away the bucket before
he made himself sick. But he only took a few
swallows and then, his muzzle dripping,
nudged Lynn as if to say thanks. She shook
her head and scrubbed him under his long,
tangled forelock that hid his eyes.
“Red, you are lucky I have a soft spot for

strays.” Counting Joe’s mom, this was her
second one in a week. She hadn’t ever had the
opportunity to indulge that side of her
character before, but given the chance, she
clearly took to it. And she thought Joe’s mom
could be dangerous. If the horse was a sign
that the portal was open, they could all be in
trouble again. What’s going on, Joe?
The horse dropped his head and went to work
on the hay. Lynn watched him for a minute,
then closed the bottom door and went up to
find out what Garson wanted. Heading back
to the house, she felt a spark of anger. Garson
was nowhere in sight, the front door just
swinging shut. He had let himself into the
house. Anger deepened into fury. Well, she
would set him straight about that. Then he
came back out, almost stumbling. Mrs. Felz
came right behind him.
“Why don’t you have a seat on the veranda?
Lynn will be right there, and I’ll bring y’all
some iced tea.” Her voice was gracious and
warm, but it was made of steel. Lynn bit back
a grin.
“I see you’ve met Mrs. Felz,” she said. She
glanced at Joe’s mom and raised her eyebrow

in surprise. Mrs. Felz winked and then gave a
public smile to Garson.
Garson looked between the two women,
trying to figure things out. He could hardly
demand to know more about Mrs. Felz, but
he had to know something was up. Lynn
hadn’t said what she was, only who she was.
Mrs. Felz wasn’t dressed for housework. She
wore jeans, sneakers, and a big floppy straw
hat, as if she had been gardening. Which she
had been, in fact. For the last few days, she
had been taking care of the flowers in the
tubs and beds all over the farm.
Garson looked back at Lynn, forcing a smile.
“Well,” he said. “Iced tea. How—southern.”
“Yes,” she said and sat. He sat opposite her.
“I’m glad you found some help, though of
course, you know, it can be difficult to run a
big place like this. Katherine was very
capable, and I know she left the farm in
capable hands.”
Katherine. Garson knew all of the owners, of
course, but that seemed oddly familiar. Did
Mrs. Hunt know they were on a first-name
basis? Lynn waited.
“But of course it’s so much for a young, single

woman to take care of. I’m not sure what she
meant by it. Surely she couldn’t have wanted
to saddle you with all of this.”
He smiled meaningfully at his own pun. Lynn
was struck by a sense of disaster.
Mrs. Felz popped out with tall glasses of
amber tea, topped with lemons and rattling
with ice. She set the tray down with a bright
smile.
“Homemade,” she said.
Instant, Lynn knew. It was all she had in the
house.
“Thank you,” she said, slightly strangled.
Whatever Mrs. Felz was doing, it had her
almost as baffled as Garson. She sipped her
tea. Instant tea or no, it was still good, sweet,
slightly acrid. A taste lingered almost veshlike
on her tongue. For a second she forgot
Garson’s presence, even Joe’s mom, and
Aeritan came to her as powerfully as a kiss.
“So, I thought I would ask how you were
doing and see if you needed any help.”
She came back to this world with a thud.
“Help?”
“Lynn, let me be frank. I’m a businessman. In
fact, the restaurant business is probably

tougher than the horse farm business. I know
that you’ve lost clients and boarders due to
last year’s troubles. I think everyone would
understand if you needed to let the place go.
Now, I’m not here asking to buy it right away.
I just want you to consider the possibility, so
you won’t feel trapped and maybe make a
hasty decision. The fact is, this place is a lot of
work, but it’s worth a whole lot more than
you think. I think you could make a tidy
sum—”
She felt the fury rise from somewhere inside
her, and for a moment she couldn’t speak.
When she could finally reply, she said only, “I
think you are being presumptuous, Mr.
Garson.”
“Now, Lynn—”
“I’m wondering what makes you think the
farm is in trouble?”
He paused, took a sip of tea. When he spoke
again, his smile was avuncular. “I’m sorry. I
think I started off on the wrong foot. That’s
me; my directness always gets me in trouble,
or so my wife says. I don’t mean to imply that
you are unable to run your own business.”
“I’m not interested in selling.”

“No, of course. But you see, things can turn so
quickly. I understand this. And as I said, I
want to make sure you don’t act in a panic
but consider all your options.”
“To sell to you,” she said.
He nodded judiciously, as if accepting the
possibility, now that she mentioned it. “That
would be one option, yes.”
Lynn kept her voice from shaking with a
force of will she didn’t know she had.
“I won’t do business with anyone who has
ever hired Mark Ballard.”
She silenced him. He stared at her,
openmouthed, gasping a little. His teeth were
crooked and nicotine-stained, she thought
with a mean sense of satisfaction. When he
spoke, his anger rivaled her own. He still tried
to control it. “I’m offering you a lifeline and a
business opportunity. Just because you had a
bad breakup—” He broke off, laughed, all
pretense at civility gone. “Seriously, young
lady, is this about the one who got away?”
No, it’s about the man who wanted to have me
killed because he was in a business deal with
you.
“I don’t need your lifeline,” she said evenly. “I

don’t need your business opportunity. I just
want to run my horse farm.” A thought
struck her. “And if I find out that you are
behind any attempt to make it hard for me to
stay in business, I’ll let everyone know about
this conversation. You made your offer. It
was turned down. Out.”
He slammed down his drink, and the tea
slopped over the side of the glass onto the
table. “I didn’t think you were stupid, Ms.
Romano. I suppose you just have a lot to learn
about business. Enjoy your education.”
Mrs. Felz came out of the kitchen and sat
down with Lynn as Garson stamped off to the
Jag and drove off in a cloud of dust. Mrs.
Felz shook her head.
“Some things never change,” she said.
“What?” Lynn said.
“Honey, that conversation is the same one
rich men have had with farmers since
farming began,” she said.
Lynn gave a half laugh. She was a farmer
now, eh? Hard to believe. Land was a blessing
and a curse. She gazed out over the farm
from the shady porch, half of her mind far
away. The green fields, the fences, the horses

grazing lazily, all the peace of it came over
her. She couldn’t sell, not to Garson, not to
anyone. She was a guardian now, for what
that was worth. Just like Joe in Aeritan, both
of them keeping the land safe and sound. It
wasn’t easy, but it was worthwhile. Only now,
if the chestnut gelding was any indication, Joe
wasn’t doing his part of the job. Lynn twirled
the empty glass between her fingers, the
condensation cold against her fingertips. She
didn’t want to fret in front of Mrs. Felz, but
the question of the red horse niggled at her.
Maybe I was wrong about the horseshoes, she
thought hopefully, but she knew she wasn’t.
“If Joe were here, you two could keep the
place together,” Mrs. Felz said wistfully.
Startled, Lynn looked over at her. The woman
made a self-deprecating face. “Don’t mind
me. I’m just an old woman living in her
dreams. I always hoped Joe would get
married someday, but I know he wasn’t the
marrying type.” She shook her head.
Truer words were never spoken. Hunter’s
Chase had probably been the longest Joe had
been anywhere in the past few years. She
wondered if he missed it. Now that he was a

guardian and tied to the woods, would he
miss the open road? Does he miss me the way I
miss him?
“I think—if he ever finds what he’s looking
for, he might settle down,” Lynn said
carefully. Not with her, and not where she
would see him again, but he might find
someone—a smallholder perhaps, or a
strongholder. He deserved that. Let him go,
she told herself. Let him go.
Mrs. Felz rested her head against the back of
the chair. “I suppose I have to go back,” she
said abruptly. “If only to tell Abel I didn’t
find anything.” She sighed. “He made it clear
he didn’t expect me to. Anyway, I know you
don’t want me here, and you’ve been kind
enough to let me stay, but I’ve outstayed my
welcome, I can tell.” She forestalled Lynn’s
protest. “I only want a few more days, just
until I can figure out where to look next. Then
I’ll go, and I promise I won’t bother you
anymore.”
“All right,” Lynn said, trying to hide her
worry. Mrs. Felz would be gone soon. She
hadn’t found out anything so far, and she
would give up soon and go. Right now,

though, Mrs. Felz was the least of her
problems. After all, she was just a mother
trying to trace her lost son and find out the
truth behind his disappearance. Lynn had a
hostile businessman and an open gordath to
worry about. At least it will take my mind off
the bills, she thought dryly. She pulled out her
phone to call the vet to look over the new
horse, trying to figure out what to do about
the portal being open and what that implied.
She told herself that Joe and Arrim would get
it back under control. In the meantime,
though, she thought she should go out to the
old house on Daw Road and check on things,
no matter how dangerous that could be. The
last thing she needed right now was to end up
back in Aeritan.
Even if Joe was there. And Crae. No, much
better to stay here.
Kate and Colar pulled off the road and in to
the gas station at the intersection where she
had seen Marthen. The streets here were
busy, the major route leading to Connecticut,
the cross street almost as busy. Along one side
of the road was a small shopping center. The

place where Kate had seen the general was a
stand of woods fronting a residential area.
They parked at the back of the gas station
and looked around. It was hot, the road and
parking lot radiating midday heat. Colar was
the first to put on his sunglasses, and Kate
fumbled for hers. She glanced at him and felt
the usual shock; in T-shirt and board shorts
and sandals, he looked like everyone else.
Well, and so do I now, she thought. She wore
a tank top over a lace cami that covered most
of the scars on her back and a denim
miniskirt. Her hair was held up in a ponytail,
the brown and gold highlights gleaming. Only
the scars on her shoulders and back said she
was anything different from her outside
appearance. She nodded at the stand of trees.
“He was right there,” she said. “Kind of in
the shadows.”
Colar nodded. “They’d be longer at that time
of day. Let’s ask inside.”
He followed her in, and the door beeped at
them as they entered. An Asian man looked
up from the counter as a few shoppers
collected soda, chips, and cigarettes.
Kate hesitated, smiled at the counter guy, and

went to the back.
“What are you doing?” Colar whispered.
“We should buy something. Plus I want
people to leave.”
He looked dubious, but they each picked out a
soda and went back to the front. While they
waited to pay for their drinks, a few more
people breezed in. Kate’s heart sank. One was
Maddy Street, a girl from school, with
another girl she didn’t know well.
“Oh, hi,” Maddy said, brightening when she
saw them. “What are you guys doing?”
They held up their drinks in unison.
“Cool. Sarah and I are going to the lake. A lot
of kids are going to be there. You should
come.” As she said it, she looked mostly at
Colar. The other girl looked at Kate and said,
“Hi. We used to go to middle school
together?”
“I remember you,” Kate said. Sarah Decker.
“Hi. Where do you go now?”
“Chatham.” It was a very posh private school.
“Are you still into horses?”
Kate nodded. The line moved up. Maddy
continued to chat up Colar, who was smiling
at something she said. Maddy was animated

and flirtatious, and Kate felt a sharp pang of
jealousy. He’s my foster brother, that’s all. Just
my foster brother. “You were, too, right?”
“Yeah, some. I outgrew it though.” The girl
heard what she said and half laughed. “Oh
my God, I am so sorry about how that came
out.”
Kate had to laugh. “No, it’s okay. I probably
should have outgrown it, too.” She shrugged
and automatically lifted a loose strap back
onto her shoulder. Colar was at the counter
and paid for the drinks, handling the money
with aplomb. She saw Sarah looking at her
scars, but the girl didn’t comment. Then
Maddy saw and gasped.
“What happened to you!”
“Bad—car accident,” Kate managed. She
flushed. Should have worn a T-shirt, she
thought.
There was an awkward silence. Then Maddy
hurried to pay for their supplies, and she and
Sarah fled, probably too uncomfortable to
wonder why Kate and Colar stayed back.
“Okay, see you, try to come to the lake,”
Maddy called out as they headed out the door.
The counter guy was looking at them, this

time a quizzical expression on his face. Kate
took a breath.
“Hi. We were wondering if you saw someone
here the other night, around four or five
p.m.? He’d be dressed really weird.”
“Like in these clothes,” Colar said. He opened
his phone and showed the man a picture of
his clothes from home—heavy boots, half
jacket, leather and mail armor—laid out on
his bed. He had taken it that morning. The
clothes were still stained with his blood, but
you couldn’t tell that from the picture.
The man nodded. “Like a Renaissance festival
actor,” he said, his accent thick but not
impenetrable.
“Exactly,” Kate said. The man scrutinized the
photo, and she added hastily, “Those are just
the type of clothes; his were a little different.
They were more ragged.” She hadn’t gotten a
close look, but Marthen had seemed much the
worse for wear since she had known him as
the meticulous, obsessive general. She added,
“This guy would be in his forties, and he has
long black hair.”
The man pursed his lips and shook his head
slowly. He handed back the phone. “Sorry.”

“Okay, well, thanks.” She and Colar turned
to go.
“But if I see him, you want me to call you and
let you know?”
They looked at each other. Colar spoke first.
“Yes. That would be well.”
He did that sometimes; the Aeritan in him
came out in his words. The Asian man heard
and made a face. To him it would sound
archaic or a put-on. He probably was already
regretting helping a pair of snotty high school
kids. Oblivious, Colar gave the man his
number, and they hastened out.
“Have fun at the lake!” the man called out
behind them.
“So what now?” Kate asked.
“We’re not done. We need to look around.”
They went around back to the Jeep, but
instead of getting in, they crossed the road to
the stand of trees, scurrying to beat the
traffic. The temperature immediately
plunged. The trees were pines, dark and
green, brown needles a thick carpet
underfoot. Colar held her back and scanned
without stepping onto the area. Cars whizzed
past them. Through the trees she could see a

neighborhood of big houses fronting an
algae-coated pond. Just some guy, she
thought. Just some guy, and now my dad
thinks I’m crazy and I need to see a therapist.
She shivered in the shade. She wanted to get
out of there. “Forget it. Let’s go,” she said.
“We should probably go to the lake.”
“Wait,” he said. He knelt and looked at the
ground, frowned. He pointed. “What does
that look like to you?”
“It better not be gross,” she said, gingerly
kneeling next to him. A pattern was pressed
into the needles and sand, more a suggestion
than anything. He got up and stepped around
it, then put his foot next to it. His sandal
made a distinct tread pattern, one that was
identifiably shoelike. The other pattern was
broader, less defined. Smudged—or an
Aeritan boot, handmade and ill-fitting? Back
in the camp, Kate could have been killed for
her fine riding boots alone, if someone was
crazy enough to go against Marthen’s
protection of her.
“Okay, I see your point,” she said, getting to
her feet and dusting off her knees. “But I
don’t know, Colar. It seems

awfully—unconvincing.”
“Maybe,” he said. “But it’s a start.” They
looked around a bit more, but it was clear
that there was very little to see.
The intersection was really far from where
the gordath had been anyway. How had
Marthen gotten all the way over
here—presumably on foot—without raising
attention?
Had she really seen him, or was it time for a
shrink after all?
She thought back to her glimpse of the man
in the shadows and shuddered at the way his
eyes had met hers. Colar nudged her.
“What?” he said.
“Just thinking—you know.”
She didn’t have to say more. They both had
ghosts. Sometimes she saw the way his hands
whitened when he held his fork and knife or a
pencil when he was doing math home-work.
Maybe a therapist wouldn’t be a bad idea for
either of us, she thought. Except how could we
tell them anything?
He nodded and looked around some more,
scanning the parking lot, the traffic, and the
few people on foot. “Someone had to have

seen him. He would have stood out.”
She laughed a bit sourly. “Maybe we should
put up a wanted poster.”
“What?”
“A poster that has a picture of people with
their names, the crime they committed, and
the reward money. The police put them up.
You’ll see them around sometimes.”
She could see him filing away the
information, and his interest sparked an idea.
She added, “You know, we could check the
police station, see if somebody else did see him
and called about him.” The police would
make it known that he wasn’t welcome here.
Kate felt a twinge of shame but at the same
time was thankful for her safe little town.
“Like you said, he’d stand out,” she
explained. “I think he’d frighten people, even
without them knowing, well—”
“That they should be frightened,” they
finished together. He gave her a quick grin. “I
think even Captain Artor was frightened of
the general.”
Kate laughed. The irascible scout captain
spent most of the campaign laid up with a
broken leg, but his temper was the worse for

all that. The captain had never frightened her
though, despite his cursing and bluster. Her
laugh trailed off. The general had struck fear
to the marrow of her bones. She knew he was
obsessed with her, and also knew he hated
himself for it. He hated me and wanted me, and
the flogging was only the beginning. If
Marthen had gotten what he wanted, she
doubted she would have survived with her
mental health and her spirit intact.
She turned to Colar and smiled gamely.
“Let’s go to the police then, and see if they
know anything.”
“What is this, a scavenger hunt?” the officer
at the front desk said. “Look, kids, I don’t
have time for this.”
The police station was calm and quiet, very
little activity. Somewhere a radio blared in
ten-code in the back, and someone else
answered.
“We just wanted to know if you got a
suspicious person report in the last couple of
weeks,” Kate said.
“The log isn’t available right now. Beat it.”
“What’s going on?”

It was the lieutenant, the detective who had
talked to Kate at great length about her
abduction last winter. He still wore the same
careful suit and had the same quiet, piercing
manner as before. His eyes took in Colar,
obviously well and healthy, a far cry from the
wounded boy who had been in the hospital
for weeks.
Kate bit her lip. She had forgotten about this
guy. He had investigated her and Lynn’s
disappearance, and he was not happy with the
loose ends their reappearance had left him
with.
“Hi, Lieutenant. They want to look at the
log.”
“Anything in particular?” Spencer asked.
“Yes, sir.” That was Colar. He looked straight
back at Spencer, giving him look for look.
Even in his shorts and sandals, even as a
seventeen-year-old kid, he was bigger than the
spare lieutenant. Not by much, but with a
hint that his growth was yet to come. Still, his
manner held nothing but respect and
politeness.
“We thought we saw a suspicious guy in the
neighborhood, but we weren’t sure. So we

wanted to check and see if anyone else had
called it in,” Kate said. She added, “Sir.”
From her it was much less convincing, and
she flushed.
Spencer looked surprised. “Most people call
nine-one-one for that, and we check and see if
there have been similar calls,” he pointed out.
“Did you call?”
“Umm, no. But we didn’t want to, well, call a
report in on a neighbor.”
He nodded. “That’s usually what it is.
Someone walking a dog. Or raccoons in the
garbage. We get lots of raccoon calls. Next
time just call it in. People are understanding.”
He was about to turn away.
A part of her knew it was better to let him go.
Making a report could bring up all kinds of
questions. She could just imagine her parents’
anger and frustration at the renewal of the
press, the inquiries. The police had to be
satisfied with the official story, that she had
run away and gotten mixed up with a
dangerous cult, the same cult that had raised
Colar. If she tried to say anything else, no one
would believe her.
But if she didn’t report it, who knew where

Marthen would end up next? Or who he could
hurt on his way to me. She would have to be
very careful.
“Well, can we make a report now?” Kate
said. She could see Colar looking at her now,
out of the corner of her eye. Trust me, she
thought at him.
The lieutenant turned back. The front desk
officer looked between them. Lieutenant
Spencer gestured to the officer.
“Go ahead.”
Kate took a deep breath. Now she wasn’t sure
exactly how to describe him. She had to be
very careful. There was so much Spencer
couldn’t know about the events of last fall.
“I saw him last Saturday evening near the
convenience store,” she began. “He’s, well,
he’s about in his forties. Long black hair,
about to his shoulders. His clothes were kind
of old-fashioned . . .” She trailed off. The
front desk officer hadn’t even begun to type
anything in at the computer in front of him.
“Was he doing anything?” Spencer asked in
his dry voice. “Did you see him commit a
crime?”
“No . . . not right then.”

“Hmm. Being old and wearing old-fashioned
clothes isn’t enough.”
She knew what she would have to say, and she
knew how she had to say it. Kate pushed
down her revulsion and took a breath. She
twirled her hair, and when she spoke, her
voice was a little lighter.
“It was, like, the way he looked. Like he didn’t
belong here?” She bit her lip and looked
away. The desk officer looked a little more
alert. He looked up at Spencer, his hands
poised. Even Spencer hesitated for a moment.
“He was staring at her,” offered Colar. “He
kept on looking at her, like he wanted
to—well, you know. We were worried that he
was going to follow us.”
Oh, good one, she thought.
Spencer raised an eyebrow. “Why didn’t you
call right away?”
“Because, well—he hadn’t actually done
anything. Like you said. Only, the more we
thought about it, the weirder it all got?” Kate
put in. This was getting easier.
“Did you tell your parents?”
“No,” Kate said, her voice small. The front
desk officer made a disparaging noise that

meant, Stupid kids. “We weren’t sure what to
do. We didn’t want them to worry.”
“Have you seen him since?”
She shook her head. Spencer glanced at the
other officer.
“All right. You’ve made a report. We’ll keep
an eye out for him.”
She felt an explosion of relief that it was over.
She couldn’t trust her voice to betray her.
“Thanks,” Colar said, and they hurried out
into the cool summer air, both taking a deep
breath when the doors closed behind them.
They didn’t speak until they got into the Jeep
and pulled out of the driveway and down the
road.
Kate let out her breath, letting her hands on
the wheel steady her. “Well, what do you
think? Was that worth it?” The wind
whipped her hair around and the words out
of her mouth.
Colar considered. “If he believed us. Do you
think he did?”
She thought about Spencer. “I think we made
him curious. I just hope it’s about the
mysterious stranger and not about us.”
“He’s a hound,” Colar said.

“What?!” Kate was half-shocked,
half-laughing.
“He’s on the scent. I could see it, the way he
looked at us. I think we put him on the track
behind us, not just Marthen.”
It hadn’t been an insult then but rather an
observation, an Aeritan one. “Well, what’s he
going to find if he follows us? That we went
through this portal thing last year? We could
swear to all that in court, and he wouldn’t
believe it.”
“If there’s one thing I’ve learned from your
mother and father, that would be a worse
problem than if he did.”
She winced, but she couldn’t deny the truth
of it. She slowed at a stop sign and checked
for traffic, tapping the brakes and then
accelerating.
“So we can’t give him anything to be
suspicious of about us,” she said. “We have to
be as normal as we can so he focuses on
finding Marthen.”
“Easy enough then.”
Even with the wind taking their words away,
she could hear his bitterness. Sometimes it
was hard to remember that Colar was ever

anyone except for Cole Mossland, teenage
boy, lacrosse player, honor student. He played
his new role so well. But how it must chafe to
be Cole Mossland and not Colar, heir to the
House of Terrick. She bit her lip.
“Colar—”
“Forget it.” He kept his face turned away
from her. “Let’s be normal. We should go to
the lake.”
The lake would have kids their age, kids they
knew like Maddy and some other friends. The
lake would be normal. She kept her voice
light.
“Sounds good. Hold on.” She slowed, looked
in the rearview mirror, and swung the Jeep
into a tight U-turn in the middle of the road.
A car coming in the opposite direction honked
at them, but she stepped on the gas, and the
Jeep burst forward. Colar grabbed the roll
bar.
“I hate the way you drive!” he yelled into the
wind.
“Can’t hear you!” she hollered back. The only
thing better than riding was driving. Then
police lights in the mirror caught her eye, and
she felt an instant of panic. Oh shit. If she got

a ticket, her parents would kill her. Panicky,
she slowed and pulled over. She glanced over
at Colar and felt a measure of guilt. So much
for staying away from the cops.
Instead of pulling in behind her, the cruiser
screamed on by, for brief seconds the siren
unbearable, and then the sound twisted in the
distance. Colar and Kate stared at each other,
and she started to laugh with a mix of relief
and guilt.
“It wasn’t us,” she said. Colar just shook his
head.
“You got lucky,” he said, but he grinned, too.
“Don’t press it.”
“Yeah, I think you’re right.” Last winter she
had pressed her luck, all right. With Colar
coming up with a distraction, she had stolen
Mark Ballard’s old jeep out from under him
from his supply camp in a daring daylight
raid. Turned out the jeep held a cache of
weapons and tech that General Marthen put
to good use in the final battle.
Her stock had risen immensely, until the
general had found out she kissed Colar and
had ordered her beaten in front of the entire
camp.

And now he was here looking for her.
Her good humor faded. Kate swallowed
against her fear. She put the car in gear and
rolled back on the road, accelerating sedately.
They arrived at the lake parking lot a few
minutes later. The beach was small, and the
water was usually filled with little kids and
their moms, as well as the usual crowd of
teens at their own section of the beach. Not
this time, though.
The patrol car had been joined by a couple of
cruisers as well as an ambulance. Kate and
Colar stared at the scene as she pulled over to
the side. A sickening premonition seized her.
She caught sight of Maddy at the same time
that the girl saw them. Maddy ran over to
them awkwardly, a towel wrapped around
her as if she needed it for comfort, not just to
cover her bikini.
“Oh my God, Kate!” she said. Horror had
wiped the girl’s face of color beneath her tan.
“They said they were looking for you.”
Five
The last remnants of faded crime scene tape
fluttered in the breeze around the little house

at the end of Daw Road. Lynn sat in her car
across the street and looked at it. She didn’t
want to get out. She didn’t want to go near
the house. It sat in two places, here and in
Aeritan, in both forests in the heart of
Gordath Wood. Behind the house, three
ancient pignut trees loomed into the sky. You
could see those trees from the road. They
were the center of the Wood.
She steeled herself and got out of the car,
closing the door gently. There was no one else
down this far. The road turned to dirt here,
the old, decrepit house isolated. She had read
in the local papers that the town and the state
were wrangling over which had jurisdiction
over the house, now that it had been used as a
center for poaching and running guns.
Garson had slithered out of that one, too,
claiming that he hadn’t known what his
former bartender had been up to.
Lynn took a deep breath and walked up. The
concrete porch was weathered and crumbled,
and the iron railing had rusted. There was a
condemned notice on the front door. She
halted at the bottom of the crumbling porch
and decided to go around the back.

The backyard was overgrown, seedlings
encroaching on the cultivated space. The
police had cleared the backyard of the skulls
and barrels as evidence, and the only thing
left was a ragged rope swinging from a tree.
There was a boarded up window at the base
of the cellar. She held her breath and tried to
concentrate. She felt nothing, no nausea. The
earth didn’t shake. The house was empty and
dead, the crowding forest silent and without
menace. If she went back into the Wood, she
could wake it up. After all, Lady Sarita had
not been a guardian, and she had managed to
walk through the worlds.
But she had been seeking escape, Lynn argued
with herself. She had been seeking relief from
a terrible marriage and—Lynn thought—a
deep loneliness.
And what are you seeking? The thought came
unbidden, and she warned herself: Be careful.
If she let herself think of Joe or Crae, she
could end up walking between worlds, too.
She breathed lightly, trying to whisk her
thoughts away, and walked a few steps deeper
toward the woods. She wouldn’t go as far as
the pignut trees, she told herself. She would

stop before she got too close. She just wanted
to see—she just wanted to make sure—there
was no opening between the worlds.
Last year, at night, she had been on the trails
less than a quarter of a mile away from here,
when the gordath reached out and snared
her. Now she was at the epicenter.
The grasses reached up to her knees and,
mindful of ticks, she was thankful for her
jeans. The trees pressed in on her, the thin
saplings on the outskirts giving way to the
giant trees, the hickories and the tulip trees,
that stretched straight and true into the sky.
There was no trail here, and she halted inside
the coolness of the woods. The air was thick
with underbrush, and she let her eyes find a
route through the woods. The ground was
covered with brown, decaying leaves and the
scent of the soil was rich and vital; she
breathed it in deeply. Outcroppings of rock
jutted up in the woods. She could hear water
trickling, even though the small streams
should be dry this time of year. That’s the
stream where I found Arrim! she thought. It’s
right through there. Lynn took a step forward
before she halted herself by main force. She

could not go into the woods.
Leaves rustled overhead, and she looked up
through the greenwood. A squirrel leaped
from a branch and then scampered down the
trunk of a tree to scold her.
“Yeah, yeah, I’m going,” she said.
Other than the squirrel, the forest was in a
deep afternoon sleep. Even the cicadas had
stopped singing in her presence. There was no
gordath here. Nothing. The woods were just
that—woods. She had a sense that she could
walk through the whole forest, deadheading
straight through to Pennington Stables if she
wanted to, and she’d arrive safe and sound.
That was the only thing that would prove the
gordath wasn’t open. The problem was, what
if she was wrong? What if it was trying to
manipulate her into going in? What about the
red horse?
“Of course, statistically speaking, horses are
more likely to get dumped off,” she said out
loud. The squirrel stopped for a moment as if
amazed at her ability to talk, and then
resumed its chattering. “It’s not quite so often
that a hole opens up between worlds and one
walks through. So I will go as far as those

three trees, and then I will walk back. And
that will prove—something.”
Lynn took one glance back at the house. She
barely stood outside the border of its
backyard. The three trees hulked about
twenty-five feet into the Wood. She could see
their trunks. Lynn took a deep breath and
walked, counting off her paces.
When she stood beneath the trees, she
touched one as if she were a kid playing tag
and the tree was home. It was cool and rough
to her fingers. Overhead the wind soughed,
and she could hear the sound of distant
traffic from the highway. She turned around
to look back at the house. It was the same as
before, small, falling apart, the paint on the
siding flaking, which she could see even from
this distance.
She had to admit it to herself. The gordath
was closed. Lynn trudged back to the house
and around the front to her car. She opened
the door and let herself in, wincing in the
baking heat. She sat there for a moment and
then started the engine and pulled away. Only
then did she allow herself to acknowledge her
sadness.

Joe was right on the other side. And Crae
might not even still be alive, though she shied
away from that thought. She could never
know and would never find out. Damn that
thing, she thought. The gordath hadn’t
opened, but it had awakened a terrible need.
Maybe that’s what it does, she thought bitterly.
Opens the hole inside you first. She knew one
thing for sure: If she ever approached the
gordath again, she would be like Lady Sarita.
She would find a way to disappear.
Drav, the big Brythern guard, aimed a kick at
a skinny dog that skulked near camp, and Joe
rolled his eyes. Drav was the camp enforcer,
intimidating Joe and Arrim whenever he
could, trying to beat the shit out of them
when he thought he could get away with it.
Lord Hare rebuked him when he thought his
man had gone too far, but it was never as
soon as Joe could have wished for. Mark tried
to egg Drav on, too, but it soon became clear
that it was the quickest way to make Drav
stop. Mark might have thought he was Hare’s
right-hand man, but whenever he tried to
give any orders, he was pretty much ignored.

He mostly sat around in camp holding his
rifle and pretending to sight it and sulking.
With Joe and Arrim off-limits, Drav took out
his frustrations on the dog. It was obviously
lost and looking for hand-outs. It scuttled
around with its tail between its legs, flinching
when it got a kick or a rock thrown at it. It
had belonged to someone, because it kept
expecting kindness. No kindness here, Joe
thought. Nothing sadder than a lost dog.
Well, he and Arrim were pretty sorry and sad
right now. They had been bound and driven
by the Brythern soldiers for two days deep in
the forest, with little pity for their pains. They
were kept apart so he and Arrim couldn’t
talk, and when he asked, no one, not even
Mark, as hard as it was for him to keep from
boasting, told him a thing except they were
captives, they were to keep quiet, and if they
made trouble, they would be killed. Hare kept
the handgun in a holster at his belt, along
with a sword and several wicked knives.
The dog whined and hid in the shadows
outside the camp, and Drav cursed and threw
a stick at him. A yelp came from the dark, but
the dog kept itself hidden. Good, Joe thought.

He sat on his haunches; his hands, bound
behind his back, were tethered to a tree. As
always, Joe tried to work his hands free, but
though the rope slipped up and down his
wrists, it was clear it wasn’t going to untie
itself.
“Hey,” he yelled out to no one in particular.
“I have to piss!”
“Piss your trousers,” someone growled.
Ballard laughed.
Asshole, Joe thought and settled back. His
guards had fallen into a routine anyway. They
would be let up in an hour and be able to
relieve themselves. It was the one time their
hands were untied, but there was no chance
for escape, not with three Brythern swords at
his throat while he went about his business.
Even without any answers he could figure out
some things. They had been kidnapped
because they were guardians, and so he was
pretty sure that they weren’t going to be
killed, no matter how much trouble they
made. It looked like Mark was up to his old
tricks. Joe wondered if he had convinced
Hare to cross the Aeritan border just to pick
up the cash, and he and Arrim were a bonus

catch, or if they were the point of the raid.
The last thing Arrim had said before they
were captured was that they were trying to
close the wrong gordath. Joe hadn’t had time
to figure out what it meant. Now it looked as
if Hare and his buddies had a portal of their
own. And since Mark was involved, chances
were that he was making another bid to run
guns across this new gordath. Was Garson
standing at the ready at his end with another
stockpile, or did they have a different game
going? Dammit, he thought. Lynn could be in
danger. She might not know about Garson’s
connection to the gordath and the guns. He
wished he could get a message to her, wished
for a moment that he could have sneaked
through the gordath back at the old house.
Gone visiting, maybe even gone home. But he
was a guardian, and guardians keep the
gordath closed.
Well, he thought, at some point Hare had to
let his two captives work together, and then
they could turn the tables.
For instance, they could open the gordath and
duck through, and close it from the other
side. Maybe. He sure wouldn’t want to open it

up here and then find out it couldn’t be done.
He glanced over at Arrim and caught the
guardian’s eye. At that moment he got
slapped on the back of his head, bringing
tears to his eyes. When he could focus again,
he saw it was Hare who had given him the
wallop with his gloves that were made of hard
leather and sewn together with metal rings.
“No signaling,” the man ordered. Mark and
the guards laughed. Joe sat back, his head still
stinging, but he kept his silence.
All right, he thought. There has got to be a way
out of this. I’m a guardian, dammit! I have to
be able to do this.
He couldn’t think of a damn thing. Even if he
could fight, he couldn’t fight armed men. If
he could get his hands on the gun—Joe knew
how to shoot a gun as well as the next good ol’
boy, but he sure didn’t know how to fight
with a sword. It was all moot anyway, since he
was trussed the way he was. He glanced over
at Mark. Mark just watched like Hare while
everybody else made camp. Hare didn’t know
it—or maybe he did—but Mark was a
liability. His brand of cocky put him at a
disadvantage, because he always thought he

was smarter than everybody else.
I’ll have to play him, Joe thought. It was hard
when Hare kept a no-talking rule for his
captives, but Mark couldn’t shut up about his
schemes. Joe could be patient and wait for
Mark to spill. He’d wait for the gordath, too.
He felt out for it. It was stronger here, and it
thrummed along with his heartbeat. It didn’t
feel any different for all that it was a foreign
gordath, but he could tell there was
something different about himself, something
darker, something harder inside of him.
Hare got up and disappeared into the woods.
Joe hoped he fell in his own shit.
Drav caught his attention. He had a bit of
meat and was holding it out in the direction
the stray had disappeared, making kissing
noises to call in the dog. Joe jerked up,
sickened.
At length there was movement in the woods,
and the dog crept out. Joe saw the man’s
other hand reach up to his knife hilt. The dog
cringed but kept coming.
“Drav, leave the dog alone,” Joe said. He
jerked at his bonds. Anxiety rose in him.
“Shut up, Aeritan pig wife,” the guard said.

He went back to luring in the dog, which
inched slow step by slow step to sure pain.
“Yeah, shut up, Joe,” Mark said.
“Drav, hold,” said one of the other guards,
disgust clear in his voice.
“Piss off.”
“Drav, let. The dog. Be.” The disgusted guard
stood.
“Why don’t you let Drav be?” someone else
shouted righteously.
“Yeah,” Mark said. “It’s just a dog. Christ.
Let him have some fun.”
Joe held his breath, but Drav’s sadism warred
with his dislike for Mark. He gave him a
disgusted look and continued to sweet-talk the
dog.
The rest of the guards were standing now,
some on Drav’s side, some for the dog.
Joe got up and angled closer. He glanced at
Arrim across the camp. The man was on one
knee, and he looked sick to his stomach. Joe
gathered up as much slack as he could in his
tether.
“There’s a good boy, come to play,” Drav said
in a falsetto. The dog touched its nose to the
meat.

Joe jumped.
The rope pulled him short but not before he
rammed into Drav’s side, taking him off
balance. The knife flashed up into the air, and
Drav landed on top of him as Joe was jerked
back.
Drav roared and thrashed, and the rest of the
men jumped in, kicking and hitting. Joe
grunted with pain, but he could do nothing to
defend himself. He curled around himself,
but they just took it out on his back.
“Hold!” It was Hare. He made himself heard
over the me-lee. The beating slowed, but Drav
took the opportunity to get up and kick Joe in
the ribs one last time. Joe cried out as he felt
something crack.
“I said hold!” Hare raised his gun and shot
into the air, the report rolling away into the
woods.
It got their attention, and the forest went
dead silent. Joe rolled over to his good side,
trying not to cry, blood streaming from his
nose. He couldn’t see, couldn’t move beyond
that, but he could listen.
“What part of hold, Drav, don’t you
understand?” Hare’s voice had gone soft.

“He jumped me!”
“And he was punished. But I can’t have him
killed. Now, I know you are one of the best
men I have. Loyal, brave, a dirty fighter.”
“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”
“But these two men are more valuable to me
alive and uninjured than dead—and if I have
to shoot you to keep them that way, I will.”
Another deep, ringing silence. Hare raised his
voice. “And that goes for the rest of you.
Mensare, fix him.”
Mensare was the small band’s medic. He said,
“Yes, sir,” and Joe felt him drop to his knees
next to him.
He heard rustling, and then Hare knelt, too.
The Brythern leader reached out and turned
Joe’s chin, forcing him to look up. Joe made
himself open his good eye—the other one had
already swollen shut.
“If you try that again, I will have your friend
beaten as badly as you just were,” the man
said. “We won’t kill you. We’ll just make you
wish we did.”
Shut up, Joe told himself. Shut up, don’t say
anything, just shut up.
Instead, he rasped out, “You can stick your

gordath up your ass.”
Hare didn’t say anything. He stood and
walked back to the fire. Mensare ripped away
Joe’s thin T-shirt and began working on him,
wiping away blood, salving his wounds, and
wrapping his torso to bind his ribs. Joe
gasped or grunted, depending on whether the
medic stung or hurt him, but the pain settled
to a steady throb. Mensare caught his eye. In
a low voice the man said, “You aren’t very
bright, are you?”
Joe couldn’t laugh so he settled for a snort.
“Yeah.”
Mensare grinned quickly and rummaged in
his bag. “Trying to save a dog like that. You
know he’ll do his best now to kill that dog in
front of you.”
“I know.” His sense of humor faded.
Mensare said, “Eh, doesn’t mean we’ll let him
do it.”
“Have Ballard order him to,” Joe managed.
This time Mensare full-on laughed and then
covered it with a cough. He began smearing
Joe with a liniment of some nasty cream. Joe
got a whiff of something that almost smelled
familiar, as if the ingredients in the cream

were the same as something on a drugstore
shelf. Mensare caught his expression.
“Bruisewort,” the man said. “You’ll still hurt
like hell tomorrow, but the bruises fade
faster.”
Joe remembered his mother’s mother, his
abuela, putting arnica on his bruises and
singing a charm over them. How did that
song go? He closed his eyes and let himself fall
into the memory as Mensare finished his
efficient ministrations.
He slept fitfully, the pain waking him
periodically. It was full dark, the fire banked.
He could see the shapes of men standing
guard. The stars shone down through the
narrow spaces between the trees, and the
night had gotten cold. Joe shivered. He
couldn’t move much, and he ached from head
to toe. His vision blurred, and he felt
nauseous. The bastards gave me a concussion,
he thought woozily.
He heard the smallest sound behind him, a
tiny footfall here and there. Joe froze. The
guards never reacted as they talked softly to
one another. They remained facing outward.
The footfalls came closer, and then he felt a

wet nose nudging his back.
Oh God. Joe kept still, willing the dog to go
back into the woods. Instead the dog settled at
his back, and warmth spread into him. Joe
still had his hands tied behind him. He used
his fingers to stroke the dog’s rough fur. The
dog licked his fingers once. Joe’s fingers
found a rough rope around the dog’s neck. So
maybe it had been someone’s pet. He
managed to grab a scrap of T-shirt behind his
back and rip it off at the seam where it had
been hanging by a thread anyway. He twisted
the scrap under the dog’s rope. The dog
whined, and Joe stilled. One of the guards
turned toward him, but then turned back. Joe
let out his breath and pushed at the dog, but
the dog just licked his fingers and settled at
his back.
A gordath wants to be open. It goes out of its
way to lure lost and lonely travelers, calling
them through curiosity or homesickness or a
combination of the two. Joe pushed the dog
away as roughly as he could with his hands
restrained. The dog resisted its exile from the
one kind man it had found, but Joe elbowed it
hard. The dog whined again, and then, as if it

understood, Joe heard it creep off. Good, he
thought. Go. Let the gordath find you.
Joe didn’t know what Lynn could do if she
got his message, but he felt comforted that
she would know he was here, alive, and in
trouble. She’ll come, he thought, looking up at
the stars between the dark branches of the
trees. She’ll come.
He woke to the hustle of breaking camp
before the dawn. Joe knew right away from
the cold at his back that the dog stayed gone,
and felt relief. Even if it didn’t find the
gordath, maybe it would stay out of Drav’s
reach. He could barely move, and Mensare
had to help him to his feet. He staggered like
an old, sick man, barely able to keep his body
straight. Drav sniggered, and Mark looked at
him in disgust. Movement helped, though,
and he loosened up. His hands were released
so he could eat the bread and meat they gave
him and drink his cup of vesh, the spiced
drink everyone took to here, even
Brytherners, apparently.
Joe looked over at Arrim, but the man didn’t
look at him. He was worried about Arrim. He

hadn’t been as badly beaten as Joe—yet—but
Joe knew that Arrim wouldn’t be able to take
it, even if his body survived. The guardian
lived for the gordath and the woods. Even
during his sojourn in a mental hospital last
year, he had survived by dreaming of his
beloved forest. Bastards, Joe thought bitterly.
Arrim didn’t deserve this.
“Stay still,” Mensare ordered. He checked
over Joe’s bandages and bruises, his hands
brisk and thorough. He poked at Joe’s ribs,
and Joe stifled a groan. “Sorry,” Mensare
said under his breath. He raised his voice.
“He’s fit enough, Lord Hare.”
Joe didn’t know exactly how bad off he would
have to be for Mensare to tell Hare he
couldn’t walk, but he didn’t want to have to
find out.
“Good. Everyone on the move.” At Hare’s
orders, the guards broke camp, retied the
captives, and headed out.
They took it slow for Joe’s sake, and he
staggered along with limping steps. The trail
they had been following took them out of the
woods. The forest thinned, and the trees
became sparse while the underbrush got

thicker, now that the plants could see the sun.
Soon they were walking through bright
meadows, the morning sun growing stronger
than he was used to in Gordath Wood or
around Red Gold Bridge. The land rolled
away from them, the sky got big again, and
the dirt was gold, baked in the hot sun.
Yellow grasses blew in the breeze, and for a
second Joe thought he could be in Texas, even
down to the stubby pines that dotted the
landscape. A range of hills caught his eye, and
the lowlands looked like they folded in
between them. Here and there he could see
settlements, the houses square and low-slung,
not like the round little stone houses of the
forestholders in the woods outside Red Gold
Bridge. Livestock grazed, mostly sheep but a
few head of cattle. No people, but he had no
doubt their passage was being watched very
closely. Probably these folk knew better than
to mess with the little band.
The land’s familiarity made him homesick.
You could plant cotton here, Joe thought,
scuffing at the trail with his boot. Maybe need
some irrigation, but the soil here looks good . . .
He caught himself up at the irony. He

couldn’t get out of Texas and leave cotton
farming behind fast enough, and here he was.
Well, you can’t take the country out of the
country boy. Even if he becomes a guardian.
The sun was high overhead when the trail
began to rise toward a pass through the hills.
The ground grew rocky, and the grasses grew
sparse until soon they walked on dirt and
rock. They ate on the go, sharing the water
and letting the prisoners have their ration.
Joe was weakening, though. Hare kept a
steady pace, and Joe finally had to stop, all of
his injuries throbbing, especially his ribs. His
head ached, and his nausea grew.
As the rope grew taut between him and his
guard, the man yanked at it. “Move!” he
growled. Instead, Joe went to his knees.
They all gathered around. Mensare rolled
him over on his back, and Joe kept back a
groan as a rock dug into his side.
“He’ll have to rest,” he said. “He went farther
today than I thought he would.”
Lord Hare made a disgusted noise. He
glanced at Mark. “Lord Bahard,” he said
with scarcely disguised contempt, “you carry
him.”

“Me!” Mark protested. The guards all
exchanged eye rolls and a few snickers.
“You. It’s time you pulled your weight
around here.”
With a sulk Mark slung his rifle over his back
and put Joe’s arm over his shoulder, heaving
him up. It was almost as painful, but the
support helped.
“Thanks, buddy,” Joe said, mindful of the
forced and unwelcome embrace.
“Screw you,” Mark said, for once keeping his
voice low. Resentment leaked through. Just as
Joe expected, he couldn’t keep quiet. “What
the hell are you doing here anyway? How did
you become a guardian?”
“Just luck. What about you? How is it being
lord and master?”
Mark was too stupid to even know he was
being laughed at. He swore again, half
dragging Joe up the steep, rocky trail. The
sun beat down, and Joe felt faint and
nauseous. “Fuck Hare, and fuck the rest of
them. I swear, once you open that gordath,
I’m going straight through and never coming
back.”
“So what’s the deal?” Joe prompted. “They

have a gordath over here now?”
Mark couldn’t keep his mouth shut. Once he
had a chance to vent his frustration, he let
loose. He struggled up the trail, supporting
Joe and ranting under his breath.
“Guess there are these things all over the
place if you know what to look for. Now Hare
wants to run the same deal that I had with
Garson. Hell, he even wants in on the oil deal.
But the Brythern gordath is worse or
something. They tried to control it the last
time, and the guys told me that it took out like
twenty men and horses. So I told them where
we could find you. Well, a guardian anyway.
You were a surprise.”
His voice turned aggrieved. “I told Hare I
needed the money that I stashed for this deal.
It’s seed money, dammit!”
So Hare hadn’t believed Mark when he said
that’s what the money was for. Good for
Hare. Joe wouldn’t believe him either.
“Sounds like it’s quite a deal,” Joe said
noncommittally.
“Hell yeah. If we bring in the oil men, the
same ones Garson contacted last year, and we
can keep the gordath open, we can run

pipelines from over here back to New York.
Man, we pull this off, we’ll be fucking rich.
Well, me, Garson, and Hare. You’ll be lucky
you’re not dead.”
If there was oil; well, and there probably was.
The geology over here looked about the same
as back home.
“There’s just one little problem,” Joe said. “A
gordath can’t stay open.”
He could hear the smirk in Mark’s voice.
“That’s your problem, not mine. Not Hare’s.
Believe me, if he wants it open, you’ll keep it
open.”
How far will a gordath open before it destroys
two worlds? Joe had the uneasy feeling that if
he and Arrim weren’t careful, they were
going to find out.
The hike continued. The ground kept rising,
and small pebbles rolled under their feet,
sending down a constant barrage to the
people at the back of the line. Finally, Hare
stopped. Mark released him, and Joe
collapsed.
The trail ended at a marker, gray and eroded,
the carvings barely legible. Joe could read a
little of Aeritan writing after the months he

had been here. Someone had carved a rose
and the characters for Red Gold Bridge. So
this was the border, where the countries of
Aeritan ended. Beyond this was Brythern.
“Bring the other guardian here,” Hare said.
Someone pushed Arrim to stand next to Joe.
“This is why you are here,” he said. “You are
to open a gordath for us. You will keep it
open until we tell you otherwise. You will
control it when it becomes greatly powerful,
and you will tell us exactly how it is you do all
of this and show us how it’s done. Fail to do
this thing, and you are useless to us, and so
you will die—not, by the way, easily or
peacefully.”
“I’ll tell you,” Joe said hoarsely. He gestured
feebly, and Hare made a face, as if he knew
what Joe was up to, but he bent low anyway.
Joe lifted his head. “Just click your heels
three times and say, ‘There’s no place like
ho—’ ”
Hare smacked Joe across the mouth, the
leather and chain glove bringing blood to his
lips, but, eh, Joe thought, it was almost worth
it.

Colar half stood in the Jeep, taking in the
scene at the small beach. The police lights
continued to strobe, and he couldn’t look at
them, though he could see it didn’t bother
anyone else as much. It was much the same as
watching TV or a movie sometimes, a barrage
on his senses so that he had to turn away.
They grew up with it, he thought, but I didn’t.
Only sunlight in Aeritan could hurt your eyes,
if you were foolish enough to stare at the sun.
Maddy was sobbing, and Kate was trying to
comfort her.
“Maddy, it’s okay, okay. The police are here.
What happened?”
Maddy kept crying, and Kate unbuckled her
seat belt and got out. She put her arms
around Maddy and held her, and the girl’s
sobs slowed down and stopped. The other girl,
Sarah Decker, was talking fast on her phone,
her voice almost as hysterical as Maddy’s. She
wore a red bikini and her blonde hair glowed
in the sun. Colar stared, caught himself, and
looked away. And speaking of things to get
used to. The girls here were . . . different, to
put it mildly.
Kate looked at him over Maddy’s head. What

happened? her expression said.
He shrugged and hoisted himself over the
door of the Jeep. Just as he landed, the
detective they had been talking with not
fifteen minutes earlier came over to them.
Spencer looked furious.
“All right. What the hell are you two involved
with?”
“What?” Kate said blankly.
“What I mean is, what kind of game are you
playing? You tell us that there was some guy
staring at you, and now this?”
“Officer, I don’t understand.”
Colar was beginning to. Maddy had said, “He
was looking for you.”
“Maddy,” he said.
She looked up at him.
“What did he look like?”
“Oh God.” She gulped. “There were, like, a
bunch of them. It was like the guys you see at
the exits asking for change. Only the one in
charge, he had, like, long black hair, and his
eyes never blinked. He kept on asking for
Kate. He said—he said he’d kill us all one by
one if we didn’t tell him where she was. He
grabbed Austin, and he, he, had a gun—”

Austin Emerson. Sophomore, honor student,
French horn player. During the school year he
and Colar played basketball together at lunch
sometimes, pig—or horse, if they decided to
skip fifth period. Colar went still and quiet.
Austin in the hands of the most feared
general in all of Aeritan, who was rumored by
one and all to be quite mad . . .
“Is he dead?”
Now Spencer was looking at him. Colar
couldn’t parse the meaning of his expression,
but he filed it away. Shuddering, Maddy
shook her head. “One of the other guys, he
made him stop. Yelled at him, said he
couldn’t ki—kill a kid.”
“That’s enough,” the cop said. He turned to
Kate. “When you filed your report, Miss
Mossland, why did you conveniently forget to
tell us that the man we were keeping a
look-out for knew who you were?”
Kate tried to protest her way out of their
predicament. While she was talking, Colar
said, “Did anyone tell him where she lived?”
As his words sank in, they turned to look at
him one by one. First Maddy, then Kate,
whose protests came to a halt, then Spencer.

For a moment there was nothing but silence.
Then Maddy said in a small voice, “Austin
told him. He was really scared, Kate. I’m so
sorry.”
“It’s okay,” Kate said. She had regained her
calm, though she had lost all color in her face.
“Tell him I said so, okay, Maddy?”
Spencer turned and spoke into his radio. One
of the cruisers backed up and pulled out.
“Miss Mossland,” he said, “where are your
parents?”
“They’re at work,” she whispered. She made
her voice louder. “Work.”
“All right. Call them. Tell them we’re sending
a team to the house, but they are to go
straight to the police station. You two, drive
back to the station and wait there.” His voice
hardened. “Tell your parents that you and I
and young Mr. Mossland here need to have a
talk. An honest one this time.”
Kate and Colar drove to the police station,
followed by Spencer. They didn’t talk for
most of the drive until she turned to Colar.
She was very pale, but her expression was set
and calm.

“He’s gone to the house,” she said. “He wants
to set a trap.”
“He’s in the trap,” Colar said. “The police
will get there before him.” He wished he
could be as convinced as he tried to sound.
Colar tried to think what the general would
do. Even being new to this world, the general
had to know by now that he was at a
disadvantage. The police had cars and radios
and guns. Even the lieutenant carried one.
Colar could see it strapped under his suit
jacket.
But Marthen had a gun, too, now. And he
knew about radios. He used one in the final
battle in Gordath Wood. Colar grimaced. Not
so much of a disadvantage after all. Knowing
the general, the man had another tactic up his
sleeve.
He would have killed Austin, if the other man
hadn’t stopped him. That much Colar was
sure about. He remembered the general’s
order: Kill all the smiths, and the brutal
murder he himself was involved with. He
clenched his fist on his thigh, willing the
memory to go away. If it didn’t, if he couldn’t
make the thoughts go away, he was in for

another three or four sleepless nights.
Kate came to a complete stop at the
intersection and then started up again at the
same sedate pace.
“All right,” she said, and he looked at her.
She had regained her color, and her voice was
strong again. “We have less than two miles to
come up with a story. They think it’s a cult, so
we’ll have to give them that. Just follow my
lead. Yes, we recognized him, but I didn’t
want to worry my parents, so that’s why I
lied.” She gave a sudden, twisted smile. “That
will serve for Mom and Dad, too.”
He didn’t say anything. He felt his stomach
tighten. Lies had a way of coming back and
tripping you up. He didn’t think the police
officer would be put off by easy lies. He would
keep coming and coming until he got what he
wanted. They were prey, both of the general
and now Spencer.
“So he wants us to come back to the cult, and
that’s why he’s coming after me.”
Colar frowned. “I think—I think we should
say he’s coming for me.”
She threw him a quick look.
“I’m supposed to be from there,” Colar said

quietly. “Raised in it, remember? So it would
make more sense—he wants me back.”
She was quiet for a minute, and the only
sound was the engine and the roar of the
wind. The police station came into sight, and
she slowed and pulled in, rolling to the
farthest corner of the lot. Kate turned off the
engine and looked at him. Her expression was
bleaker than before.
“The thing is—Colar, they might make you
go.”
He stared at her. “They?”
“My—mom and dad. If they thought the
general were your father or something, they
might say, well, it’s time for you to go home.”
Spencer was waving them over, but they
didn’t move. Colar bit his lip. My foster sister,
he thought. She is my foster sister. He had
fancied her last winter, when they were the
only two young people in the camp. He still
did, but the rules of fostering were strict, and
so he had tried to keep his feelings tucked
away. He made a decision, slightly numb. He
knew he would regret it later, and that he
would miss this life terribly. School, friends,
girls, sports, cars, and later, college. He didn’t

belong here, and he was nothing but an
imposter. Even the reason he was here—the
only reason anyone could give—was one he
couldn’t understand and never would, not if
he lived here forever. But he wouldn’t live in
this world forever, and it was all a terrible
mistake that he was here in the first place.
Marthen’s coming was a sign from the high
god. He would give it all up, return to
Aeritan, and become lord of Terrick in his
turn.
“That’s just it, Kate. If Marthen’s here, the
gordath’s open. I can go home.”
It took Kate’s parents about forty-five
minutes to arrive from work and then be
filled in on the situation, including the attack
on the kids at the lake. When they found out
that she and Colar had gone to the police not
an hour before the attack, they were livid.
“Kate,” her father had said, low-voiced in his
anger. Kate stared back at him defiantly. No
matter how much you want this to be about me
being crazy, it’s not. She didn’t say that,
though, not in front of Spencer. Instead, her
father turned toward the officer, his face

working with an effort to placate and dismiss.
“Officer, I blame my wife and myself. You
know, we thought if we just gave her time to
get her life back, just let us all get our lives
back after what happened last year, but it’s
clear that maybe we should have given her
some extra attention.”
Kate gasped at her father’s betrayal. She
turned to her mother. Mom, she mouthed in
outrage. Her mother just shook her head
slightly, her lips compressed into a thin line.
She was pissed; that was clear.
“Maybe,” Spencer said, jotting things down
in his notebook. “But if you don’t mind, Mr.
Mossland, I don’t think this has to do with
your daughter’s mental state. She identified
someone she recognized from this cult that
kidnapped her—and by the way, we never
found anything to support that
contention—and now he’s not only come after
her, he’s putting other people in danger. So
while I can appreciate that you just want to
cover this up, I can’t do that.”
“This isn’t a cover-up, and you know it,
Louis,” Mrs. Mossland broke in, her words
clipped. “We’ll help any way that we can, but

since we don’t know what’s going on, we
don’t know what we can do.”
“The truth would help,” Spencer said mildly.
They all stared at him; the response had guilt
written all over it. Kate had to keep back a
laugh that she knew would sound hysterical
and inappropriate. Talk about confirming
that she was crazy.
“Officer,” she said, steadfastly ignoring her
parents and their alarm at what she might
say. “I was kidnapped last year by a cult of
crazy people. They dragged me all over the
place, and I never quite knew where I was.
Colar was shot by one of them, and we
managed to escape, and I drove home, and
that’s it. Except now, the leader came after
us. I didn’t think he would, but he did.”
“The kids at the lake said that he had a bunch
of other people with him. You know anything
about that?”
Kate frowned, trying to look as if she were
thinking. Instead, she remembered what
Maddy had said. Like the guys you see at the
exits asking for change. What would Marthen
be doing with a bunch of homeless people?
“I don’t know,” she said finally. “I don’t

know anything about that. He was definitely
by himself when I saw him.”
Spencer consulted his notes. “This man, as
you described him, was wearing
‘old-fashioned’ clothes. I remember when you
and young Cole turned up last year, Miss
Mossland. That would be what you were
wearing, too, except his clothes were more like
combat gear. Can you tell me about that?”
His look included the two of them.
As one, Kate and Colar shook their heads.
“No, sorry, it was just what they made us
wear,” Kate said apologetically.
“But the other men he brought with them,
they wore modern clothes,” Spencer said.
“The kids and the adults at the beach were
sure of that. Could be he’s recruiting.”
“If he’s recruiting from among the local
homeless people, surely you’ve gone to
question them,” Mrs. Mossland said, her
voice raised in alarm.
“We have, Janet. And it’s a funny thing. All
the underpasses from here to Brewster, even,
are all empty, except for trash left behind.
Like they’ve disappeared, just like Miss
Mossland did last year.”

Police lights strobed in the early evening
outside the Mossland house in their quiet
neighborhood. Kate and her parents and
Colar waited outside while the police checked
the house one last time for intruders. Their
neighbors watched from their porches and
driveways or from behind the curtains in
their great rooms, and Kate knew that her
parents were embarrassed over the unwanted
attention. No one spoke. Kate kept on
swallowing against the lump in her throat,
trying to keep back the tears. Her father
would rather believe she was crazy instead of
the truth.
At last the cops finished their sweep of the
house, and one came up to the little family
huddle, his modern armor with the SWAT
logo on it making him look big and bulky. He
carried a rifle pointed at the ground, his
finger well off the trigger.
“All right,” he reported to Mr. Mossland.
“It’s all clear now, but someone has been
inside; the alarm has been compromised, but
someone knew enough to call the alarm
company and call them off. We checked with

them, and that’s what they logged. But we
checked everything, and there’s no one inside.
House is clear.”
That couldn’t have been Marthen, Kate
thought. He had someone with him who knew
about alarm systems.
“So what we can do is keep a detail here—”
the officer began.
“That won’t be necessary,” her dad broke in.
Kate looked at him. Was he crazy? Marthen
had pulled a gun on a kid and broken into the
house looking for her. Beside her Colar
moved restlessly, as if he wanted to say
something.
“Dad,” she said. “I think—”
“That’s enough, Kate!” The look he gave her
was one of fury, as if he didn’t know her or
even like her. Despite herself, Kate cringed.
“Officer, we’ll be fine. It was just a break-in.
They won’t come back.”
Kate thought the man gave a look that
Captain Artor might have given: impatient,
disgusted, and derisive. But he just nodded
and called his men away. Without looking
back, Kate, her mom, and Colar followed her
dad into the house and closed the door.

The house was fully lit, every light blazing.
Kate’s mom reflexively went to turn off the
lights but then hesitated. Kate understood. It
feels dangerous, she thought. It doesn’t feel
like home. As one they began to move from
room to room. The police had been thorough;
there were traces of their passage everywhere.
A chair was out of place, and the pantry door
had been left open, but they hadn’t violated
the house. That had come earlier, and an aura
of unsettledness remained. Kate found herself
jumping at the least sound.
“I’m calling the alarm company,” her dad
said. “Incompe tents. They’re supposed to ask
for the password.”
Her mom sighed. “David. The password is
taped to the underside of the alarm box
because we kept on forgetting it.”
Her father began to bluster, and Kate had
enough. They were in danger, grave danger,
and her father had just compounded it with
his willful pride. “I’m going upstairs,” she
called out. Colar went to follow.
“Kate,” her father snapped, and Colar
halted. Kate looked back. “Don’t. You. Ever.
Interrupt like that again.”

Kate felt the color drain from her face. Her
father had never spoken to her like that
before. Her mother looked as if she were
about to say something but turned away. She
tried once more.
“Dad, you have to—”
“Not another word.”
Fear, anger, and hurt kept her silent. She
waited until she could get her voice under
control, and when she did, she managed
through her teeth, “Yes, sir.”
She saw by the look on his face that it had
been a direct hit. Kate turned and headed up
the stairs. She hadn’t slammed her door in
years, but she was tempted. Instead, she
closed the door and threw herself onto the
bed, tears leaking from the corners of her eyes
into her ears. Her parents thought she was
crazy and that she needed a shrink. They’d
never believe that Marthen was truly
dangerous. How was she supposed to keep
them safe if they refused to listen to her?
We’ll just have to find him first. What they
would do with him was another story, but
they would have to find him and stop him
before he attacked again.

Crying about it wouldn’t help. Kate got up,
wiping her face, when something caught her
eye.
Draped neatly across the back of her desk
chair was Mojo’s old saddle, the one she had
left behind in Aeritan.
Six
Crae limped out of his chamber before
daylight had broken, only to almost be bowled
over by a householder rushing by with an
armful of cleaning supplies. He flattened
himself against the wall as she stammered
out, “Oh, sorry, Lord Crae! Excuse me, and
Calyne wants you to not return to the upstairs
until this evening, please my lord and thank
you!”
Bemused, he watched her go, her words
floating behind her, and shook his head,
tightening up the strings at the throat of his
shirt as he headed down the stairs. He hardly
needed his walking stick anymore, though his
leg was still stiff. He walked, rode, helped
shear sheep and move cattle, and sparred
with his men, and rubbed liniment into it
each night, massaging the herb-infused grease

deep into the muscle. Truarch told him it
would keep the scar from tightening his
muscle like a drawn crossbow. He couldn’t
tell if it was working, but the wound didn’t
hurt as much, even if he did smell like the hay
meadows.
He made his way down the stairs, threading
his way between harried householders, each
giving him a breathless greeting and usually
some kind of admonition. He was told to stay
out of his chambers, the kitchen, the great
hall, and the guest chambers. The whole
household was in an uproar over the Lord of
Favor’s visit. He was expected that day. It was
one more thing he had to deal with. Crae
didn’t know the man, except from what he
had heard from Stavin, and that obliquely; he
had muttered once that Jessamy had gotten
all the sense in that family.
He wondered what his new brother would
think of him. Favor had attended his
wedding, but they had not spoken except for
the formal words of family over the wedding
cup: “Welcome, Brother. Let us drink to our
bond.”
Crae didn’t really remember much about his

wedding, other than the sense of wariness he
got from everyone at Trieve, except for
Tevani, of course.
He turned to the kitchen, remembered that it
was off-limits, and gave a curse. He hadn’t
eaten, and whatever they were cooking in
there for the welcome feast made his mouth
water.
Damned Lord Favor, he thought. Well, it’s my
damn house, and so it’s my damn kitchen. He
steeled himself and was about to pull open the
door when one of the cooks bustled up behind
him, two freshly slaughtered ducks hanging
by their necks from her capable hands.
“Ooh, get that door for me, Lord Crae,
please?” she called out, tendrils of brown hair
coming from underneath her kerchief. Her
dark eyes lit up when Crae held the door for
her and followed her in, admiring her figure
in her serviceable skirts and a half-laced
bodice, no doubt undone because of the heat
in the kitchen. Indeed, the heat rushed at him
from the ovens, and he was enveloped in
warmth and spices. The cooks and their help
had been joined by men and women from the
neighboring villages, all busy deboning birds

and stuffing sausage, kneading bread or
patting down flatbread. The kitchen was piled
high with sweetbreads and sausages. A basket
of the first strawberries waited to be turned
into a sweet and savory chutney along with
onions, garlic, and dandelion greens. Crae’s
stomach rumbled again, but he also wondered
what this feast was costing him; it looked as if
a fair bit of his livestock had been slaughtered
to impress his brother-in-law.
“Now, sir,” the cook said, throwing an impish
glance at him as if she caught him looking at
her, “we are all very busy for Lord Favor’s
visit . . .”
She reminded him of being a captain and
being the recipient of a woman’s boldness at
Red Gold Bridge.
“Vanye, if I don’t get something to eat and
some vesh, you are all going to be very sorry.”
She rolled her eyes, but he could tell she
wasn’t mad. “Fine. Go help yourself, but stay
out of the way. Not that!” she shrieked as he
made for some freshly baked rolls stuffed
with spiced beef. He held up his hands in
exaggerated alarm, and Vanye laughed. Her
laugh faded as her attention turned to a point

past his shoulder. Crae turned and saw his
wife watching him flirt with the householder.
Jessamy’s face was stricken, but she smoothed
her expression hastily.
“Good morning, Jessamy.”
She nodded. “Crae. Vanye.”
“My lady.” Vanye took her ducks and fled.
“Have you eaten?” he asked.
“Of course, Crae. Where have you been?
We’ve all been up for hours.”
“I didn’t realize your brother’s visit would
turn the house upside down and keep me out
of my chambers, the hall, the corridors, the
kitchens.”
“You usually spend all day outside anyway.
Get something to eat, but we’re all busy.”
He sighed. Not again. “Why are you so
angry?”
“I’m not angry, but if you must know, we’re
very busy, and it would have been better if my
brother’s visit did not have to coincide with a
crow in the kitchen.”
“The crow is not in the kitchen, and I don’t
see what the visit and crow have to do with
one another.”
“Because I don’t know how I will explain to

Lord Favor why there is a crow anywhere in
this house, especially one that tried to kill my
daughter.”
“I’ll explain it.”
She snorted. “You? That’s not—”
“Good enough?” he finished for her. She
reddened. He was peripherally aware that the
kitchen had gotten very quiet. Jessamy
seemed to become aware, too, because she
lowered her voice.
“I wasn’t angry before, but now I am. See
what you did?”
He couldn’t help it. He said, “It’s not that
hard, Jessamy.”
For a moment she looked as if she were
fighting tears, and then she turned and
walked away. He felt wretched and closed his
eyes, wishing for strength. When he glanced
around again, all the cooks looked quickly
away. After a bit Vanye came up to him with
a roll stuffed with minced meat and cabbage
and a mug of vesh. She gave him a
sympathetic look, but she also jerked her head
at the door.
He took the hint and left. Jessamy had
already disappeared, but he didn’t have the

energy to try to find her and placate her. She
had always been moody, but lately she had
been so on edge that the entire household
tiptoed around her.
They hadn’t bothered to place the crow’s
lockup off-limits to him, so he set his stick
outside. The boy he had set as guard had a
kitten with him and was letting it bat at a
string. Crae bit back a smile as the boy,
hardly more than nine, saw him and stood
straight up, approximating a soldier at
attention. The kitten mewed, and the boy
shushed him but continued looking straight
ahead.
“Um, hello, sir, Lord Crae. I’m sorry, sir.”
Well, the crow was no danger, and the only
reason the boy was on duty was to call for
help if he or the crow needed it. But Crae
thought that he should encourage the
youngster’s instincts.
“Son,” he said, “have you checked on the
prisoner?”
The boy’s face fell. “No, sir. Do you want me
to?” he added hopefully. Crae held up a
hand.
“When you stand guard, even over a

miserable creature such as the crow, you need
to be vigilant at all times. The crows are full
of wiles. How do you know he hasn’t
escaped?” The boy’s eyes went wide. Crae
kept from smiling as he pressed home his
point. “I knew a prisoner who once hid
beneath a manger. She would have escaped,
too, if I hadn’t tricked her.”
“How?” the boy said, his eyes wide.
“I pretended to give up looking for her and
close the door to the stables behind myself,
but I really stayed inside. She thought I had
left and stood up from her hiding place.”
He remembered suppressing a grin of
triumph at Lynn’s shock and disgust. She had
been upset with herself, but he had been able
to convince her he wasn’t her enemy—Tharp
and Bahard were. He nodded at the door.
“Let’s see if he is still inside. Has Truarch
come to care for his leg?”
“No one has been to see him, sir,” the boy
said. He pushed back the bolt and pushed
open the door, and Crae limped in.
The crow looked up listlessly when Crae
entered. The boy lit the two candles on either
side of the door and left them alone. The crow

lay in the hay, his leg exuding the sick-sweet
smell of infection, the chains half-hidden in
the straw. The room had become sickly again.
Crae regarded him from the doorway. If no
one had been to see him, the crow was likely
starving, if he was well enough to eat. He slid
down as best he could with his stiff leg. The
vesh slopped a little. He held out both the
vesh and the stuffed roll.
“Here. Breakfast.”
The man watched him, unblinking. He was
sprawled in the straw as if he had no energy
left. Crae set down the food and pulled
himself closer, steeling his nerve. If I call for
help, the boy will come, he thought absurdly. It
was foolish to be so frightened. The crow was
dying. Even with Truarch’s care and
remedies, his leg was festering.
“Here,” Crae said again. There was a clean
bucket of cold water at least, set far from the
corner with the slop bucket. Crae scooped up
a cupful with the dipper. Supporting the
man’s shoulders, he sat him up and held the
dipper to his mouth. The man sipped
obediently, but he felt hot, so hot. After a bit
he croaked something and feebly waved away

the dipper. Crae let him back down carefully,
and the man closed his eyes.
“Do you wish to speak to anyone?” he asked,
feeling a little foolish. The man moved his
head in the straw. No.
Crae nodded and he sat next to him. “Do you
want me to go?” he asked, this time feeling
still more foolish. Again the man moved his
head.
No.
“All right,” Crae said. “I’ll stay.”
The crow didn’t die then but only slept. Crae
left when his breathing settled to a raspy
evenness, blowing out the candles and leaving
the crow in darkness. When he stepped out
into the hall, he breathed the fresh air, feeling
the sweat bead on his forehead. The boy
watched him from across the hall, holding the
kitten as it squirmed and purred, biting his
fingers. It was a bad job for a kid. Crae
decided to set him loose.
“Here,” he said. “Go find Truarch and tell
him he needs to see to the crow. If he’s not in
the barns, he will be out with the sheep or in
the cow fields.” The boy’s face lit up at his
reprieve, and he ran off. Crae watched him

go with a grin, and then his smile faded. The
crow was dying. His scheme to learn what he
could of the lawless creatures was going
nowhere. I can’t capture a hale one, he
thought with grim humor, and I can get
nothing from a dying one. Maybe Jessamy was
right, and it was a fruitless quest. Crae locked
the door behind him and went off to find his
men. They needed to drill once the morning’s
work was done.
The sun had come up finally. The grayness of
the early morning was giving way to the pale
yellow of the sunrise, and the cool air was a
welcome change after the kitchens and the
sickroom. Meadow birds piped and called. It
looked to be a fair day, the air brisk and cool
for now, but it might even get some heat later
on. Crae arched his back and stretched. It
would be a good day for riding out, and he
needed to get aboard a horse again and test
his leg. Perhaps he could take Lord Favor
around Trieve when he arrived. That might
calm Jessamy, to see her husband and brother
get along.
On the way to the barn he tossed the meat roll
over to the pigs, reluctant to eat it after it had

been in a room of sickness, and dumped the
vesh in the rosebushes at the back entrance to
the barn. He stuck the cup on a stone ledge
next to the lintel, hoping he remembered to
bring it back.
He looked longingly back at the house,
wondering if he should try again for the
kitchens, when a tantalizing smell caught his
attention. He turned. One of the cooks was
bringing food to the men in the barns. She
had a pitcher of vesh, some more stuffed rolls,
and pickles, it looked like. Crae grinned,
retrieved his cup, and followed his breakfast
into the barn.
The breakfast fueled that morning’s arms
work. He set his men to battling on the lawn
at the top of the terraces, using wooden
swords to start with. Crae went from pair to
pair, keeping an eye out and sometimes
stopping combat to give advice on positioning
and tactics. It was maddening that Stavin had
not taken care of this when he was lord. He
would not have lost as many men as he had.
He had grieved over them, true, but he would
have done better to have prepared them for

war rather than throwing them into it
willy-nilly. Many of these men, now, were
brothers or cousins of the men who had died.
One sure thing in Aeritan. There would
always be a war, and so there would always be
a need for fighting men. He could not fail his
men—his House—by allowing them to be lost
again. Though he couldn’t do it alone. He
needed a captain, someone who could focus
only on putting together a fighting company.
Once he had been such a man, but even he
had come to Red Gold Bridge, his old posting,
with a fighting force in hand, and taken over
another already trained. He had never had to
train his men from scratch.
Well, now he had the need. As the sun got
high and his muscles loosened, Crae stripped
his shirt and tossed it aside. So did many of
the others. He motioned to one of his men, the
young farmer Alarin. The man threw him the
crude wooden sword, and Crae faced off
against his opponent. His weapon was a
crossbow, but in close combat that was
useless. He was not as great a swordsman as
others, but he could handle himself well. He
nodded to the other man, and they set at each

other, Crae calling encouragement. The
swords clunked dully together.
“There, good! Now watch your step—press
hard on me as I back up. Good!” He held up
the sword, and the man halted, grinning.
“Try again. This time you want to keep me
from getting my footing, so you have to move
faster and harder, like so.” Crae attacked,
pushing the man so quickly he stumbled. Crae
let up. No good at this stage in quashing all of
their confidence. “Now you try it.” The man
nodded and pressed a credible version of
Crae’s attack.
“Lord Crae!” At the call Crae turned. The
other man was not so quick to stop, and he
rapped Crae in the bare ribs with his sword
before he could pull up.
“Ow!” High god, that stung!
“Oh, sorry, my lord!” The man went from
confidence to wide-eyed worry.
Crae breathed hard to get the pain under
control. “No harm done. You’ve got quite a
blow there. Good thing we’re just playing.”
The man grinned in relief. Crae canted his
head and looked down at his ribs. An angry
red mark was slashed across his side. He

winced. It was going to raise a good weal. He
hoped Truarch had a nostrum for this.
“Oh, sorry, sir,” said the man who had
distracted them. “Lord Favor’s here.”
They all turned to watch as Favor and his
train mounted the terraces. Their horses were
blown, but the riders did not dismount. He
heard some of the grooms mutter at that.
Crae held up his hand and gave them a stern
look. This was one of the Council lords, and
they had best be respectful. Grudgingly they
subsided, and he let it go, but he made a note
to himself that he would need to be harder on
them. It was too easy to let them be on equal
footing with him—not so long ago he was a
commoner, too—and forget they must
remember their place. He must not be like
Stavin and let things go the easy way. He
winced at the memory of Vanye’s familiarity
and resolved not to allow himself to be drawn
into that again.
Crae grabbed for his shirt. It would not do
for the Lord of Trieve to greet the Lord of
Favor—his wife’s brother and thus his
brother—naked from the waist up, especially
with a livid mark across his side. He pulled

his shirt over his head, tying the strings at his
neck, and raked his fingers through his hair,
then limped forward to give greeting to his
new kinsman.
The lord was not much older than Jessamy
and looked a great deal like her. He was taller
than she, but they shared the same cast of
face and the same dark eyes. Favor stayed in
the saddle as his horse snorted and shook the
froth off its neck, its sides bellowing. He
looked down on Crae.
“Lord Favor, I give you greeting and
guesting,” Crae said. Get off your damn horse,
man. “Come, take your ease in my house.”
“Is my sister within?”
“Yes, of course.”
Favor gestured to his men, and they all
dismounted, some with a great deal more
alacrity than others. So at least he had some
men who knew what was due their mounts.
Take care of your horse, and he will take care
of you, the saying went, but it didn’t always
happen. Crae nodded to his grooms, and they
came over, and there was a great bustle as
housemen helped bring in Favor’s belongings
and the grooms took care of the horses.

Favor led the way to the house, and Crae
shook his head and let him go. So his brother
would not be courteous. So be it. He had a
holding to lead. He turned back to his men,
his limp more pronounced from the exercise.
The exhilaration from their training had
faded away, and now Crae felt the soreness he
had been denying. The youngsters looked
none the worse for wear, though there were a
few of the older strongholders who looked the
way he felt. That was a hard thought, and he
pushed it away.
“Enough for today,” he said. “We’ll go again
tomorrow.” It would be well if they could
spar against Lord Favor’s men, now they
were here, but he knew that could go badly.
His men were novices; he had but a quick
look at Favor’s men, and they all looked
battle-hardened. His men didn’t need to have
their confidence flattened.
All the more reason to get them into fighting
shape. With crows on the move and Aeritan’s
lords always irritable, it was not good to have
a weak holding.
Alarin, the young farmer, fell in beside him as
he gathered up his gear and his walking stick

and stumped toward the house.
“Lord Crae, may I ask you something?” The
young man’s voice was low. Crae stopped and
waited.
“Should we not have fighting men stationed
in all of Trieve’s villages? I know we have
much still to learn, but with all the men here,
it leaves our holdings vulnerable.”
Crae nodded. Alarin was an earnest fellow,
his eyes clear gray and a farmer’s tan evident
on his face and hands. He was strong and
stout, a good man, and a smart one.
“We’re racing time,” Crae said, keeping his
voice equally as low. “I say this not so that you
can talk it over in the ale-house, but that you
know I am aware of our lack. We need
fighting men, and we need them fast, with the
crows on the move and any other attackers
out there. So, we are going to train as we have
been. And I will find additional fighting men,
and with the high god’s blessing, we will be
ready when the need comes.”
Alarin nodded, his face determined. He
bowed, and Crae went on to the house.
Jessamy had greeted her brother, and they
stood together at the fireplace, a cup of

welcome already in Favor’s hands. Tevani
was wild with excitement, jumping up and
down. She caught sight of Crae and ran over
to him.
“Lord Crae, Lord Crae! My uncle has come!
He has the same name as Jori! Uncle Jori,
come see Lord Crae! He gave me Hero!”
Jessamy gave her brother a glance, and Crae
figured that she had already told him about
his gift of the horse. Favor skimmed over
Crae, his eyes lingering on the walking stick.
“Yes, I heard about that. Jessamy, I see what
you mean, about the spoiling. Maybe it’s a
good thing I’ve come.”
Jessamy had the grace to look abashed at
that. Crae let the slow burn rise and fall
within him. This was not the time to give his
wife’s brother the trouncing he deserved.
“Come, the welcome meal awaits,” Jessamy
said a bit hastily. “We give thanks for your
safe journey, Brother. We can all talk later.
Tevani, ask one of the housewomen to help
you into your pretty clothes. Goodness, child,
how did you get into so much mud?”
“I never know how it happens, Mama. I think
mud likes me.”

Several days later, Crae was drilling his men
under a bright, midsummer sky. There were
no clouds, and the sky was deep blue. It was
hot. Sweat poured off him and his men. Their
wooden swords clunked dully.
He was furious. Favor’s men watched, and he
could see them turn to each other, hiding
comments but unable to hide their smirks.
He should have been able to ask Favor for
help. But when he broached the topic, Favor
had taken great pleasure in disdaining his
request. “I do not wish to blunt my own men’s
prowess by setting them at beginners.” Even
Jessamy had looked at her brother, startled
by his response. Crae had seen the way her
eyes narrowed, but she had kept her counsel,
though she seemed uneasy. A part of his
anger was directed at her. She needed to help,
and yet she would rather support her brother
against her husband. No, against her home.
His men had grown unsure under the gaze of
the audience, and Crae bit back a curse.
Finally he shouted, “Swords up!”
Everyone halted raggedly, still another sign of
their inexperience. Crae picked up his shirt

where he had left it on the grass and wiped
his face with it. He scanned his audience. Let
Favor complain if he wanted to, but Crae was
going to put his brother’s men to good use. He
pointed at Breyan, Favor’s captain. “You!”
“My lord?” the man said, stepping forward.
He finessed the respect due to a lord with his
body language that said he answered to one
lord only.
“You are Breyan, are you not?”
The man bowed.
“Come, show Trieve what Favor can do,”
Crae said. He let a mocking tone enter his
voice. Breyan bit back a laugh, and his men
all gave a chuckle.
“With all due respect, my lord, but your men
are not yet seasoned. It would not be good for
them to fight us.”
“Oh, that’s not what I meant, Breyan.” Crae
tossed aside the toy sword and picked up his
scabbard where it leaned against the stone
wall of the old barn. He drew it and it rasped
out of the scabbard, a satisfying noise after
the timid thunk ing of wood on wood. He
waited. “Well? Or don’t you think that I can
wipe that smirk off your face?” He hoped he

could. He was worried about his leg, but he
didn’t think the captain had anything on him.
He was several years older and a bit thicker
than Crae, even if he was an experienced
fighter. And right now my anger will carry me
when my leg fails me. He’d blood Breyan to
make his point.
Breyan looked astonished. “My lord, I
can’t—well, my lord wouldn’t allow—”
“Yes, I would,” came Favor’s voice. He had
come out of the house with Jessamy. “You
have my permission, Breyan. Captain to
captain.”
Crae’s men rumbled, and a few stepped
forward. He held up a hand and walked over
to Favor. “Rather than lord to lord?” he said,
loud enough for all to hear.
This time the silence was broken only by the
sounds of the wind and the distant baaing of
the sheep. Jessamy spoke up first.
“Don’t be ridiculous. You aren’t going to
fight. I won’t allow it.”
“Of course not,” Favor said quickly, though
Crae hadn’t missed how he had to swallow
before he could speak. Crae was taller than
he, and the man had a softness about him

that spoke of too much wine and rich food.
“Are you sure?” Crae said. He shifted his
sword. “Are you sure you don’t want to fight
me?”
Favor turned pale, and his breath came fast.
He gripped his sword hilt, though, and
stepped forward gamely. “You forget
yourself,” he said.
“Crae, stop this at once,” Jessamy said. “Jori,
don’t.”
Favor sneered and made a great show of
releasing his sword hilt. “For you, Jessi. After
all, you are much to be pitied, for what fate
has married you to.” He took her arm and
made to lead her back to the house. She shook
off his hand and turned to Crae. She was
livid. Crae had seen her angry before, of
course, but this was the first time he had seen
her in full wrath. She had paled except for
two points of color high on her cheeks. He
stared back at her, matching her anger with
his. Do not walk away with him, he thought.
Do not, Jessamy.
Jessamy kept her eyes on him, eyes that were
dark with anger. She gave him a full curtsy,
her back rigid, bowing almost to his feet, the

elaborate ritual speaking of her fury. And
then she turned on her heel and walked away
from both of them. After a moment of
surprise, Favor followed at her heels,
remonstrating, and she shook him off.
Crae watched her go, seething. He walked
over to where he had left his gear, pulled out
a cloth, and wiped his sword down, even
though it had not been used. “Captain,” he
called, sheathing his sword. Breyan turned to
him with a watchful expression.
“Sir.”
“In Favor you follow your lord’s orders. In
Trieve you follow mine. Laugh at my men
again, and I will see to it that you are cleaning
the stables and shearing the sheep in their
place. Is that understood?”
Breyan was rigid with shock and growing
anger. When he could finally speak, his voice
was tight. “Understood.”
“Good. Then pick up a wooden sword, all of
you, and fall in. We have a House guard to
train.”
He watched his men join forces with Favor’s,
and already the energy of the training center
climbed tenfold. Crae watched and called out

orders, and wished he could spar, the anger
burning a hole in his gut. Better not to, he
decided. In his mood he could easily kill
someone, wooden sword or no.
Calyne approached him timidly later that
evening when Crae sat alone in the great hall,
cold air coming in from the imperfect glazing
in the windows high overhead. He sat at the
desk on the raised dais, going over the
histories of Trieve and the accounts, a bottle
of strong spirits at his elbow. He had not gone
to dinner with the others. Instead, he called
for his meal and sat with a few oil lights and a
fire on the hearth to cut the chill. He knew he
was sulking, knew that he lost what high
ground he held in acting so, and still he got
drunk and wished them all to hell.
He looked up at the housewoman’s approach.
She bobbed quickly and then said, “Lord
Crae, Lady Jessamy asked that you join her in
her chamber.”
His first impulse was to say no. He could tell
that Calyne thought he would, that or
demand that Jessamy join him instead. Crae
sighed and stoppered the bottle.

“Tell her I will be up.”
Calyne bobbed another small curtsy and
rushed off as if she had been reprieved. Crae
closed the books and set them neatly away.
This was Jessamy’s domain anyway, this desk
with all of its accounts. She had kept them in
Stavin’s absence. Trieve had prospered under
her control. It would have been a sad thing
for her to have left her home and her
children’s home if the Council had their way
last year.
Only by marrying Crae had she been spared
that. He supposed it too much to ask that she
offer him thanks. No, that was bitterness
speaking. It had been hard for her to seek this
salvation and harder still to accept it from
him, and he understood that. She had never
liked him or Stavin’s friendship with him and
tolerated it only for her husband’s sake.
He kicked back his chair and grabbed his
stick. He doubted that she was planning to
apologize, so he might as well go and see what
she wanted.
She sat nursing the baby boy in the low light
by the fire and a few candles. Tevani already
slept in a small bed next to the larger one that

was Jessamy’s, and there was a cradle for the
baby. The room was crowded and peaceful.
Clothes spilled out of a large chest, hers and
the children’s. The baby suckled sleepily, and
Jessamy was herself ready for bed, her hair
down around her shoulders and falling to her
waist. She wore a nightgown with tiny buttons
down the front bodice. It was half-undone
now so she could nurse. A blanket lay
discreetly over the boy and her breasts. Crae
waited, leaning against the bed-post. She had
summoned him; she could begin.
She watched him over her son’s head. Even in
the dim light he could tell she had been
crying.
“Thank you for not fighting him,” she said,
her voice thick. Of all the things he had been
expecting, that had been far from it. She
caught his expression of surprise, and she
gave a watery smile. “Crae, I’m no fool. He
deserves a good thrashing, my brother or no.
But if you fought him, win or lose, it would be
very bad for Trieve. We are in a tenuous
position here. No trained men and an upstart
lord? It would not take much for the Council
to decide they made a bad choice in you and

seek to remedy it.”
She was right. She put into words what he
had been sensing but hadn’t been able to
articulate. What the Council had raised, they
could cast back down. Just like that, they
were thinking together. All of his temper
vanished.
He nodded. “So what do you suggest? We
need allies, men—” If they could not even get
Favor as an ally, would any of the Houses
come to their aid in the Council or otherwise?
“I will talk to Jori,” she said firmly. “He
won’t go against me, no matter how much he
dislikes you.” Crae acknowledged her
openness with a wry smile, and she gave him
one of her own. “And I think we can count on
Terrick. I know that House. They are good
and honorable. Their son may still live
beyond the gordath.”
“And Wessen,” Crae said. It was his home
country, and he knew the formidable Lady
Wessen, Sarita’s mother. She had been the
one who sent him off to lead her daughter’s
guard, after all. At which I failed, he thought,
but nonetheless, he felt the grim lady would
have forgiven him, now that Lady Sarita was

returned.
“Red Gold Bridge is perhaps not our ally,”
Jessamy said thoughtfully. She dislodged Jori
from her breast, hastily covering up her
nightdress. She stood and laid the sleeping
baby in his cradle. He cried out once and then
sank into sleep, and Jessamy gave a sigh of
relief. She kept her back to Crae as she
buttoned her nightgown, and he allowed
himself to admire her form under the
nightdress, almost but not completely hidden
under its folds. “Unless Sarita can influence
Tharp.”
“What of Kenery?” he asked her. “Do you
think . . .”
She snorted and turned around to him. “I
would not trust Lord Kenery to hold my
horse for me. Do you know what it took for
me to argue him around? A bit of flattery and
an appeal to his most false nature.”
Crae laughed out loud, then muffled it
instantly, hoping he hadn’t woken the
children. “I had wondered. I thought you just
kept talking to him until he finally gave in.”
It was her turn to laugh, although more
quietly. “There was something of that, I

admit.” She began braiding her hair loosely.
“So our allies are few, our enemies many. But
that is the way of the Aeritan lords—how we
do squabble.” She gave him a smile that was
almost impish. “Welcome, Lord Crae, to your
new family. So how much longer do you think
it will take before we have a fighting force?”
“Months,” he acknowledged. “I need a
captain, perhaps two. I can’t do it all myself.
And we need men in all the villages.”
“Breyan is a good man,” she said. “He was in
my father’s guard as a young man, and he
took over when Jori became lord. Perhaps he
knows someone among his men who could be
a good captain. I’ll ask him.”
“Good,” Crae said. He felt a wave of relief
and hopeful-ness. He never thought it would
happen, but they worked together, at least for
now. Perhaps it took her brother to make
Jessamy see Crae in a better light. He wanted
to take her in his arms—hell, he wanted to
take her to his bed—but he knew better.
Crae stepped forward and kissed her lightly
on the cheek. “We will get through this,” he
said. “Trieve will survive.”
She made as if to say something but changed

tack.
“It will,” she said firmly and formally. “We
will. Good night, Lord Crae.”
Well enough. They were back to that. He still
felt lighthearted, though, enough to tease her
a little. He gave her a formal bow, lord to
lady.
“Good night, Lady Jessamy.”
And then he left her to seek his bed.
Jessamy must have talked to her brother,
because Favor sulked the rest of the day. Crae
hadn’t had a chance to ask her if she had
forced Favor into agreeing to ally with Trieve,
but he suspected from the man’s attitude that
she had been successful. Favor never looked
at Crae the whole day. He drank hard at
dinner, the good beer that was Trieve’s
specialty wasted on him. Crae was beginning
to wish that he could take his meal into the
kitchen and at least enjoy the company there,
when Favor finally spoke up.
“So, Captain,” Favor said sullenly. He glared
up at Crae. “You have turned my sister’s
House into quite an old barn. You give
guesting to a crow. That is something new.

What next? Marry him to my niece,
perhaps?”
Crae looked at him through narrowed eyes.
High god, how he hated the man. No alliance
was worth this. “Someone needs to find out
where they come from, who they are, and why
they fight.”
Favor spat out a laugh. “They are lordless
men, godless men. They are mad, filthy
animals. They deserve to be killed where they
stand. Instead, you bring one into your
house—my sister’s house—and stable it in
your kitchen.”
“Jori, shut up,” Jessamy said with
deliberation.
“No, Sister! I have had enough of this. I’ve
seen how he treats you. I’ve seen how he runs
your house. He is an incompetent, common
captain at arms, and he can’t even do that
very well.” He sneered in Crae’s direction and
at the stick propped against the table next to
him. “Have you seen his men-at-arms?
Farmers and shepherds all. Not a soldier
among them.”
“That is because, Jori, all of our men-at-arms
were killed fighting against the army you

joined.” Jessamy glared down her brother.
“So it could be said that you put us in this
precarious situation.”
Favor blustered. “Well, if Stavin had not
joined with Red Gold Bridge . . .”
He trailed off at the look on her face. Jessamy
was pale, her face like stone.
“Don’t you ever disparage Stavin.”
“Jessi—”
“Don’t you ‘Jessi’ me! You never call me that
except when you want something!”
“He gave guesting to a crow in your kitchen!”
Favor’s voice was rising.
“It’s my house, Jori!”
“It’s. My. House.”
A part of Crae knew he spoke, but the words
welled up from another source. He knew only
that he stood, and the same strength he had
gained from the high god overwhelmed him
again. He put his fists down on the table and
leaned over Favor. “Trieve is mine. I will keep
this holding as befits its lord, and I will not be
gainsaid. You are my kin, but never do you
think, ever, that you have the right to
question my rule.”
Favor shrank back. His throat worked

convulsively, and Crae let his disgust creep
into his expression.
“Are we clear, Brother?”
Favor just nodded.
“Good. Then, I have work to do.”
He pushed back his chair with one boot,
grabbed his stick, and bowed to Jessamy, as
lord to his lady. “My lady,” he said. She was
furious, he could tell, but she graced him with
a nod in reply.
For a moment, as he left them to the remains
of their family dinner, he thought that it
would be fun to set the crow loose and watch
Favor run. Then he sighed. There had to be a
way to get through to the man, and he didn’t
just mean his wife’s brother.
The mountain light lingered long into the
night in Trieve, the sunset remaining for
hours over the jagged horizon, even as the
first stars opened in the vault of the sky. Crae
walked the perimeter of the house and barn,
keeping quiet conversation with his
smallholders as they readied for the night.
The sheep were in the fold, the dogs keeping a
careful watch, the cows in the byre. Crae

turned to go back to the house and was
surprised to see Jessamy come out to him, a
wrap around her shoulders, her hair blowing
about under her kerchief. Favor was nowhere
to be seen.
“At last,” she sighed. “Both children sleep,
and I have a few moments to myself. I talked
to Breyan, and he said he had a few likely
candidates for you, men who have been
chafing under his command. You should
interview them tomorrow.”
That could mean he was eager to rid himself
of trouble-makers, but Crae understood. He
had been a young man of that type
himself—ready for his own command. It was
how he came to Red Gold Bridge those years
ago. It was a small step after that to taking his
position under Lord Tharp’s rule. He would
be there still, breaking heads and keeping
peace in the stronghold, if Lady Sarita had
not disappeared through the gordath. Once, it
was all that he had wanted: his own
command in a good House. His ambitions
were few: adventure, love, and an honorable
commission.
Life had grown complicated, to be sure.

“Good,” he said. “And the other? Did he
agree to an alliance?”
She gathered her shawl, her hair flying in the
rising wind. “Well. He is stubborn. And he
cast in his lot against Trieve in last year’s war
and sees no reason why he can’t do so again.
But he wants to marry, and I told him if he
sets against Trieve again, I would make sure
every eligible maid of marrying age knew
exactly how windy he gets after dinner, not to
mention certain other . . . secrets I have on
him.”
Crae laughed despite himself. “You are an
elder sister, indeed.”
She laughed, too. “Oh, we fought so hard
when we were young. I love him dear, but he
sets my back up all the time.”
Mine, too, but Crae didn’t say that out loud.
They stood companionably for a time,
enjoying the rising breeze and the lights from
a distant village, a few houses in a fold in the
hills far below. He was startled when she
spoke.
“There is nothing wrong in the way you treat
me,” she said abruptly. It took Crae a minute,
and then he remembered Favor’s temper at

dinner.
“I know,” he said with equanimity, though
Favor’s accusation had stung, as it had been
meant to.
She laughed a little reluctantly. Again she
shook her head.
“Crae, you are the most unlordlike, upstart
captain—” She broke off. When she spoke
next, her words came jerkily. “I must
apologize to you. Your elevation by the
Council was not a summoning as I said. It
means the same thing, but there is a
difference, as you discovered. We are not
often summoned nowadays, but the high god
appears to be silent on the matter, so the
Council does as it wills.”
He couldn’t find words for a moment. Finally
he said, “Is anyone ever truly summoned
anymore?”
“It’s not something to talk about,” she said.
“But—I think not, or at least, it is not given
the final word. Lady Wessen had to fight for
her right to be lord of Wessen. I was young,
but I remember my mother being quite
shocked that she would go against the Council
and insist on taking up her House.” She put a

hand on his arm. “You must not talk of this
to anyone or accuse anyone,” she said, and he
could hear the fierceness in her voice.
“Sometimes the high god
chooses—differently, that’s all. So the
Council makes its decision.”
Elevated by the Council and summoned by
the high god. It should have cemented his
position as Lord of Trieve. Instead, it had
only undermined it. If the high god
summoned whom-ever he wanted, then it
meant that anyone could be a lord.
The Council wouldn’t like that.
Crae and Jessamy turned to each other,
perhaps each waiting for the other with the
answer, when the door to the great house
came open, and the kitchen boy came
bounding out, his skinny boyish frame like a
sketch in the darkness.
“Lord Crae, Lady Jessamy,” he cried, and
there were tears and terror in his voice. “Lord
Favor has killed the crow.”
On the outside of Crae’s attention he could
hear Favor blustering. He knelt by the dead
man’s body. Blood pooled out from under

him where he lay. It puddled outside the
storeroom door, and the straw bedding was
thick and rank with it. A crossbow bolt jutted
through his torn shirt into his heart. First
Favor must have shot the crow from the
safety of the doorway as he lay helpless and
chained, and then, when it was safe, cut his
throat. Favor stood back now, his long knife
bloody. Breyan stood next to him as he
babbled. Crae caught words here and
there—“duty” and “creature” and “filthy”
among them—but he mostly concentrated on
the crow.
He was just a dead man now, no longer a
fearsome enemy, and his secrets and those of
his brotherhood died with him. He was
younger in death, but so dreadfully ravaged.
His leg had never healed, and Crae could
smell that rot had set in. He wondered if he
should tell Favor that he had done the man a
favor indeed, by giving him a quick death,
and wasn’t that a fine joke.
Crae put one hand over the man’s eyes and
closed them. He stood, and Favor’s babbling
died off. Within him, the summoning
quivered, and he could feel it in the beating of

his heart. He felt something else, too, as if
another god spoke to him. The crow god, he
thought. The crows had no lords, but they
followed their god.
And now the man was dead under the sacred
guesting, and he could see a dreadful
unfolding in his mind’s eye. The crow god
would tell them his man was dead, the
guesting broken, and the crows would come to
avenge him.
One part of him—the part that was still
Captain Crae—thought, And so it begins. The
part that was Lord Crae spoke out loud.
“Captain Breyan,” he said. The man looked
at his lord, then stepped forward.
“Yes, my lord?”
“We must ready all the men. Though Trieve’s
are yet untrained, I ask you to prepare them
for battle. The outer villages must also be
warned. Alarin.” The farmer stepped
forward, on fire with eagerness. “Who is our
best rider?”
“Myself, Lord Crae.”
“Then take the best horse and warn the
villages.” The man turned and ran for the
stables.

“Now, wait,” Favor began, even as his captain
bowed. Crae turned to his brother.
“You see,” he said, with a soft voice over steel.
“You broke guesting—”
“He was a crow, and you are a fool! What
possessed you to give him guesting? That was
more of a blasphemy than any of my doing!”
“And they will come.”
“It meant nothing to him! He was an
animal!” He was almost screaming.
Crae shook his head. How could the man not
know? Surely the high god was quivering
inside him, too, along with the rising fury of
the crow god? He could almost see the
gathering of crows in the darkness, coming
together as one ragged army.
He turned and found Jessamy. She had one
hand to her mouth, and her kerchief,
forgotten, lay around her shoulders. Her light
brown hair gleamed in the torchlight, and
tears shone on her cheeks.
“You won’t be able to talk us out of this one,”
he said softly, and she gave a dry laugh.
“How much time do we have?” she said.
“A few hours. I think they will attack before
sunrise. We’ll need to lure them up the

terraces to bring them within crossbow
range.”
She didn’t ask how he knew, so he didn’t have
to tell her he could sense them gathering at
the foot of the terraces. They were a few miles
away at most.
The trick would be to bring them within
range but keep them from storming the
house. He would have to rely on Breyan for
that. At least Favor had brought him a good
captain. He would thank his brother later.
“All,” he ordered, raising his voice. “Prepare.
Men of Trieve, follow Captain Breyan.”
They jumped to obey, although he could tell
there were some who were as confused as
Lord Favor.
As everyone left, Favor turned to Crae. This
time the bluster had fled, leaving behind only
bewilderment.
“He’s a crow,” he said again.
This time Jessamy answered. She sighed. “He
was under guesting, Jori. It binds all of us
equally.”
Crae thought he could kiss his wife. He just
nodded at her, and she gave him a quick nod
back. Then she surprised him. She knelt next

to the crow and placed her hand over his eyes,
whispering the words of farewell.
“The body must be washed and laid out in a
plain robe,” she said. “My householders and I
will do him that courtesy.”
“Thank you,” Crae said, and this time, he
knew she heard what he meant. Trieve thanks
you for your service. A shadow passed over her
face, and he hated himself for having to salt
those wounds. But she called for her people to
help her, and the moment moved on.
He shouldered past Favor, when the man
made a noise that could have been a strangled
question.
“Ask your captain,” Crae said, too disgusted
to be courteous to the man. “Do what he tells
you to do.”
Seven
The last light of the evening was fading as
Marthen surveyed his camp. Gary had set it
up just off the woods along one of the
reservoirs that dotted the area. Marthen had
put the word out—no campfires—and they
had obeyed him. The makeshift war camp
had a few tents, a neat row of bedrolls, and

what little gear the men had was all carefully
stowed. He had Gary order a latrine detail,
and the man had been surprised, but
Marthen thought he saw wary respect in his
expression.
A wind blew, rattling the leaves in the high
branches above him. Some of the stickiness
blew away, and he smelled rain.
Gary came up to him now, his plain features
hidden in the twilight. “More guys are
showing up,” he told Marthen. “I don’t know
where we’re going to put them all.” He
hesitated. “These tents and shit—it’s all going
to show up if they send out helicopters or
planes. We need to cut brush and drape it
over the tents.”
Marthen wasn’t used to thinking in terms of
spies from above. He still wasn’t used to the
airplanes that cut across the blue sky, leaving
long, thin clouds in their wake. If he wasn’t
careful, the sight of the flying machines
would captivate him until he lost track of
where he was. He could see now what Kate
Mossland had been telling him about
warplanes. If I had those in Aeritan, he
thought, no one would have been able to stop

me.
Now he looked at Gary. The skinny drunk had
grown to be a competent aide-de-camp. He
would soon be as quiet and resourceful as
Grayne, who had the knack for disappearing
until Marthen needed him. He allowed
approval to leak into his voice.
“Good. See to it,” he ordered. Gary nodded in
pleasure.
“Yeah, I learned that when I was growing pot
in Tennessee . . .” His voice faded as Marthen
turned away. Gary had presented him with a
bigger problem, though. Where were they
going to put all these men?
The men had showed up just that night, after
Marthen and his first little cadre had
ambushed the pleasure seekers at the lake.
When they heard the sirens approaching the
lake, and Gary told him what that meant,
Marthen ordered them to scatter. Gary had
set the rendezvous place in these woods, and
only Gary went with him to the house. They
cut through the woods on foot till they came
to a quiet street filled with towering houses,
all alike with grand windows and ornate
doors. Gary led him to the garage and showed

him how to break in; Gary showed him the
little box that had a silent red light blinking
on it. Right now, Gary said, it’s calling the
police. Marthen waited, feeling the same
rising tension, the same sense of
overwhelming grandeur he did when he led
the charge into battle. He let it fill him,
holding back on his impatience the way he
had held in his warhorse, knowing that when
he gave it release, it would be all the stronger.
Let them come, he thought. Instead, Gary
looked underneath the little box, found the
word to say, and spoke into the device that
was called a phone.
Gary was invaluable. He said nothing when
they moved through the house, and he nodded
when Marthen said, “No touching, no
thievery.” Room after room spread out before
him, all filled with furniture, paintings,
things. Marthen didn’t know what he was
looking for till he opened a door upstairs and
found it.
Her chamber. She had paintings of the small
brown horse that she had been captured with
last year. There were ribbons, toys, books, a
window on her desk that was dark, another

window like it on the other side of the room.
It was a child’s room. Here she was still a
child. In Aeritan she was a woman grown. His
desire mixed with disgust at himself.
Gary was getting restless, constantly checking
the window at the end of the hall. “Come on,
man,” Gary had urged. “Take something or
not; we got to get out of here.”
Her bed was messy, the blankets and
bedclothes trailing onto the floor, as if she
had spent a restless night. Clothes spilled out
of a sturdy chest of drawers. The room had
her aroma to it, and as Marthen breathed it
in, his head began to pound. It had not done
that for months. He tried to keep himself
steady.
“Jesus Christ, man!”
Marthen grimaced. With the last of his
control he set the saddle on the back of the
chair and followed Gary downstairs. They
escaped out the back door, just as the rising
call of sirens sounded in the distance.
And now, this. He had started with about ten
men. He had about fifty now. It was a sorry
collection of men compared to the thousands
he had commanded in Aeritan when he

served the Council. They were all from among
the bridge dwellers, some old, some only
looking that way because of the hard life they
led. Gary said that they were mostly
alcoholics—“like me,” he said, with only the
merest chagrin—“and a few drug gies, but
you won’t get many of those,” he told
Marthen, as if to reassure him, “because they
need a steady income and tend to work alone.
Which is just as well, because the meth
heads—well, you don’t want them around.
“So we’re mostly just harmless crazy. A lot of
these guys, they were tossed out of mental
hospitals. Jails don’t want ’em.”
Crazy or not, they found his camp and settled
in without a word. When he made Gary ask
about this one or that, they mumbled
something about how they heard there was a
shantytown, and they were tired of the
highway.
“Excuse me!”
Marthen turned to look at a newcomer,
pushing his way through the underbrush
toward the camp. This man was neither crow
nor bridge dweller; that was immediately
clear. His clothes were good, and his face was

clean-shaven, his hands clean. He struggled
through the underbrush into the clearing, one
hand half up as if to proclaim himself
unarmed, the other gingerly pushing aside
thorny bushes. Marthen flicked a hand, and
Gary immediately stepped forward, a long
staff held across his body. The newcomer
flinched and stopped. He scanned the group.
Even in the twilight Marthen could tell this
man was middle-aged, his hair thinning, his
body paunchy and unfit. His eyes lit on
Marthen. The man gave a big smile and
reached out his hand. Marthen’s distrust
deepened, and he made no move to take it.
“I’d like to talk to the man in charge,” he
said. “Name’s Garson.” Marthen waited,
arms folded across his chest. He was in no
hurry. The man dropped his hand.
“Mike Garson,” the man added. “You’re
from there. Aeritan, right? You might have
heard of me. I worked with Mark Ballard and
a fellow named Lord Tharp to set him up
with a few goodies.” He nodded at Marthen’s
belt where he stowed the gun. “Looks like you
got one of them right there.”
Marthen kept his expression calm, though his

heart started pounding. This was how Tharp
had gotten his weapons. This man, this bluff,
hearty man, who smiled too easily and offered
his hand without a care, this man had set into
motion one of the most devastating wars in
Aeritan.
Marthen needed this man.
“What do you want?” Gary said. He glanced
back at Marthen as if to check in, and
Marthen shoved down the irritation.
Reassurance indeed. The man was like a dog.
Garson looked from Gary to Marthen. “I
have a proposition,” he said. “For your boss.
See, I think we can help each other.”
“So let’s get this straight,” Garson said. He
and Marthen sat together, Marthen on his
tree stump and Garson on a lumpy boulder
covered with moss and leaves. “You came
from Aeritan after that girl, the one who
disappeared along with Lynn Romano.” His
pleasant face got hard when he said her
name, then smoothed out. The other woman,
Marthen thought. Yes, he had seen her at the
battle in Gordath Wood last year. She had
taken Kate Mossland and young Terrick

away. She was full-grown. Hardly old, but in
this world it was hard to tell.
“Not just for her,” Marthen said. He had
learned from Gary’s attitude and now from
this man’s that Kate Mossland was off-limits
in ways that would—could—hurt him. She
was young, and she was wealthy. Both of
those things he knew. Had she been an
Aeritan woman of good blood, and he had
gone after her as a robber bridegroom, his
life would be forfeit. Who knew that in this
world it was much the same thing, except that
it was not her wealth that protected her but
her youth?
“Right,” Garson said. He looked and sounded
as if he were fighting distaste. He looked
Marthen over. “You planning on taking her
back to Aeritan?”
“That depends,” Marthen said, his voice dry.
“Do you intend to provide me with means?”
Garson laughed. “I could. I could. And you
want to go back to Aeritan and set yourself up
as a warlord. Could be—that’s what Mark
said was going on, the few times he came
back. It’d be easier there than here. I don’t
know if you’ve guessed, but we’ve got pretty

strict laws against mercenary generals over
here.” He slapped at a few mosquitoes that
landed on his broad forehead.
“But I’m not just going to give you guns. I
need a few things done first, and a few
promises. I arm you, and you are working for
me, for one thing. And for God’s sake, don’t
touch the kid till she’s legal, okay?”
Marthen didn’t bother telling the man he had
no interest in serving him. He said only,
“What do you need done first?”
“Yeah. Well, you know that woman who the
kid came back with?” Once again, Garson’s
face twisted in disgust. “She owns Hunter’s
Chase Stables now. She inherited it from the
other lady, the one who came from your side
and who went back. That lady stole what was
mine. Stole it right out from under my nose.
She must have been watching and waiting,
waiting for Mark to come back through with
my first payment, because he left it there for
me, and I never saw a dime, because she got to
it first. Well, she’s out of my hands. But Lynn
Romano is still there, and she’s got the
money. I know she has.” He looked straight at
Marthen. “You and your boys take care of

Lynn Romano for me, and I’ll get you your
guns.”
Marthen was silent for a moment,
considering. Under his steady regard the man
shifted uneasily, rubbing his hands along his
plain trousers. When he was ready, he said, “I
will receive the guns first, before I act on your
commission.”
Garson laughed. “Smart man. I’d do the same
myself. But only a few, just to whet your
appetite. You’ll get the rest when Miss
Romano is no longer a problem.”
Marthen watched him go off and went back
to regarding his growing camp. He didn’t
need an army to take Kate Mossland. He
needed an army because he was a general,
and he was meant for conquest. With the girl
at his side, nothing could stop him. This time
he was starting with crows, but that was
because he knew what crows could do. They
fought with mauls, but their best weapon was
fear.
He thought back to his last terrible months in
Aeritan as a sloppy drunk searching for a
gordath. Now he knew it had all been
necessary. It had led him to his crows, to his

army.
The buzzing in his head started again, and
with great difficulty he kept it under control.
Not yet, he thought. Soon, but not yet. Soon it
would be time for the reins to be loosed and
the spurs to be applied. Soon it would be the
time for madness to lead to war.
Lynn woke to the sound of rain pattering on
the roof. She lay in the darkness, the wind
blowing in through the open windows,
bringing a smattering of cold rain with it. The
air smelled wet and wild. She lay there for a
moment, coming awake. She needed to close
the window to her bedroom so water
wouldn’t get all over the floor. She groaned
and pushed herself out of bed. The floor was
damp already, and she winced.
“Yuck,” she muttered. She fumbled with the
sash. It was stiff but finally came down with a
clunk.
The rain and the cool were abruptly cut off,
and the bedroom became unpleasantly
humid. She pushed back the curtain and
looked out. The farm was dark, the only light
coming from the lightning flashing on the

distant horizon. She counted seconds until
thunder rumbled. The storm was pretty far
away.
She told herself to go back to sleep, but she
was wide awake now. Plus, in the silent house
she could hear an irregular tink tink tink.
The roof was leaking. “Great,” Lynn said. She
turned on the light, wincing against the
brightness, pulled on her robe over her
pajama pants and tank top, and went to
investigate.
The house was old. Someone—probably
before Mrs. Hunt—had updated the interior
and modernized the plumbing and electric,
but the bones of the old house remained
Victorian farmhouse. It was surprising that it
hadn’t leaked sooner. Lynn padded over the
wide floorboards, turning on lights as she
went. The drops sounded louder in the hall,
and she flipped on the light switch even as she
realized she was standing in water.
“Shit!” She jumped back, heart hammering,
staring first at the floor and then at the
ceiling in dismay. A damp patch had formed
around the trapdoor entrance to the attic.
She had never been up in the attic. It hadn’t

seemed necessary. She didn’t have a lot of
stuff, so she hadn’t needed storage, and she
had been hesitant to roam all over the house;
it didn’t even feel like it was hers, after all
these months. Exploring it felt intrusive.
She heard a knock on the door and Mrs. Felz
calling, “Lynn? Are you all right?”
Lynn went out to the living room and opened
the door. Mrs. Felz stood there in her robe,
wet from her dash across the driveway. Lynn
let her in.
“I saw the lights,” she said, pushing back her
wet hair. She looked wild and frizzy, for a
moment like an exotic beast with a woman’s
broad, handsome face. “I wanted to make
sure you were all right.”
Lynn felt both irritated and guilty for it. “No,
no. Sorry to have woken you. The rain woke
me, and then I heard that I had a leak.”
“Oh, honey, I was awake. I’ve always loved
listening to the rain.”
“Well, it’s in the attic. I’m just going to get
some towels and a bucket.” She led the way
back to the mudroom, where some old ratty
towels and a filthy mop bucket were kept.
Mrs. Felz clucked at the water in the hall.

Lynn wiped up the water and placed the
bucket under the leak.
“Oh, you’ll have to check and make sure it
hasn’t ruined anything in the attic.”
Lynn had been hoping to leave that till
tomorrow, but it wasn’t like she was going to
get much sleep. And if they could find where
the water was coming in, she could put down
another bucket and then call out the roofers.
Just another expense. She sighed and tugged
the cord that opened up the trapdoor. How
had Mrs. Hunt run this place, and drive a
Mercedes, which Lynn had already sold, and
pay her household and barn staff?
The stairs folded down with a squeak. No one
had been up there in a while. A rush of air,
musty and humid, poured down at them.
Lynn looked up into the gaping hole. She
looked at Mrs. Felz, who was peering up into
the attic with interest. Lynn suddenly felt how
nice it would have been to have Joe here and
not his mother.
After going back to the kitchen and
rummaging for a flashlight, she took her first
step onto the rickety ladder. Holding her robe
like a lady in a long gown, and with the

flashlight in one hand, she ascended into the
attic, stopping with the upper half of her
body in the attic. She swung the flashlight
slowly.
The beam of light showed a high-roofed
room, beams and floorboards rough and
unfinished, thick with cobwebs. There was the
detritus of many years all around. A stack of
broken chairs filled one corner. Lynn
remembered the gala from a few years ago
when a horse had broken loose and run
through the spectators, turning over chairs as
everyone ran for their lives. There were also
odds and ends of life. A cardboard box with a
jumble of paperbacks spilling over the top;
those couldn’t have belonged to Mrs. Hunt.
Old lamps. A pile of rectangular picture
frames.
There was a wooden chest. Lynn shone the
flashlight on it. It was flat, old, handmade.
Antique, she thought, but she knew it was
much more than just an antique. She hoisted
herself up and into the attic. From below she
heard Mrs. Felz.
“Did you find the leak?”
“Not yet,” Lynn called back. She stood,

ducking under a hundred-year-old beam, and
went over to the chest. It had a motif of roses
carved in it.
Lynn had seen those roses before, and she
would never forget them. They were carved
over the doorframe of her tower prison in
Red Gold Bridge.
She tugged at the lid of the chest. It came up
heavily and fell back against the wall. She
shone the flashlight on the contents. At first
she thought it was filled with linens, but the
light caught on something and winked and
reflected back at her. Lynn reached in and
pulled aside the cloth. A rope of pearls shone
back at her, a red jewel in the clasp blinking
like a star in the light of her flashlight. One
by one she uncovered the rest of the treasure.
There were gold necklaces, or what she
assumed was gold. An honest-to-god whatsis,
silver tiara, only slightly tarnished. More
pearls. What? she thought, repressing a
hysterical giggle. No diamonds? Oh, here they
were, in a small flat cloth that was tied with a
ribbon. There were coins as well, in leather
pouches like the one that Lady Jessamy had
carried at her belt as lady of Trieve. And

underneath that . . . copper, silver, and gold
bars shone under the flashlight, along with
other metals she couldn’t recognize. She could
be looking at titanium or platinum, for all she
knew. All precious, not for jewelry, but for
manufacturing. Forget the pearls; there was a
fortune here in industrial metals.
There was an irregular lump beneath the rest.
Lynn lifted it out and unwrapped the cloth,
and a handgun gleamed under the flashlight’s
beam. Her heart started pounding. Oh shit,
she thought. Things were complicated before.
Now they were much more complicated.
Lynn was still holding the gun when Mrs. Felz
poked her head up. “What did you find?” she
called. Taking her time, Lynn set the gun
back in the chest and closed it as if there were
nothing in there.
“Nothing,” she said. “I think I’m going to
have to come up here when there’s more
light.”
“That’s probably a good idea,” Mrs. Felz
said. She backed down to let Lynn climb
down. Lynn took one last glance at the chest
before she made her way down the ladder and
closed the ceiling trapdoor.

Well, I guess that explains how she was able to
afford this place. It was one question
answered, but it raised a couple of others in
its wake. Sure, it was obvious where the
treasure had come from. Crae had said that
Lord Tharp had funded his war with Lady
Sarita’s dowry that she had left behind when
she initiated her gordath divorce.
The treasure was hers to begin with.
But what the hell was it doing here? And how
did she get a gun to go with it?
Eight
It was before dawn when Alarin returned, his
horse trembling at the end of the charge up
the terraces. Alarin flung himself off as soon
as they cleared the last ledge, almost as done
in as his horse.
“I’ve warned the nearest smallholdings.” He
reported in where Crae waited with the rest
of the men in the main hall, gearing up.
Everyone was surrounded by crossbows, bolts,
and swords, and what armor they could
scrounge. The more experienced of Lord
Favor’s men were eating. Alarin gulped
thankfully at the ladleful of water someone

brought him and drank deeply. He splashed
the rest on his head and chest and then
continued. “And sent out a few youngsters to
raise the alarm among the more far-flung
villages. They are also looking to their own
defenses, sir, though if the crows come
through any one village, there might be
nothing they can do.”
“They’re as ready as they can be, as are we,”
Crae said. He clapped the young man on the
shoulder. “You did well. Now grab a weapon
and report to Captain Breyan.”
The man nodded and took off in Breyan’s
direction. They had worked it out between the
two of them, Lord Crae and Favor’s captain.
Of the eighty or so men they had, Crae would
take two-thirds and station them at the
bottom of the terraces. They would be spread
thin, and he hoped that the crows would as
well. Luckily, the crows were mob fighters,
with handheld weapons that were crude and
inexact. They would be at a disadvantage
against trained fighters.
Crae had only about thirty of those, and they
were mostly Favor’s. He shook off his despair.
No matter how many times he counted his

men, the numbers never changed. They went
into battle with only a few soldiers, and that
was the truth of it.
He glanced up at Jessamy’s entrance. She
barely gave the fighting men a glance as she
threaded her way over to him. All the men
looked up to watch her and then him. He
knew they all wanted to see how their lord
and lady fared together. If the two of them
failed to convince, it might spread uncertainty
throughout Trieve. And Trieve could not
withstand such a thing.
“We’ve readied the torches and oil,” she told
him, her voice low. If the crows broke into the
hall, she and the householders, mostly women,
had to be able to fight.
“Good. Where are the children?” He kept his
words private. Besides Tevani and Jori, there
were four more small ones that needed to be
protected.
“The old barn.” She smiled at his look of
surprise. “You’d be surprised at the nooks
and crannies of this place. I don’t think
Stavin knew them all. The old barn has a
trapdoor that leads to a root cellar. It’s big
enough for two of the housewomen and all six

of the children.”
He nodded, then said, “Jessamy, you must
join them.”
“This may be your House, Crae, but it is my
home. I will defend it.”
“Jessamy, I order you—”
She laughed at him, and after his first shock
he had to fight a laugh at his own expense.
The summoning only takes you so far, he
thought—point taken. “All right,” he told her,
close to her ear so no one else could hear.
“But stay back until necessary, and if I or
Captain Breyan gives you an order, you obey
it.”
She bobbed a curtsy. “Yes, Lord Crae,” she
said in a meek voice, making sure he heard
the sarcastic tone. He watched her go, and
then came back to himself.
Bells caught all of their attention, the deep
tolling coming from the villages to the south.
Everyone looked up. The crows were on their
way. Crae took a deep breath.
“Heed me,” he called out, making his voice
reach the ends of the hall. “As we planned.
All the men with me, to the bottom of the
terraces. Those with Breyan, take the top

third.” He paused, then let his full anger
reach into his voice. “Do you know what the
crow told me? He said they ravage and kill,
and their god laughs.” He let that sink in, and
he could see their faces darken. Muttering
rose in the hall, and men gripped their sword
hilts. “We’ll see who is laughing, and it won’t
be their god. No mercy, boys. No prisoners.
Kill them all. Kill them all.”
He thrust his sword into the air on the last
words, and they echoed his cry with their
own, with a scrape and a clash of their own
swords. The sound rang in the hall along with
their cheers.
They were ready, even the young ones. The
veterans had taken them in hand, though he
knew what that was like; it was hard to think
of the shepherds and farmers of Trieve as
anything but shields to stand between
themselves and a crow’s maul.
Not a good way to go into battle, he thought, as
he led his small band out of the doors, the
armor fitting with a comforting yet
constricting weight on his back and shoulders,
the nosepiece of his helm limiting his vision.
But if anyone ever came up with a good way,

he hoped they would let him know.
It was still pitch-dark outside, and he paused
them on the second level to let their eyes
adjust. “No one look back at the house,” he
called out. It would take that much longer for
their eyes to adjust if they looked back at the
lights. They went down terrace by terrace,
their armor clanking. Slowly they could make
out a detail here and there, as a few stars
shone through. The night was mostly overcast
though, and there was no moon.
The night was split by ululating screams that,
even though Crae was expecting it, sent a
shock of fear down his spine. The crows came
in a loud rush, deadly, skinny shadows in the
dark.
The soldiers answered with a cry of their own,
but their advance was disciplined.
Crossbowmen crouched and loaded and shot,
loaded and shot, their deadly bolts zinging
into the crowd of crows on the lower terraces,
their goal to thin the mob. They could not
shoot at the advance, for fear of hitting their
own men in the dark. Crae heard the screams
that said some of their shots were true.

Still the crows came on, and Crae estimated
there were several hundreds scampering up
the terraces. He braced himself on his good
leg as a crow leaped on him, swinging a maul.
He ducked, letting the man’s momentum
carry him around, and then slashed down
with his edge. The crow fell, and Crae pulled
out his sword, and followed with a backward
slash as another crow came at him, and
another. He drew in breath and let it out in a
shout, his war cry lost in the cries of the men
and the crows around. Everyone was
screaming; everyone was in a frenzy.
It was dark, chaotic. He used both his sword
and shield as weapons on the next man, and
the crow’s scream was cut off into a dying
gurgle. Overhead he heard the crossbow men
from the top terrace fire, and the bolts pinged
and thunked into the attacking wave. Crows
dropped. One crow threw himself at the
soldier next to Crae, and the man went down.
Crae thrust his sword in the crow’s back, then
kicked him off his sword. The soldier stayed
still, and Crae fought over him, taking a
bruising hit to his head. His helmet rang, and
he staggered. A crow screamed and came up

in his face. Crae, his bad leg giving way, fell
backward. With the last of his strength he
thrust upward, catching the man under his
ribs. The crow screamed again, gurgling, then
fell on top of Crae.
He roared with frustration and pushed at the
dead weight that lay athwart him. Someone
pulled the body off of him and hauled him to
his feet. It was Alarin. The farmer was
covered with blood and dirt, and his helm was
dented. Without speaking they set their backs
to each other, swords and shields up, moving
as one like a deadly beast. Crae could feel the
other man’s back against his, armor to
armor, and they gave each other support as
they thrust and hacked.
Still the crows came on. They flowed over the
terraces, a never-ending wave, and pushed the
men back to the upper terraces. Crae
stumbled over an armored body as he was
forced backward by the sheer volume of
crows. There was but one more terrace before
the lawn at the doors to Trieve. If the crows
reached the lawn, there would be nothing to
stop them from breaching the house save
householders with nets and flaming vats of

oil. We kill and we ravage, and our god laughs .
. . Crae drew breath into his lungs, and he
could feel Alarin behind him shift to give him
more support.
“Trieve, attack!” He roared. “Trieve,
redouble!”
He heard roaring in his ears, and for a
moment thought he was about to lose
consciousness. But no, it was the roar of his
men, answering his cry, his men and Favor’s,
fewer than one hundred brave souls. Yet they
answered his call, and the line of crows
wavered, and they slowly pushed forward,
backing the crows off the terrace.
And still the crows came on. Even as he used
sword and shield to repel each crow in front
of him, more came and more came. Soldier’s
god, he thought. Will we kill every crow in the
country before the night is through?
Time became measured by breaths and the
pulsing of his heart, until he felt as if the
world had always been night, and he had
always been fighting crows. He could not let
himself think of anything else but this
moment, the same moment for all eternity.
Breath, slash, step, breath, slash. His muscles

burned, and he had to lock himself away from
the pain to master it. Crae shifted his sword
to his left hand; there was no finesse anymore
anyway. He fought like a crow himself, blud
geoning and hacking. Alarin slipped behind
him and caught himself against Crae’s back.
A crow came up in front of him so suddenly
Crae thought he appeared out of the air. For
a second the man’s face was imprinted upon
his vision, what he could see: wide eyes, the
glint of teeth, a sharpened spear blackened
and slick with blood. The crow screamed as
Crae lifted his shield to ward off the attack,
catching the crow under the chin with the
rounded edge. He could feel the click of the
man’s teeth as he forced his jaw upward.
Crae set his shoulder and pushed the man
backward, off the edge of the terrace step.
The man windmilled wildly and landed hard
on his back and lay still.
A space appeared in front of him where the
crow had been. Crae waited on the terrace’s
edge, sword and shield up, Alarin breathing
hard behind him, and let the world come
back to him, first sight, then comprehension.
Dawn rose over the terraces; gray mist trailed

over the battlefield. The top terraces were
littered with hundreds of crows. His land was
black with them. Far below some crows still
lived, but they were fleeing. He would give the
order to track them down later. Crae dropped
his hand, his shoulder and back screaming
with agony. Sweat stung his eyes, and he
squeezed them tight to try to ease the sting.
With a shaking hand that was stiff and
swollen, he unstrapped the leather strap at his
chin and took off his helmet, the better to
look around him. The battlefield came in
focus now. He could see the last crow
groaning on the terrace below him, his hands
jerking but his legs curiously still. Crae had
seen those injuries before; a man whose spine
had snapped lost the use of his legs as if they
had been cut off. Crae stared down at him,
unmoved. The crow was no longer a danger
and would likely die before the day was out.
Whose god is laughing now? he thought, but
he felt neither triumph nor vindication.
They had won, but the aftermath had just
begun. About half of Trieve’s men were
among the fallen. Crae knelt beside one of

them, a young shepherd. The man gave little
gasping cries. Blood ran down from a gash
that had nearly taken his eye. Crae helped
him sit up.
“All right?” he said.
“Yes, my lord,” the man said and promptly
fainted. Crae lowered him back down. He
limped over to another man. This one was
dead. Crae laid a hand on his shoulder and
whispered a few words the man could take
with him to the soldier’s god. He is a good
man. A good fighter. He will serve you well.
Crae felt too weary for grief. If this is all
we’ve lost due to my whim and Favor’s idiocy, I
will thank my high god every day and every
night, he thought. Alarin came up to him. The
young man was covered with blood, but it was
the look in his eyes that struck Crae. His eyes
were old, exhausted, and deeply sorrowful.
Behind him trailed many of Trieve’s men,
and Crae knew at once what he needed to do.
He reached up a hand. Alarin pulled him to
his feet.
“Lord Crae,” Alarin said.
Crae clapped him on his shoulder. “Come,
Captain. We still have much to do.” Alarin

was so tired that his comprehension was slow.
But when he understood, the young man
managed a smile and a half bow.
“Thank you, sir. I will honor you with my
service.”
“I know,” Crae said. “Let’s go.”
Trieve lost about forty men, Favor two.
Breyan reported his deaths, and they set all to
fetching and laying out their dead. The crows
they left where they lay; their namesake battle
followers could take care of them while Trieve
and Favor mourned their dead.
The householders had not had to show their
mettle. Jessamy had her women stow the
torches and oil, and the heavy ropes and
weighted nets they had set up to blockade the
great hall. If the crows had broken through, it
would not have kept them out, but it would
have stopped them, perhaps long enough for
the householders to escape. The children who
had been hidden away in the cellar were
reunited with their mothers and fathers.
Jessamy hugged her children fiercely. Jori
wailed, and Tevani clung to her mother with
one hand on her skirt, sucking her thumb.

Crae went over and patted both children
clumsily, but Jori cried harder at the sight of
him in his armor, and Tevani wouldn’t speak.
Jessamy surprised him though; she touched
his arm briefly, and their eyes met. He
squeezed her fingers clumsily through his
heavy glove and then went to see to his men
and she to the ordering of the household to
tend the wounded.
The battle was over, but the day was long.
Crae sent squads out to ride to the outlying
villages to rout the crows that had escaped to
ravage the smallholders. He and Breyan set
the men to building a rough palisade of
sharpened stakes midway up the terraces. If
the crows came back that night, they could
keep them at bay. Attacking under the cover of
dark works both ways, Crae thought grimly.
He stayed in armor, though it stank of blood,
sweat, and oil. His leg shrieked with pain, and
he staunchly ignored it, though he knew his
limp worsened as the day progressed. He
moved between terrace levels, supervising the
defenses. Alarin set a work detail to move the
corpses of the crows to the bottom terraces.
We cannot bury them, Crae thought. There are

too many. We will have to burn the bodies. The
idea sickened him, but he had no choice.
The word came back; the squads had run
down a few hand fuls of surviving crows and
made short work of them, and the
surrounding villages were clear. Everyone let
up a drained and ragged cheer. Breyan came
over to Crae under cover of the noise. He was
still in armor, too, his helmet under his arm,
and he sported a stained bandage around his
dark and gray-streaked hair. He grinned.
“Not bad for a lot of farmers and cowherds,”
he said cheerfully.
“Not bad with your help,” Crae said. “My
thanks, Captain.” He frowned. “How much
longer will we have you?”
“I wish I could stay, Lord Crae. I could give
you some of my men, with Lord Favor’s
agreement.”
Crae grunted. He didn’t want to be beholden
to Favor, but he had little choice. And it was
the least the man could do, after getting them
into all this. Not that Favor would
acknowledge that.
“I will ask Lord Favor,” he said. “We could
use your men. I would stake my life that the

crows will come back.”
“I would set a watch all around the perimeter
night and day, and have the villagers do so,
too,” Breyan said. “If they are set on their
heels often enough, even crows will back off,
find easier prey.”
“Probably,” Crae said. The problem was, if
the crows knew that right now Trieve was at
their mercy, they would be unrelenting. He
went a little sick at the thought.
“Lord Crae, Lord Crae!”
He turned. One of his men on the work detail
came running up.
“Sir—he says, he says he’s the lord of the
crows, sir. He’s at the bottom of the terraces.
He wants to talk to you.”
The hall went quiet. Everyone looked at him.
“Tell him I will meet with him.”
He had Hero saddled and was boosted on
board, his leg screaming in agony. Alarin
handed him up his sword and crossbow and
bolts. Alarin and Breyan mounted up and
followed him on horseback as well, as did a
handful of Breyan’s men.
By rights, Crae supposed he should have had

the crow come to him, but he did not want
him up near the house. Best to keep him
below, at the foot of the hill.
The bodies already stank as they negotiated
the last terrace and approached the
remaining crows. There were five in all. The
lord of the crows, so-called, stood in front of
his handful of men, still armed with mauls
and staves. Next to him Crae heard Breyan
and Alarin arm their crossbows, and their
men drew their swords. Crae turned his
attention on the crow lord.
He was no less ragged than his men and just
as skinny and ill-fed, but he had found a
horsehair cap somewhere, with the horse tail
still attached. He wore that and a blue cloak
that looked as if it had once been Terrick
colors. He had no other clothing; he stood
before them naked and exposed.
One of Breyan’s men sniggered, faltering
when Breyan growled at him. Crae felt pity
and disgust, along with revulsion.
The man held himself stick straight.
“Lord of the high House,” the crow lord said,
his accent refined. He did not sound like the
captured crow. This man could have been on

the Council. “You have something the crows
want.”
Crae halted Hero. The horse snorted and
shook his mane. Crae leaned on the pommel
of the saddle, looking down at the crow. “You
have left many dead men on my land,” he
said. “You may go to the first terrace to
collect them.”
“Not them,” the crow lord said, and his smile
was sly. “You have another. You took him
from us. You promised him something, and
we want it.”
“It’s not yours,” Crae said. “I promised him
and him alone.” Not even a mad crow could
believe that guesting was given to an entire
people when it was granted to one.
The sly smile widened. “But you broke your
promise. You took it away.”
He doubted the crow would understand or
care if he said, That wasn’t me; that was my
wife’s foolish brother. He kept his voice level
as he said, “He died under our care, and we
washed his body and laid him out with all
courtesy.”
“You give one of us such a courtesy?” The
crow sneered. “This I must see with my own

eyes.”
Crae didn’t want to. He wanted nothing more
to do with crows. Let them fester in their
madness and fear, he thought. But if showing
this man the courtesy they had given one of
his own would make him leave Trieve, then he
would do so. He found himself bowing his
head in acknowledgment. “Come. I will bring
you to him.”
This time it was the lord of the crows’ turn to
hesitate. Then he leaped onto the first terrace,
a scramble of thin arms and legs. “I come.”
Crae gestured Breyan and the others to stay,
and they faced off against the remaining
crows. Crae reined Hero around and walked
the horse beside the strange lord up the
terraces.
Everyone at the house turned as the strange
couple came up the hill, people watching
them climb the terrace. Hero breasted each
level next to the crow, whose scrawny legs let
him climb each level with alacrity. Still, the
crow was breathing hard when they achieved
the top, and so was Crae.
He dismounted, wincing as he put weight on
his bad leg. He gave the reins to one of his

men, catching the man’s wide-eyed look, and
led the crow lord into the house.
Now the women turned to look, catching a
full glimpse of the odd man’s nakedness, their
faces a mixture of surprise, disgust, and
amusement. The crow was unmoved.
Jessamy stood up, wiping her hands, and
came toward them. She had the same look of
steel that he had seen before. She glanced
over the crow, her expression mild but stately.
“I am Lady of this House,” she said. She gave
Crae the smallest of glances but went on to
say, “You are welcome here.”
Bless you, Jessamy, Crae thought, his heart
slowing.
“He wishes to see the cr—his man,” Crae said.
Jessamy dipped with full courtesy, spreading
her skirts wide.
“This way.” She led them to the storeroom.
The smell of herbs and death hit them as they
neared the room. The man had been washed
and his hair and beard scented, and he lay
peacefully in a white robe. Scented candles
burned around his makeshift bier; the room
had been swept of every scrap of straw and
every bit of night soil.

The crow stepped in and looked over the man.
His face held no expression as he examined
every inch of the body, lifting the robe to see
his infected leg and the wound to his heart.
“You promised him guesting; you give him
death and burial,” he said at last, his voice
gravelly.
He grieves, Crae thought in wonder. He
nodded. “We will help you take the body
away, for your own customs.”
The crow made a noise like a laugh. “Bury
him here,” he said. He turned away, his
ragged robe sweeping near the candles. It
knocked one down and extinguished it, even
as Crae and Jessamy jumped forward in
alarm. “Then he will be a part of this land.”
He cackled again. “You gave him guesting.
You made a promise. Now you keep the
promise.”
The crow lord did not come with them to
bury his man. Instead, Crae and Jessamy led
a small group of householders to one of the
high sheep pastures. The sun poured out its
blessed warmth and the meadow birds piped
and called as the householders raised a cairn

of white stones to the lost crow. He did not
know what to say to the high god. Would he
even listen if Crae asked him to watch over
the man? And what of the mad crow god?
Would he even know what to do with a prayer
other than one by his benighted followers? In
the end, they all stood in silence, Crae still in
his bloody clothes, until he felt they had done
what they could, and they filed down the
grassy hill. Crae looked back once at the
lonely cairn at the top of the meadow,
silhouetted against the sun and casting a
shadow that pointed a finger straight at
Trieve. He felt a chill then. It was as the crow
lord said. The crow was a part of Trieve now.
It was near midnight before Crae limped off
to his bedroom. He ached all over, soothed
somewhat by a bath and change of clothes
and the beer and whiskey that had
flowed—overflowed—for all. It would not
make his head better tomorrow, but
tomorrow was another day. Now he just
looked forward to his bed.
One of the householders had laid a fire for
him to cut the chill of the mountain air, and it

crackled cheerfully in the dark room. Crae
undressed, leaving his clothes where they lay,
and climbed into bed. He had just closed his
eyes when the door opened.
He raised himself up on one elbow as Jessamy
came in. She carried a single candle that she
placed in the sconce over the bed with a
practiced ease. She wore her white nightdress,
and her hair was unbound. It lay around her
shoulders and trailed halfway down her back.
She said nothing as she crawled into bed
beside him and turned to face him, her
breathing even and her gaze intent in the dim
candlelight. Crae’s breath came faster. He
touched her hair, twining his fingers in its
softness. She bit her lip but made no move.
He pulled her closer and kissed her, not sure
how she would respond. For a second she
resisted, and then put her arms around him,
but stiffly, unwillingly, and gave him a peck
on the cheek. He drew back, his heart
sinking. This can’t work. High god, I can’t see
how this will work.
“Jessamy,” he whispered. “I will not force
you.”
“I’m here of my own will,” she countered.

“It’s just—I’ve never been with anyone except
for Stavin. You are so different—I—” She
faltered to a stop.
He didn’t know what to say to that. He stayed
quiet, stroking her hair, letting his fingers
graze her cheek and across her lips. She
shivered, rigid with tension, but didn’t pull
away. Crae pulled her close, telling himself
that they had time, there was no hurry. He
kissed her again, letting his kisses trail down
her neck to the hollow of her throat, to her
breasts. She gave a little gasp and closed her
eyes, and when he returned to her lips, she
kissed him back.
Later, when the fire had sunk to red coals,
they lay tangled together. Crae lay with his
arms around Jessamy, and she wept into his
shoulder.
“Shh,” he whispered, wishing he could soothe
her better. “Shhh. It will be all right.”
Nine
The next day sparkled in the aftermath of the
rain. Hunter’s Chase looked washed clean,
the fields bright green, wet with dew. Mist
collected in the low places, and the air was

crisp. The sky was already bright blue with
only a wisp of clouds. Lynn helped the girls
who came to feed and turn out, checking the
schedule for which clients were planning to
ride that morning. All the horses were lively,
the good weather perking them up, and as the
grooms led them through the gate and
unhooked their lead ropes, they trotted up the
hill, snorting and shaking their manes.
Lynn went into the red horse’s stall and
haltered him. “Hey, Red Bird,” she said. The
horse whickered as she scratched him under
his mane, and he rubbed his head against her
side, almost knocking her off balance with his
rough affection. Mrs. Felz had started calling
him Red Bird, which she said was what
Texans called cardinals, and it suited him. He
was cocky, like his namesake bird, his mane
standing up like a crest, and his eyes were
bright, lively, and dark.
Her mystery horse had turned out to be a
good horse. His Coggins test had come back
negative, and the vet had pronounced him
healthy except for worms. She had
administered a dose, and Red Bird responded
almost overnight, though he was still a bit

underweight. Lynn herself had pulled his
shoes and rasped down his hooves. She was no
farrier, but she could do that much, and she
didn’t want her regular farrier to ask
questions about the horse’s badly made horse
shoes. She wouldn’t know what to tell him,
for one thing, and she didn’t want the best
farrier in the region to wonder what the hell
she was doing to her horses.
Lynn attached a lead rope and led him out of
the stall, his hooves clomping dully on the
cement aisleway. This was the first time she
would turn him out into the fields; she
thought he was ready, healthy enough to hold
his own and find his place in the herd’s
pecking order. She led Red Bird over to the
cross country field and unclipped the lead. He
snorted and shook his mane and bucked, then
trotted forward, his legs shaking a little. Lynn
felt a pang. Poor guy. She had kept him
limited to turnouts in the sandy dressage ring
for his own safety, but a horse was made for
wide-open spaces. Red Bird dragged his nose
on the ground and then folded himself up and
rolled, scratching his back over and over. She
had to laugh. He snorted and rolled, and

when he got up, he shook until grass and rain
and dirt flew off him in a cloud.
“Go run, you idiot,” she told him, and he did.
He cantered smoothly up the slope, bucking
now and again.
A horse is made for open spaces, she thought
again, pulling the gate closed and putting the
latch in place. So how was Dungiven doing in
Red Gold Bridge? The stronghold had been
built inside the forest, backing up to a
mountain. Not the best place for horses, and
the stables there were dark and damp. She
should know. She had hidden in a dark stall
when she broke away from the tower room.
Though a fat lot of good it had done her. She
had been promptly uncovered when Crae
tricked her into revealing herself.
It could have been a lot worse. At least it had
been Crae. If it had been Mark Ballard,
would he really have killed her?
She could hardly believe it, even of Mark, but
then, it turned out there had been a lot at
stake. At least Mark thought so. Not only had
he been running guns between here and
Aeritan, he and Garson had been planning on
keeping the gordath open and selling oil

leases.
Mrs. Felz was out gardening when she came
back to the house. Lynn waved to her, and
Joe’s mom waved back with her trowel. The
place really looked nice. Mrs. Felz was talking
about putting in roses over an old trellis they
had unearthed in the toolroom. Which begged
the questions: how long was she planning on
staying, and should Lynn broach the subject
again? If she stays, I should pay her, Lynn
thought. She guessed she had the money for it
now. Except that a trunkful of cash—or the
equivalent in gems and precious
metals—generally was illegal.
What the hell had Lady Sarita been doing?
Lynn had sent Mrs. Felz off to bed and had
stayed up for a few hours after her discovery
in the attic. She looked through the accounts
in the office desk, trying to see if Sarita had
been selling off her regained dowry piecemeal
for operating expenses. There was nothing
that she could see that would account for
that. The lawyers might know something, but
Lynn didn’t want to go to them right away. It
was Sarita’s own dowry, but how had she
come in possession of it again?

Lynn put up the lead rope in the mudroom,
stripped her work boots, and went into her
bedroom to mull her choices in front of the
closet. A sundress would be too obvious, and
she didn’t want to give the wrong idea.
Breeches and shirt, then. Tall boots? No.
Hard to drive in. She’d wear her paddock
boots. She had just polished them to a shine;
like most horsewomen, Lynn took care of her
boots along with her tack and was proud of
both.
Dressed, she looked at herself in the
full-length mirror on the closet door. She
wore her fawn-colored breeches, a white
oxford shirt, and her paddock boots. As a
concession to what she was doing, she let her
dark hair down around her shoulders. As
always, it startled her a little to see it down. It
softened her face, making her less—intense.
Proper, Joe had called her. He had teased her
a little, and she smiled, remembering. You
always wear your hair up, he had said, catching
her in the barn where it was just the two of
them and they had a quiet moment. You know
it don’t matter; everyone still knows what you
look like.

Maybe, she thought, her smile fading. But
that wasn’t the point. The point was that she
had to be taken seriously to run the farm the
way it needed to be run. She was Mrs. Hunt’s
right-hand woman.
When she went to see Howard Fleming that
morning, she had to portray something else.
She had to be disarming.
When she pulled up to the vast Pennington
Stables, Lynn was struck by the difference
between the two barns. Hunter’s Chase under
Mrs. Hunt had been no less meticulous, but it
was smaller and more intimate than the huge
Pennington. The drive up was white gravel
that shone under the summer sky. Green
fields with white fences ran alongside the long
drive, and the red stables sat back behind
them. There were plenty of riders and horses,
a lot of expensive cars in the parking lot.
There were grooms everywhere, leading sleek
Thoroughbreds or warmbloods, the cream of
the show world. The jumps in the training
rings were brightly painted, the poles striped
red and white, the barrels, the coops, and the
hedges all perfectly trimmed. Man, Lynn

thought, turning off her car. Who could stand
it?
The Fleming house sat on the hilltop, a pile of
roofs and windows. It reminded her of Trieve,
which made her think of Crae. I should have
stayed. He fought for me; I should have stayed
and fought by his side. Except he had sent her
off with a kiss, and she had ridden away
without looking back.
With great deliberation she shrugged off the
memory. It could do her no good right now.
Lynn headed up to the barn. She would ask
there for Howard.
Geoff, the head groom Howard had imported
from a British racing stable, turned at her
approach. A young groom watched, holding
an expensive Thoroughbred by the halter and
lead rope. Geoff tilted back his farmer’s cap.
With a flick of his eyes, he took in her
appearance, and a faint smirk appeared on
his face.
“Looking for Howard?” he said, his accent
thick.
“Hi, Geoff,” Lynn said stiffly. “Yes, actually.
Is he around?”
He half hid a snort. “Up at the house.” He

turned back to the horse and the young
groom, continuing his lecture on the proper
way to rub down a horse.
Figured. She should have gone straight up.
She didn’t like Geoff, he didn’t like her, and
the way everyone talked about her, her visit
with Howard was going to be all over the
horse community in no time. Well, as if she
could keep it secret. She only hoped she could
keep the topic under wraps.
Howard had guests. There were several
people at the garden at the front of the house,
all wearing civilian versions of Lynn’s riding
outfit: breeches, yes, but not actual riding
breeches, and white shirts that were much
more expensive but not quite for riding, and
boots with heels that were too high and had
metal detailing that looked like spurs but
weren’t quite. Well, Lynn thought, I tried. But
she would never be mistaken for an owner or
a client. Underneath it all, she was just a barn
rat. That’s why Geoff had smirked. She
smiled, trying to hide her discomfort.
“Hi. I’m looking for Howard. Is he around?”
The men and women eyed her. “He’s coming
out in a moment,” a woman said finally. Her

hair and makeup were impeccable. Lynn
thought she might have seen her in a movie or
on television. She felt dowdier and dowdier.
“Lynn!”
She turned. Howard came out, wearing his
signature breeches and light blue polo, and
she actually felt a wave of relief. He came
over and took her hand. “What a surprise!”
“I should have called, I’m sorry. I didn’t
realize you had guests.” All of whom were
watching intently. “But do you have a
minute? Or, is there a time we could talk?”
She hated feeling like a supplicant, that’s
what it was. Howard cocked his head, looking
at her. He nodded.
“Yes, of course, of course. Come on in. Have
you met everyone?”
She was introduced as the owner of Hunter’s
Chase to everyone, promptly forgot all the
names, and with Howard’s hand at her back,
was ushered into the house and his study.
Opulent was the only word. Impeccable,
gleaming terazzo floors, light streaming
perfectly into the room, books and art
carefully placed. He gestured her to a leather
chair, and he took the other one.

“What can I help you with?” he said. “Is
everything going all right? I should have
stopped by sooner, made you feel welcome.
All the owners are hoping things go well.”
“Everything is fine; the farm is great,” she
said with as sprightly an air as possible. She
set herself up for the first fence. “This is a
little strange, I know, but I need to know
about Mrs. Hunt. You were friends. What did
you know about her?”
He looked taken aback at her forthrightness.
Lynn sat back, tossed her hair over her
shoulder, and crossed her leg.
“She was a good woman. I was very sad to see
her go.”
“Was she in any kind of trouble?”
His mouth dropped. “I don’t know what you
mean.” His eyes flickered away.
Be careful, she told herself. She kept her eyes
on him, said nothing.
“I don’t know,” he said again. “She, well, she
had lots of friends, or rather a lot of people I
didn’t know anything about, although I tried
to guide her as best I could. There was an
innocence about her, I thought. I felt I could
help.”

“Were you concerned about her?”
“Well, she was a very competent person,” he
blustered. “I don’t know that concern is the
right—”
“Did you know her before she owned
Hunter’s Chase?”
“Lynn, what are you after?”
With an effort, she kept her mind off the
chest in the attic. She said softly, “I think she
might have been involved with something and
gotten in over her head.”
He grew very still.
“Well?”
He stared at her, mouth agape. A part of
Lynn wondered where she had gotten her
resolve. The rest of her just focused on
Howard.
“I heard—rumors,” he said finally. “We just
thought she had been—set up by someone.”
Lynn had heard the rumors, too, from the
rest of the stable workers. Sometimes people
said it was a horse-mad sheikh, other times
this or that politician. Could she have
bankrolled herself?
Crae said Tharp used most of her dowry to
finance his war. Tharp paid Ballard, and

Ballard paid Garson.
“Was it Mike Garson?”
She knew by his expression that it was a
direct hit and something more. As if he knew
he had given it away, he said, “Interesting
fellow, Garson. Did you know he shot most of
those trophy animals at the restaurant?”
“Did you try to warn her away from
Garson?”
Howard sat back, staring at her, his light blue
eyes rimmed with red. He wasn’t a handsome
man, and he was arrogant and dismissive.
The house was ridiculous, too, screaming too
much! the way it did. When he spoke next, he
lost his arrogance, and he was just a
middle-aged man. He almost sounded as if he
was as much aware of that as she was.
“I did. It was after a dinner one night at his
restaurant. Garson cornered her on the way
to the ladies’ room. I watched as they argued,
and it looked as if he threatened her. I went
over to put a stop to it, but she said it was
nothing. She didn’t tell me anything. I nosed
around and toyed with the idea of engaging a
private investigator.”
Oh man. Can you imagine what one could have

found out?
“But in the end, I didn’t think I should
interfere.” His gaze sharpened. “Should I
have?”
Lynn hesitated. She didn’t like him, but he
could be an ally in other ways. She didn’t
think he liked Garson, for one thing. “Mike
Garson came to Hunter’s Chase the other
day, and he offered to buy the place. He said
it was too expensive to maintain, and I should
just give it up. Some of the things that he
said, well, he sounded threatening, like he
would make it hard for me to run the place. I
thought, if he had approached Mrs. Hunt the
same way, maybe it led to her
disappearance.”
She lied the same way Dungiven took a fence:
big and bold.
The effect was instantaneous. Howard was
furious. “Charming individual,” he said, his
voice dry. “What did you tell him?”
“No. Or words to that effect.”
He laughed, and for that moment they were
equals, owners not just of expensive land but
of a piece of a disappearing life. “Lynn, why
did you come to me?”

“Because I think she was in trouble, and you
were her only friend.” Mrs. Hunt or Lady
Sarita, whoever she was, she didn’t have
friends. Not really. But that didn’t matter.
Whether Lady Sarita knew it or not, this man
had been the best friend he knew how to be.
Almost at once the old Howard was back.
“You’re a sweet girl,” he said, leaning
forward and taking her hand. With an effort,
she kept a grimace off her face as she pulled
her hand away. “Is that all you needed? Just
reassurance that Katherine had my good
feelings? Because my guests are waiting. But
yes, I warned her about Garson. I was
jealous—a pretty girl like you might think
that’s funny about a man like me, but I was.
And I thought there was something about his
attention for her that was—menacing, as if he
had some secret or knew something about
her. But if it was just pressure to sell, well,
you’ll have to get used to that. We all get it;
even I do.”
But Lynn wasn’t finished.
“Howard, when you warned her, what did she
say?”
“That it was all right, that Garson held no

danger for her, and if necessary she could
always disappear.” Then he frowned. “Well,
she actually said, she could always disappear
again.”
Garson, Lynn thought on the drive home. She
had the windows down, letting the cool air in
to clear her head and put her thoughts in
order. That’s why he came by the farm and
wanted to buy it; he knew there was a fortune
somewhere on the property. He knew it was
there because Mark had brought it over from
Aeritan as payment for the guns he was
getting from Garson. So how had Lady Sarita
retrieved it?
If she went to Garson and demanded answers,
he would know she found the dowry and the
gun. And if he knew it was somewhere at
Hunter’s Chase, he would never rest till he
got it back. He wouldn’t give up so easily,
even though she had kicked him out on his
last visit. He’d keep trying.
And Mrs. Felz was there alone. Lynn sped up,
taking the narrow country lanes as fast as she
could. Damn Garson, she thought. If Mark
was right and there was oil in Aeritan, he

wasn’t about to just let all that go away. He
was probably trying to open the gordath
again. But Joe and Arrim were there to stop
it.
Except there was the case of Red Bird. Why
hadn’t Joe and Arrim stopped the horse from
coming through the woods? What if they
couldn’t? Maybe something prevented them
from keeping the gordath closed. Was Lord
Tharp up to his old tricks again? But Lady
Sarita wouldn’t let him. She wanted the
gordath to stay closed. That’s why she went
back. Unless—what if she were regretting her
decision to go home?
The tires squealed as Lynn took the turn to
Hunter’s Chase too fast, and her little car
fishtailed. As she fought for control of the
car, out of the corner of her eye she caught
the odd sight of several men walking along
the side of the road. They were bearded and
scruffy, clothes and faces showing they had
seen better days. They were definitely not
from around here. She toyed for a moment
with the idea of calling the police, but the
thought was distasteful. Poor or not, scruffy
or not, these guys had the right to walk along

a public road.
She had bigger problems, anyway. There
might not be any earthquakes this time, but it
looked like the gordath was open, and Mike
Garson was nosing around after Lady
Sarita’s dowry. She wasn’t sure what she
could do about either situation.
To her vast relief, Hunter’s Chase looked
unchanged when she pulled up. She parked in
front of the house and got out, her sweaty
shirt sticking to her back. She looked around.
A few clients rode in the ring, and the rest of
the horses grazed in the fields. Mrs. Felz was
nowhere to be found, and her car was gone.
Lynn went into the house, expecting a note.
Sure enough, there it was, on the kitchen
table, held down with a glass full of
wildflowers.
Lynn. Mr. Garson from the Continental called.
Would like you to call ASAP. Isabella. PS.
Went into town for groceries.
He called, eh? And found out she was out?
Lynn dropped the note and looked up at the
ceiling. She ran for the hall. With shaking
hands she pulled down the trapdoor and
unfolded the attic ladder, scrambling up as

soon as it touched the floor. A wan light came
in from the vents at the corner of the eaves,
and the air was hot and humid, the heat
collecting up here almost visible, it was so
thick.
The chest was still there, and she felt a wave
of relief. Then suspicion touched her again,
and she went to take a look, bent over
awkwardly in the cramped space. Sure
enough the bounty was untouched, the gun
still wrapped where she had placed it, tucked
in a corner of the chest. She breathed out
hard in the dusty, humid space. She should
move the chest. Garson suspected that it was
somewhere on the farm, and he would do his
best to find it. The problem was, where could
she move it to?
She heard the kitchen door creak open and
Mrs. Felz call out, “Lynn? I’m home.”
Lynn shut the chest and went back down.
When she descended, Mrs. Felz was standing
there with an expression of surprise.
“Oh. Another leak?”
“No. I mean, yes, well, not sure, actually.”
Feeling she said enough, Lynn concentrated
on folding up the trapdoor. With her back to

Mrs. Felz she said, “So, what did Mr. Garson
have to say?”
“Nothing much. Still as full of himself as he
was when he came to visit.” Her voice made it
plain she was not impressed.
“You should go home,” Lynn said abruptly.
She hadn’t known she intended to say it.
Mrs. Felz looked at her, confusion and
surprise warring with each other. Tears
started to well, and she turned away. “Of
course, I—I never meant to . . . Of course. I
will.”
Lynn felt hugely, monumentally, wretchedly
guilty. She’s in danger, and she’s endangering
me, she tried to tell herself.
She didn’t believe it for a minute.
Mrs. Felz didn’t say anything else, just went
back into the kitchen and continued to unload
the groceries. Lynn followed her back in,
wishing she could take the words and stuff
them back into her mouth.
“Isabella,” she started. Mrs. Felz didn’t reply,
but she banged the cupboards a bit more than
necessary.
“Look—”
“No!” Mrs. Felz said. “You are absolutely

right. I’ve overstayed my welcome, and it’s
time to go home. I don’t know what I was
thinking.” She stopped and turned around.
Her face was tired and careworn, the
brightness faded.
She’s not that old, Lynn thought. She’s
younger than my mom. She must have been very
young when she had Joe.
“Listen,” Lynn said as gently as she could.
“I’m in a whole lot of trouble, and you could
be in trouble, too. I think you should go,
because I’m worried things are going to get
dangerous around here.”
Mrs. Felz didn’t answer right away.
“It’s that Mr. Garson, isn’t it?” she said
finally.
Lynn nodded.
“Can you call the police, tell them he’s
harassing you?”
The police suspected that she faked her
disappearance last year so she could somehow
end up owning Hunter’s Chase. She doubted
they would be sympathetic to any
unfounded—and unfoundable—accusations
against a pillar of society like Mike Garson.
All that was too hard to explain though, so

she just shook her head.
“And if you are here alone, what good is that?
Don’t you see how foolish you are to keep to
yourself?” Mrs. Felz’s eyes sharpened. “Does
this have to do with Joe?”
Lynn stayed silent for a second too long, and
Mrs. Felz sat down at the kitchen table. She
began playing with the note that she had left.
She spoke very quietly. “Are you ever
planning on telling me what happened to my
son?”
Sure. He went through a gateway between
worlds to find me, and you know what? He
stayed behind there because it turned out he
knew how to control it and there aren’t too
many people with that talent. Now the gateway
is open again, and I am worried that it means
something happened to him.
She didn’t say any of that. Instead, she said,
“I don’t know what happened to your son.
But I plan to find out.”
The morrim nestled against the side of a
rocky draw, supported on several small
boulders and tangled with deadwood and
papery vines. Green thornbushes and brush

curtained over it, and the rock was covered
with moss. It looked like an ancient rockslide.
Only the energy emanating from the rock
indicated what it was. Joe could feel it from
where they stood, about thirty paces away and
looking up. He glanced over at Arrim, and the
man met his eyes briefly and looked away.
Back in Gordath Wood, the ancient morrim
was matched with Balanced Rock, its mate in
North Salem. Where was this morrim’s twin,
and where did the gordath between them
lead? Joe remembered what Mark had
spilled, that Brythern had tried to control the
gordath out here with disastrous results.
Hare’s men all stood back nervously now,
behind him and Arrim. He almost laughed.
At last, the Brytherners were starting to get
scared, as if finally catching on that they were
out of their league. Well, maybe he and Arrim
could use that to get out of this fix.
“Guardians,” Hare said. “Get over there and
tell me what you know.”
Their guards pushed them forward, and they
stumbled a few steps to the morrim, looking
up at it. Climbing up would be a bitch, Joe
thought. The rock pile looked half-supported

by the ropy vines and roots, and he thought
he could see some three-leaved poison ivy to
boot. Crap. He hoped Hare didn’t want them
to go up there.
“So what do you think?” Joe said to Arrim in
a low voice.
“Hey!” Mark shouted. He turned toward
them, slightly raising the rifle. “No talking!”
Joe almost threw his hands into the air with
frustration. He looked at Hare. “What do you
want, Hare? You want us to control your
gordath, then you have to let us work
together.”
Hare looked mad enough to shoot Mark then
and there. Nonetheless, he had to save face.
“You talk when I say you can talk, Aeritan.”
He looked at Mark. “Take the rear guard;
shoot anything that comes along.”
Mark looked like he wanted to protest, and
then he made a face and went back down the
trail to stand a useless sentry watch. Joe
watched as the Brythern lord rolled his eyes
but then looked back at his two captives. “All
right. What can you tell me?”
It was the first time since their kidnapping
that they had relative privacy. Joe ignored

Hare’s question.
“Hey,” he said, keeping his voice low. “You
okay? You hanging in there?”
“Forest god,” Arrim muttered. “How can you
take it?”
“It sucks, but it keeps them happy,” Joe
muttered back. “Look, whatever happens, we
can’t open their gordath.”
“I know.”
“No games, Guardians,” Hare warned from a
few steps away. He was getting nervous, Joe
realized. He was probably already regretting
his decision to let them talk. Joe tilted his
head back and focused on the morrim. Under
the sounds of the rustling forest, the whir of
insects, and the movements of their guard
behind them, he could hear the whispering of
the morrim, like a radio out of tune. It was
maddening the way it stayed on the edge of
his hearing, static and words he strained to
make out, even though he knew that it was
not a language that he knew. Another
indication the gordath was alive—the damn
thing talked.
Now he could feel the air that came down
from the rocky slope. It was cool and smelled

ancient, as if it came from a place that existed
long ago. Millions of years ago, this granite
boulder had been flung up from the earth. At
least, back home it was. Here, who knew?
The humming intensified, and he drew nearer
so that he stood almost directly beneath the
morrim. Behind him he could hear Hare
shout a warning, but it was so far away he
ignored it. The supporting boulders were dug
into the side of the slope, and now he could
see how the morrim was cradled on them,
almost gently. He climbed a few feet, pulling
himself up the vines. If he reached up, he
could almost touch . . .
Joe yanked his hand back, scrabbling
backward and losing his footing so that he fell
on the trail. He looked at his hand, half
expecting to see it was glowing or burned
from his direct contact with the energy. It was
the same as always: dirty, rough, and worn. It
tingled, though, as if it had fallen asleep.
“What!?” That was Hare and Arrim both.
Joe panted and got to his feet, trying to get his
heart to slow down, to beat to a regular
rhythm. He ignored Hare and looked at
Arrim.

“I think I felt the gordath directly.”
If the morrim were the anchors, the gordath
was the sail that stretched between them like
a spiderweb. Joe knew what he felt was one of
the lines that held the gordath in place. If he
closed his eyes, he could almost see the line of
energy that stretched from morrim to
gordath, a dark pulse running beneath the
surface. He turned and followed the direction
his senses told him. It led deeper into these
strange woods that were scruffier, harder, less
lush than Gordath Wood proper. The gordath
was that way. They had felt it open all the
way in Aeritan. No wonder they hadn’t been
able to close it; they weren’t anywhere near it.
Hare came up next to him and looked up at
the pile of rock above them, and for once he
looked keenly interested in something other
than his men, his mission, or making it clear
who was in charge.
“Can anyone touch it?” the Brythern lord
asked.
Joe and Arrim looked at each other. Maybe
the morrim would recognize a nonguardian
and zap his ass to kingdom come. Or more
likely, it would know it had nothing to fear

from the man and reserve its malevolence for
the ones it knew could contain it.
“Much as I don’t care where you stick your
hand, better not,” Joe said finally. “You
might screw something up.”
The man’s eyes narrowed.
“Well,” Joe said, “you best show us where this
brand-new gordath of yours is.”
They didn’t really need Hare’s help. As if
touching the lines had awakened something,
Joe could practically follow the energy
beneath their feet. But he figured the
Brytherners didn’t need to know that.
The power hummed beneath his boots and
into his body, making his ribs ache deeply. It
was hard to draw a breath. Dammit, he
needed to talk things over with Arrim. He
looked at the other guardian. Arrim walked
carefully, one foot in front of the other, and
Joe knew he was pacing the line.
It was so close to the surface, he thought. The
lines in the old gordath were so deep and
ancient they could be barely sensed. This was
new, and it made him uneasy.
He had been yanking the Brytherner’s chain
when he told him he and Arrim had to be

able to work together to control this new
gordath, but he had a feeling that he might
have been right—and it might still be more
than they could handle.
And if we turn out to be useless, we—and the
whole world—could be in some serious shit.
After several hours of walking, it was as if
they had reentered Gordath Wood. The air
cooled a bit as the tall trees closed out the sun.
Joe could hear water falling somewhere and
licked his lips, cracked and broken from not
enough water, food, or care. The forest got
wet again, the loamy soil rich with nutrients.
The trail wound down deeper into the woods,
and a little pool emerged at the bottom of a
hollow, ferns dripping down the cliff sides
into the water. He could see dark shadows of
fish swimming languidly.
They didn’t stop, just kept on walking, the
guards pushing them past the water till he
and Arrim stumbled.
A half hour later, the trail turned again, and
the smell hit him first, and then he registered
the buzzing of flies. Joe stumbled backward,
choking. Where trees had toppled, their roots

had pulled up completely out of the soil,
drying dirt clinging to the tendrils. Some trees
had broken, the jagged yellow wood
weathering in the air. Horses lay where the
energy of the gordath had blasted at them,
their bodies bloated so that saddle girths had
popped open. Scavengers had already started
on them.
At least they must have removed the soldiers,
Joe thought, covering his nose with his sleeve.
He thought of the little smallholding that he
and Arrim had come across months ago in
Gordath Wood. Only in this clearing there
was no peace, just death. Joe looked at Hare.
“What the hell happened?”
Hare’s jaw worked. “We opened the gordath,
as Lord Bahard said it might be done. Only . .
.”
Only they couldn’t control it, and it killed
more than twenty men, just as Mark had said.
Mark began to bluster. “Hey, don’t look at
me. It worked last year, and I got through just
fine.”
Asshole, Joe thought. Mark got through, sure,
but he couldn’t close down the gordath. It
took a guardian to do that. Joe shook his

head, still sickened by the stench. He looked at
Hare.
“You are one crazy bastard, you know that?”
He expected a reaction, even another smack
across the face, but Hare just shook his head.
His lips pressed together as if to keep back
what he wanted to say. Instead, the Brythern
lord looked around at the clearing, a muscle
jumping in his jaw.
“All right,” he said finally. “Open it. Keep it
open.”
“Jesus Christ, Hare. You’ve got to be
kidding,” Joe said, panic rising. The way the
portal was humming, all it needed was the
slightest touch to open it. Hell, he and Arrim
would have to be very careful to keep from
disturbing it. It was so on edge all he had to
do was reach out with his mind, and it would
fly open.
The gordath’s vibration increased in intensity
as if it could feel his panic. He could sense it
whispering on the edge of his mind; if he
strained to try to understand, it would lure
him in. If he wasn’t careful, it would worm its
way inside of him and take control.
“Hare,” Joe said, his voice shaking. “We all

have to get out of here. Now!” Joe tried to
keep his mind carefully focused, but it felt
like ants were crawling around inside of him.
He glanced at Arrim. The man was sweating.
Joe knew he could tell how delicate the
situation was.
“Open it!” Hare roared. “Open it, and keep it
open!”
The ground trembled under their feet, the
ferns swaying and the leaves rattling
overhead. The forest darkened almost
imperceptibly. Joe’s head spun with the effort
to keep control, and he swallowed the rise of
bile in his throat. His knees went weak, and he
fell.
God, he thought. Forest god, Jesus Christ,
whoever you are. Stop it.
Arrim went to his knees next to him. Joe
could feel the gordath opening. The last thing
he remembered was sharp regret. So the
Brytherner would have his way after all, and
all of the beatings had been for nothing. He
could do nothing about it except to succumb,
and the gordath opened wide, swallowing his
world.
Ten

“Kate!” her mom called through her
bedroom door. Kate opened a bleary eye. It
was morning, and the day was fresh, the
sunlight streaming through her bedroom
window. Yesterday’s chaos came back in a
rush, and when she looked at Mojo’s saddle,
still perched on the back of her desk chair,
she felt a sickening quiver in the pit of her
stomach. Her mom knocked again and poked
her head in, and Kate made sure she was
covered up to her chin with her blankets. She
had slept in her clothes, and she didn’t want
her mom to see. Her mom was dressed in a
suit and had her briefcase and keys. “I’m
going to work, sweetie, and your dad’s
already gone. I don’t want you sleeping in all
day. Cole’s already up; you should be, too.”
He always got up early. First light.
“Okay,” Kate said. “I’m going to the stables
today.”
Her mom smiled. “Good. Your dad and I
talked, and we think it would be a good idea if
we bought Allegra for you. You seem to like
her, and you did get a few ribbons with her
the other day. We’ll talk with Lynn

tonight—if you want, of course.”
Was that a bribe, or did they think it was a
solution?
“Um, okay,” she managed.
Her mom was about to close the door when
she saw Mojo’s old saddle. Her gaze
sharpened, and Kate could see her struggle to
control her anger. “Oh, Kate. Remember
what I said about no tack in the bedroom?”
“Sorry,” Kate managed. “I’ll take it back
today.”
Her mom pressed her lips together, as if she
wanted to keep going, but instead she nodded.
“All right. I will see you tonight. I might be
late—we’ll order takeout. Cole likes Thai,
doesn’t he?”
Kate felt a rush of irritation. Just go! “I don’t
know, Mom,” she said, her voice level. “I’m
sure he’ll manage.”
Her mother hesitated, then, still determined
to let no bad mood foul the day, she said
again, “Good-bye, Katie. Call me if you need
anything.”
Call me if you intend to go crazy again. Kate
waited for her mother to close the door and
threw off the covers, fully dressed from

patrolling the house last night. She and Colar
had alternated watches, and he had taken the
early morning shift. She had left him at the
top of the stairs, his sword in one hand, a cell
phone in the other. The night stayed quiet,
but she knew that it was only a matter of time
before Marthen came back.
What were they going to do? The general had
sent a message when he left the saddle: You
aren’t safe from me. I can come here anytime.
She didn’t know how she was going to be able
to protect her parents if they wouldn’t believe
her or Colar about the danger.
The house was dead silent, and she held her
breath, listening, a trickling of fear niggling
at her. Her home was no longer a refuge; now
she felt as if she were being watched. Kate got
up and shed her slept-in clothes, getting
dressed in the first clean pair of jeans and
T-shirt she pulled out of her bureau. She was
clumsy in her haste and knocked over a
picture from her shelves. The glass broke with
a crack.
“Oh no!” Kate knelt to pick it up, careful of
broken glass. She turned it over. It was one of
her and Mojo taken at a show just before she

had gone to Aeritan. She held him by the
reins under the chin with one hand, the other
holding up a yellow ribbon. She remembered.
They had come in third among some really
stiff competition. Most of the other riders had
upgraded to better horses, bigger horses, on
their way to garnering enough points for
Nationals. She was proud of how her little
horse had proved himself against some of the
toughest competition in the area.
“Kate?” It was Colar.
“Just a sec,” she called out, but he opened the
door anyway and came in. He carried his
sword, lowering it immediately when he saw
her.
“I just dropped something,” she said. She
checked for broken glass, but the picture had
just cracked, not shattered. She got up and set
it down on the desk.
“I heard it. I thought he might have gotten in
the window.”
Her window was on the second floor, and
there was no convenient tree to climb, like in
the movies. But she knew better than to
underestimate her enemy.
Colar sheathed the sword. He wore his sword

belt over jeans, and the scabbard hung down
low by his side. He was wearing sneakers, the
laces tucked inside. He touched the saddle. It
still had a few black hairs from Mojo’s mane
stuck in the D rings, and there were splotches
of blood and dirt. Aeritan blood, she thought.
Aeritan dirt.
Colar looked as if he were fighting to keep his
anger down. His hand whitened on the hilt of
his sword. When he spoke, his voice was low.
“I don’t like him being here.”
She sighed and sat back down on her bed.
“What are we going to do? He made it clear
he’s going to come back whenever he wants
to. This house isn’t safe, and I don’t know
how to make it safe.” A thought struck her.
“We’re not safe right now. He probably has
someone watching us this minute, and he
knows my mom and dad are gone.”
He walked over to her window, positioned
himself next to the wall, and peeked out
through the blinds. “He could be,” he said.
“We patrolled most of last night, and we did
have the alarm on, so if he did set someone to
watch, they probably had an eye on us all
night.” He glanced at her. “I set up a deadfall

early this morning in front of the garage
door. I figured that would be the way they
would try to get in first. I put everything back
when I heard your parents get up.”
“Cole’s already up,” her mother had said. She
just hadn’t known that he had been up all
night. She probably heard him puttering
down in the garage and just thought he was
throwing the basketball around.
Kate said, “What did you use?”
He shrugged. “Tools and things from the
garage.”
Kate almost wished Marthen had tried to get
in last night. Maybe then her parents would
believe them. As it was, time was running out.
They couldn’t wait for him to make the next
move.
“We have to find him. He’s hiding in the
woods, and he’s got all those homeless men
with him. He’s got to be camped out by the
gordath.” She didn’t want to leave the house
empty, but it wasn’t the house that Marthen
wanted.
“Then what?” Colar said. He leaned back
against the wall. The scabbard looked
incongruous against his jeans. He looks taller,

she thought. How strange. “What do we do
with him?”
What, indeed? There was only one thing they
could do, even if it meant that they could get
stuck on the other side. The words came to
her as if the soldier’s god had spoken them.
“We send him back.” In pieces if we have to.
Colar’s expression was hard to read; he
looked as if he was going to say something but
stopped himself. Finally, he said, “If we take
him through, we might not get back. If you
can’t go home again . . .”
“I know,” Kate said quickly. “Let’s not worry
about that.”
They hurried to prepare. Kate dumped her
binders and notebooks out of her school
backpack, sweeping out all the detritus of
sophomore year. She left the pile on the
bedroom floor and hurried into the
bathroom. Aspirin, tampons, a roll of toilet
paper, toothpaste, and toothbrush, all went
into her backpack. Inspiration struck, and she
pilfered a few old hotel soaps and shampoos,
too. She took the Band-Aids and the
antibiotic ointment. Too bad none of us are

taking antibiotics. Finished, she went back into
her bedroom, stuffing underwear, an extra
shirt, and extra socks into the backpack. It
was full. The jeans I have on now have to do,
she thought. She bit her lip, thinking, then
grabbed a light jacket and a thin sweater. She
could roll them up and tie them to the back of
the backpack.
There was a good chance they weren’t going
to stay, anyway. This is just a precaution, she
thought. All they had to do was make sure
Marthen went back.
That’s all? a sardonic part of her mind asked.
She ignored that and zipped her backpack
shut.
She met Colar out in the hall. He had dumped
out his lacrosse duffel bag, and it was full.
She knew he packed his old armor, his old
clothes. His sword was strapped to the back of
the gym bag. “I’ll change into my gear when
we’re in the woods.” He nodded at her pack.
“Toilet paper?”
Kate giggled, suddenly lighthearted.
“Toothpaste, too.”
He grinned, and he suddenly looked his age.
“Let’s get food.”

They went down into the silent kitchen and
raided the pantry.
Kate checked all of the doors and reset the
alarm. Her mom must have left it off when
she went out, and Kate clicked her tongue in
annoyance. Well, soon they won’t have to worry
about it, because Marthen will be gone, she
thought grimly. They went out the garage and
loaded up the Jeep. It was eerie, how quiet the
house had become. She used to not mind
being home alone, but the house would never
feel safe again. Suddenly she remembered her
saddle.
“Wait!” she said. Colar looked up from where
he had dumped the duffel bag. “My saddle. I
promised my mom I wouldn’t leave it in the
room.” She felt a sharp sadness. What if she
did get trapped on the other side?
“All right, but hurry.”
She ran up the steps, her hiking boots
clunking on the carpeted stairs, and grabbed
the saddle from her room, holding it over her
arm. She looked around. It was a mess, and it
would look like she had been snatched from
the house. Her school stuff was all over the
floor, and the cracked photo . . . She didn’t

have time to clean. She would leave a note in
the kitchen.
A sound came from the garage, reminding
her she had to go. She shouldered open the
door and ran back down to the kitchen. They
had left the pantry door open, and she closed
that, then rummaged for notepaper and pen
in the junk drawer. Hastily she scrawled,
Mom and Dad. We’re okay. We’ll see you soon.
Love, Kate. And Cole.
It wasn’t enough, but it would have to do. She
heard the Jeep start up and went out to the
garage. Kate set the saddle in the backseat
and climbed in. Colar put the car in gear, and
they backed out, the garage door cycling up
its chains, the motor a dull roar. As the
garage door closed behind them, the house
looked like any other house in the
neighborhood, silent and empty during the
day. Kate listened to the thudding of her
heart as they drove out toward the gordath.
In the cold gray light of a Trieve dawn, Crae
woke alone in his bed. The side of the bed that
Jessamy had shared was empty, the blankets
drawn up neatly as if to erase her presence.

He had held her until she cried herself out
and fell asleep, her head tucked under his
chin. She was warm and heavy in his arms,
and her hair draped over his chest, tickling
him. At some point she moved to lie next to
him, and he fell asleep at last.
He was confused. She had come to him, and
though at first stiff and shy, she had shared
his bed willingly. Then she cried as if her
heart was broken.
Did she regret her decision? Or had she cried
because of disappointment? High god, Crae
thought. Could things get any more
complicated? He sat up, threw off his
blankets, and got out of bed. He winced;
yesterday’s battle made his body one great
bruise, and last night’s ale did the same for
his head. He moved slowly as he dressed,
stumbling to get his woolen socks on. The
stone floor held a chill, and there would be no
fire till that night.
Dressed in his heavy trousers and shirt with
his warm overshirt on, he yawned and headed
out to the stairs. Time to take stock of the
damage and see what Trieve needed. This
time he would take a troop out to scout the

lower terraces. No need to get ambushed
again, though he doubted the crows would try
it. They had been routed too thoroughly.
And one of their own was buried in Trieve.
That meant something to the crow king.
Trieve kept its promise and gave the crow
guesting for all eternity. In the tally of
potential allies, Crae thought, perhaps the
crows would side with Trieve, although he
was not sure whether he would lose more by
treating with them than he would gain.
He was headed out to the stairs when he
stopped, looking down the still-dark hall.
Jessamy’s chamber was that way. Crae
hesitated, then made his way down the hall to
her room.
He could hear movement within her door and
listened to Tevani’s chatter and Jori crying.
Then the baby stopped crying, and he knew
the babe nursed. Crae knocked.
All sounds paused. He had almost lost his
nerve when he heard running footsteps and
then the door rattled and opened. Tevani had
opened it, pushing against the weight of the
heavy door with all her strength.
“Lord Crae!” she shouted and barreled into

him. Crae caught her up and, still
embarrassed, he entered the room with the
little girl in his arms.
Jessamy sat in her chair nursing the baby, her
face an oh of surprise. She looked straight at
Crae, turned red, and looked down
studiously.
“Good morning,” he said, setting down
Tevani. She ran back to her little trundle bed,
chattering.
“Are we going riding this morning? I’m not
afraid of the crows. I can come out riding
with you, can’t I? Mama, please say yes. And
Uncle Jori says I can ride with him, too!”
Crae pushed down a twinge of jealousy.
Favor wouldn’t be here much longer, but he
had no doubt Favor’s offer to let Tevani ride
with him was a direct shot at Crae.
Under cover of Tevani’s chatter he knelt
beside Jessamy’s chair and took her hand.
She started to pull away but let her hand stay.
“Are you well?” he asked softly.
“Yes. Yes, of course. I—it was such a day and
a night,” she fumbled. She still wouldn’t look
at him.
“And last night? Are you well?”

She looked full at him, startled. “Yes, Crae, of
course. I—I am sorry I—cried.”
The room had gone silent, Tevani having
caught on that the grown-ups were having a
conversation that she was not part of.
The room was warm and cozy, full of life and
comfort. He felt as if he were an intruder.
Had he done wrong to come here?
“I wanted to wish you good morning,” he
said, realizing how inadequate it was.
This time her mouth quirked in a smile,
fleeting as it was. She gave his hand a squeeze
before bringing it back to tuck the blanket
around her son.
“It is a good morning,” she said firmly, and
the old brisk Jessamy was back. “We have
survived the crows, and Trieve is safe.
Because of you,” she added.
He didn’t know what to say, so he just
touched the baby’s head. He was fair, like his
father, though he looked more like Jessamy.
But Crae knew that boys often looked like
their mothers, and girls their fathers.
If he and Jessamy had made a baby, he would
have a child. Crae caught his breath.
If Jessamy noticed, she made no sign. “Here,”

she said. She put her finger in the corner of
the baby’s mouth and dislodged him from her
breast. She covered up hastily and raised the
boy to her shoulder, rubbing his back. “He
would nurse for hours if I gave him leave.
Greedy little thing.” The boy gave a hearty
burp, and they both laughed. Jori smiled, too,
a wide-gummed grin, the tiniest pearl of a
tooth showing through. “Hold him, please,
while I get myself together.”
She had never given him leave to carry the
baby before. Crae took the baby and held him
while she got up and called over Tevani.
“Come here, darling; let’s get you dressed.”
The baby was surprisingly heavy and warm.
Crae sat down in the chair and held him face
out so he could look around. The baby leaned
back against him, and he watched Jessamy
alternately scold and cajole Tevani into her
thick tunic and leggings.
As Tevani sat on the floor and painstakingly
fastened the straps of her boots herself, there
came another knock on the door. Calyne
bustled in with linens.
“A good morning to you, my lady, little
Tevani—oh!” She spotted Crae, holding the

baby. “Oh!”
Crae felt something warm and wet down the
front of his shirt. “Here,” he said hastily,
holding out the damp baby. “I think he needs
you.”
Both women clucked. “Oh, that dear little
boy!” Calyne said. She took him from Crae
and laid him down in his cradle, her careworn
expert hands unwrapping the diaper, taking a
new one, and wrapping him up again all
before the boy could do more than whimper.
“Thank you, Calyne,” Jessamy said. She laced
up her bodice. “I swear that this boy goes
through twice as many cloths as Tevani ever
did.”
“Oh, of course, Lady Jessamy. Come, shall I
take both children to breakfast with me?”
“No. I, well . . . That is—”
Crae had never seen Jessamy at such a loss
for words.
“Yes,” Crae said firmly to Calyne. He stood,
knowing that he towered over both women.
She bowed hastily, and with Jori in the crook
of her arm, she took Tevani by the hand, the
little girl jumping in her boots. The door
closed behind them, Tevani’s voice regaling

Calyne with the events of the morning all the
way down the hall.
“What?” Jessamy said, looking up at him, her
chin raised. She looked as if she needed
something to do with her hands, now that she
didn’t have the baby. She had held Stavin’s
son between them so that he could not get too
close to her. And it had worked, until she had
come to his bed last night. Now the days of
shields between them were over.
He took her hand again, this time lifting it to
his lips. She made a small wordless sound. He
bent and kissed her. Once again her mouth
was stiff at first, and once again she yielded,
her lips soft and sweet.
“If you don’t come to me tonight,” he said, his
voice low, “I will come to you.”
The first thing he noticed when he made it
downstairs was that Calyne’s news traveled
fast. Everywhere people smiled when they saw
their lord.
“Good morning, Lord Crae! A good morning
to you, sir! How are you this fine morning, my
lord!”
It was disconcerting to say the least. As a mere

captain, he had had more privacy, little
though he had been able to make of it, for
there were few opportunities for love at Red
Gold Bridge. Still, it was as if everyone had a
stake in his and Lady Jessamy’s marriage
bed—and come to think of it, exactly what
had the grooms and farmers been wagering
on the last few months?
The only person who had no great smile for
the turn of events was Lord Favor. He
scowled at Crae as he came into the kitchens
for breakfast and vesh. Crae’s general good
humor faded.
“Brother,” Crae said shortly. He got himself a
cup and let one of the maids fill it for him.
Favor grunted. Crae wondered if he had been
drinking something stronger than vesh
already that morning. His expression was
hangdog, and he slumped at the table. Breyan
was at his side, and the captain glanced from
lord to lord, his expression closed.
“So, you were triumphant,” Favor sneered.
Crae didn’t bother replying. He sipped his
hot spiced vesh and waited. His
brother-in-law flushed. “Now what? I heard
how you gave in to that foul stick who called

himself the king of the crows. King of the
rats, more like. What kind of man are you,
Captain?”
Crae regarded him over his cup. You are a
fool, he thought. If I could, I would thrash you
and throw you from the top stair; only your
sister saves your skin. When he was good and
ready, he said, “The kind of man who made a
valuable alliance with a feared enemy. No
crow will attack Trieve ever again. And if we
are ever attacked”—he put some emphasis in
the word—“they will come to our defense. So
you see, Lord Favor, I might be more
favorably inclined toward the crow lord than I
am to you right now.”
Favor’s expression made him look as if he
were about to explode. He stood, and Breyan
stood with him—to defend him against Crae
or to hold him back, Crae was not sure which.
“You threaten me,” he blustered, “but you
have no idea who you toy with. I am a
member of the Aeritan Council, Captain, and
who we elevated we can cast down.”
Everyone in the kitchen had given up all
pretense at work. The hot bustling room had
become still, the stone walls almost leaning in

to hear. Crae set down his vesh. With the
utmost care he kept his control.
“You didn’t elevate me,” Crae said. “The
high god did, and until he says otherwise, I
am lord here. You would know that, Favor, if
you had been summoned, as I was. Instead,
you just took the lordship with a nudge and a
wink.”
Even as he spoke he knew he trod on
dangerous ground. He warned himself to take
care. From what he knew, he might as well
have accused the entire Council of falsifying
their right to their lordships.
Favor licked his lips. “And you are ungrateful
and unworthy,” he said. “I spoke against you
from the first, because I knew you were
nothing but a common free lance. You
resigned your commission and took arms
against your lord, you consorted with a low
female from an uncouth land, and you
conspire with crows against the House of
Trieve. I should bring you before the Council
on charges of treason and strip you of your
rights.”
A couple of men growled and stepped
forward. Breyan drew his sword and stepped

in front of Favor, even as Crae lifted his hand
to halt his men. They stood down, but they
did not back off.
“Do it,” he said. He could barely speak for his
anger. “Go to the Council. Tell them what you
think of me. Bring war to your sister’s land,
her children’s birthright. All for nothing
except your hurt pride and that you can’t
stand the idea that I married your sister in
more than name only.”
“You dare—” Favor stopped. When he spoke
again, his voice rose barely to a whisper. “You
insult Favor.”
“You’ve insulted Trieve more than I could
ever insult your House,” Crae said. He was
half-worried, half-thankful that he hadn’t
worn his sword to breakfast. Favor was
armed. He had come to the kitchen looking
for a fight, and Crae had handed him the
pretext. Fine. Then we will have this out. “You
insulted this House the moment your horse set
foot on the bottom terrace. You brought war
down upon us, yes, you, Brother. You brought
this battle to us through pride and stupidity. I
do not take the flat of my sword to your back
for three reasons, and they sit upstairs safely

in my House.”
Favor advanced, one hand on his sword,
Breyan next to him. Would he have stood so
next to Tharp? Crae’s mouth twisted. He
would have done as Breyan did. A captain
served the House, not the man. Breyan’s
feelings for his lord could not enter into it. He
didn’t look around, but all the men and some
of the women gathered at his back. Some
were his newly blooded fighting men, but
none were armed.
“You are a false lord, and the Council will
treat you as you deserve. We will take Trieve
down stone by stone, Captain, and make you
watch when we put your people to the sword
and torch your fields. That will teach you to
think you are better than your station.”
“Get out of my House.” Crae could barely
speak. He turned toward Breyan. “Get him
out of here.”
“Uncle Jori! Lord Crae!” Tevani bolted into
the kitchen, followed by Calyne. “Can I ride
Hero this morning with Uncle Jori? Please?
You promised you would ride with me—”
Favor growled and turned on his niece as the
little girl ran up to him. Crae knew what he

meant to do: simply swat the child away. He
knew Favor could not have meant to hurt her.
But the man drew his sword and swung it at
her with the flat end. They were in such close
quarters that Breyan and Crae fouled each
other as they jumped in. The sword caught
Breyan across the shoulder and down his
chest, and the man dropped. Crae caught the
rest of the arc across his shirt, the tip scraping
his skin as he threw Tevani out of the way.
The little girl screamed as she thudded to the
stone floor, her cry cut off on impact.
Then there was nothing else but
shouting—Breyan in pain, the women and the
men in horror. Crae grabbed the sword from
his brother-in-law and raised it over his head.
Favor’s eyes went from confused to pleading
to terror-stricken, but he could make no move
as Crae plunged the sword into his chest
almost to the hilt.
Blood blossomed on Favor’s fine shirt, and he
sank to his knees, the sword jutting out from
his chest. Crae let him drop, and the blood
pooled beneath him on the stones. All around
them the men and women of Trieve moved,
some to pick up Tevani to keep her limp body

out of the flow of blood, some to draw Breyan
away and wrestle his sword from him. More
men came in, drawn by the commotion, more
women. Jessamy came running in, stricken at
the sight of her daughter.
“Tevani!” she shrieked. “Tevani! High god,
she can’t be dead! She can’t!”
As if from far away, Crae heard the others
reassure her that the child hadn’t been
bloodied but had been pushed aside and had
fallen. He heard Tevani’s gasping cry as she
regained consciousness. Crae let the flood of
panic swirl around them. He and Favor were
in a world all their own. He watched as the
life failed in Favor’s eyes and the man fell
forward, the dead weight of his body pushing
the sword through his back.
High god. Help me.
His god was silent though, or at least Crae
could not hear him over the buzzing in his
head.
Eleven
“Hi, Lynn,” Nancy called from behind the
counter at Toomey’s as Lynn entered the
low-slung feed and supply for some odds and

ends for the farm. Nancy was about Mrs.
Felz’s age, and she had worked the feed and
supply store for twenty years or more. “Jim
wanted me to let you know that he’s got in a
new batch of dewormer and he hasn’t gotten
your order for grain, and was wondering
what was up.”
Crap. She had forgotten. Dammit, I need a
barn manager. “Hi, Nance,” Lynn said.
“Sorry, that was my fault. As long as I’m
here, let me put that in. And, er . . . how
quickly can you get that out to me?” Toomey
wholesaled the grain and hay for most of the
area farms.
Nancy tsked. “I’ll put you on the list. Hey, so
what’s this I hear about you finding a new
horse?”
News traveled fast, that was for sure. She
knew she wouldn’t be able to keep Red Bird a
secret for long.
“Yeah, it was strange.” You have no idea how
much, Lynn added to herself. “I’d put up
flyers to see if someone lost him, but I don’t
think they should have him back. He was
pretty badly mistreated.”
Nancy raised an eyebrow. “And he just

wandered in? He must have known a good
thing when he found it.”
“Yeah. I’ve put him up and had him vetted
out. Nothing wrong with him that food and
time won’t cure.”
A new voice chimed in. “Your mystery horse?
I heard about that.”
Lynn looked up to see Sue Devin, one of the
local riders who ran the cross-country club,
with a basket of supplies in hand, wearing
jeans, a long-sleeved shirt, and hiking boots.
Lynn smiled. She liked Sue, a no-nonsense
woman who was in her seventies and looked
and acted as if she would live forever. She
used to be a member of the hunt club and was
one of its foremost riders, until her husband
died and Sue gave that up. She was still a
fixture on the horse show circuit, though,
with her big rawboned bay gelding, the aptly
named Chocolate Moose, who was eighteen if
he was a day and still jumped as if he was ten
years younger.
“People are terrible,” Sue went on. “Are you
going to try to find the owners?”
“I was planning on turning them in to the
ASPCA if I did,” Lynn lied, a feeling of

inevitability coming over her. Well, people
would forget about the horse soon enough, as
soon as the next news tidbit came up.
“Wait, if she keeps him, doesn’t that make
her a horse thief?” Nancy teased. “Do we get
to hang her?”
“I think they only hang horse thieves in
Texas,” Sue said.
With an effort, Lynn kept any reaction off
her face at the mention of Texas.
“So tell me about him,” Sue prompted. There
was nothing better than a new horse to talk
about.
“Blocky, nice square build, looks like he has
some quarter horse in him. About fifteen
hands,” she added. Sue made an Oh well face.
Like Lynn, Sue was tall. In the horse show
world, anything less than sixteen hands for a
tall girl didn’t look good in the show ring.
“After all this, you’ve bought him, I think. I
wouldn’t worry about the owners coming
forward,” she said.
Nancy rang up Sue’s purchases and said,
“Are you off to perambulate?”
“Indeed I am,” Sue said. She caught Lynn’s
confused expression. “You youngsters. Don’t

you know what a perambulator is?”
Lynn shook her head, half laughing. “A baby
carriage?”
Nancy pushed over the receipt and said, “It’s
a fancy title for people who don’t do anything
except hike,” she teased.
“Hush, you. We do more than hike. We walk
the town borders between Connecticut and
New York and make sure that the borders are
secure.”
Lynn felt her mouth drop. “Wait . . . you
what?”
Sue stowed her packages in a big canvas tote
with a jumping horse cross-stitched on it and
chattered on, oblivious to Lynn’s reaction. “It
dates back to the Colonial era. All of the
Connecticut towns used to have them. Now
we call ourselves the perambulators, but we
haven’t been official for, goodness, twenty or
thirty years. As Nancy says, we just hike.”
“So, you’re like . . . guardians, right?”
Sue considered that. “I hadn’t thought of
that, but that would be a good way to put it.
Well, I have to run. Oh, and Lynn, let me
know what happens with that horse of yours
and if you find his owners. I’d love to give

them a piece of my mind.”
“Wait!”
Sue turned around with a quizzical expression
at Lynn’s urgency. Nancy waited with Lynn’s
purchases, also as surprised.
“Sue, this is really important. Where do you
hike, exactly, and have you been in the woods
recently?”
Sue was smart; Lynn had always known that.
The woman’s expression changed from
quizzical to sharp. Lynn held her breath.
“If you aren’t busy today, why don’t you
come out with us, and I’ll show you. I’ll swing
by the farm and pick you up.”
Lynn nodded, watching her go. The door
tinkled behind Sue, and Nancy finished
bagging her purchases. Remembering, Lynn
turned to her and took the bag.
“I just wish I knew what was going on, but no
one ever tells me anything,” Nancy groused.
She gave Lynn a sharp look of her own. “I’ll
tell Jim to schedule you for a shipment.”
“Thanks.”
Lynn got into her car, heading home on
autopilot. So there were guardians in the
area. Who knew—especially since they didn’t

seem to know themselves. How much did
perambulators know about the woods in the
area? Did they know anything at all about
Gordath Wood? From what Sue said, it was a
Connecticut tradition, not a New York State
one, but in this part of the region, it could be
hard to tell where Connecticut left off and
New York began, especially on the trails. She
supposed that was the point of having
perambulators, in pre-satellite-mapping days.
What if those long-ago selectmen had
established perambulators in Connecticut not
to guard against border encroachment from
New York but to keep an eye out for
something more dangerous?
On the other side of Gordath Wood, they had
guardians who knew what they were doing
and how to keep the gordath closed so it
wouldn’t consume the worlds. Over here they
had old folks who liked to hike in the woods.
She didn’t know how much she could tell Sue.
She didn’t know how much the older woman
would believe her. But maybe it was time for
the perambulators to know what they were
really up against.

Lynn looked through the binoculars across a
forested tract in Connecticut at what Sue
Devin had said was the border with New York
State. She couldn’t tell. The woods were
divided by roads and houses, and one great
empty field swooped up toward the sky as if it
wanted to meet the clouds. Next to her Sue
consulted with her fellow perambulators over
maps and binoculars. They were a hearty
group of a half dozen middle-aged and older
enthusiasts, all amiable, with water bottles,
bird books, hats, hiking boots, and walking
sticks. Lynn was the youngest by about thirty
years, and they treated her with good humor
and a touch of pity—the latter, she suspected,
because she could barely keep up. She wasn’t
used to walking, she wanted to protest, but
instead saved her breath. She needed it. They
hiked some steep and rocky hills in their duty
to patrol the borders of Connecticut towns.
The summer air was still under the trees,
their leaves hanging limply in the midsummer
heat. Cicadas buzzed rhythmically. The sound
was soothing and peaceful. If she had a
hammock, she would have wanted to swing
easily and fall asleep.

The last time she fell asleep in the woods,
things hadn’t been so peaceful, she reminded
herself. She lowered the binoculars and
handed them back to Sue.
“So is that High Hollow?” she asked Sue,
gesturing toward the sweep of open space.
Sue nodded. “And over there is Stone Brook,”
she said, pointing to the west. “And behind
that—”
Hunter’s Chase. And Gordath Wood.
As promised, Sue had come by to pick up
Lynn, who had brought along a filled water
bottle, some granola bars, and her old
sneakers from the back of her closet. She had
wanted to fill a backpack with provisions, just
in case, but she’d held back. They wouldn’t be
hiking anywhere near the gordath, after all.
They didn’t keep to a trail, exactly. “Too easy
to get lost,” Sue quipped, and the rest
laughed. “We have to be careful though; we
stick to trails where we know there are
endangered species.” She pointed out several
on their walk: here a salamander in a damp
swale, there a kind of fern. There were
flowers and other plants as well, and plenty of
invasive plants, which caused a fluster of

consternation and some ruthless weeding that
left the bad species pulled up by their roots
and drying in the sun.
“And up here is a special treat,” Sue told her.
She accepted one of Lynn’s granola bars. “If
you look over here, there’s a glade of
old-growth forest tucked away. Whoever
logged this area hundreds of years ago left a
nice little swath.”
Lynn felt a prickle go down her spine. This is
what she had come for. “I’d love to see it,” she
said casually, and Sue led the way. They
picked their way off the trail down a rocky
slope. The rocks in the area were legion,
brought by glaciers, left behind when the ice
retreated. The morrim in Aeritan had been
one such boulder, and so was the morrim in
North Salem.
She saw immediately what Sue meant when
they reached the little swale, and she knew at
once that she looked at a piece of Gordath
Wood. A glade of six huge trees, ancient and
gnarled, squatted in a semicircle, one, the
tallest, almost split in two by an old lightning
strike—or some other force. It had sheared
off a half of the trunk and several branches,

but it did not kill it entirely; that cloven
branch rested on the ground, but it still
carried green leaves and life. Thin grass
threaded between the trees and around a fat,
squat boulder that hulked in the center of the
little clearing. Soil and leaves mounded
around its base.
Bet it’s supported by smaller rocks, if someone
wanted to dig under it to find out. The shiver
down her spine increased, and she felt a
momentary dizziness. She took a few steps
closer, then stopped. Was it whispering to
her? She didn’t want to hear it if it was. To
turn her thoughts, she said to Sue, “What do
you know about it?”
“Well, it’s hard to say. These trees are old
oaks, and their DNA suggests they are related
to trees in Gordath Wood itself. That’s not so
unusual, but those trees are singular; there
don’t seem to be any oaks in the area that
have the same genetic code. It’s like they came
up through acorns from—from, well, I don’t
know. We also know there are these pocket
ecosystems that you find in odd places where
the surrounding conditions don’t usually
support these species, and yet here they are.

It’s odd that this little glade is here, so close to
Gordath Wood. Maybe a long time ago all
these woods were the same forest.
“I like it,” Sue finished, still gazing at the little
glade. “It’s a mystery. It makes me a little
homesick.” She laughed a little. “Well,
nostalgic anyway.” She straightened herself
up briskly. “And then I remind myself that I
have better things to do than think about the
past. But I wanted you to see it.”
“Thanks,” Lynn said. “Is it okay if I—I mean,
there aren’t any endangered species around
it, are there?”
“Oh no, no. Tread as you wish. I’m going
back up to the overlook, and we’ll come and
get you when we’re done.”
Lynn was about to say, Wait! when Sue
headed back up the trail, leaving her
face-to-face with the old morrim. It didn’t
mutter or sing. It looked just like a big rock
that was half-buried in the composting
woods. The feeling of peace and silence in the
woods deepened, and she felt the same
melancholy again. She looked back once, but
she couldn’t see Sue and the others, though
occasionally she thought she could hear their

voices.
Or the morrim’s? she wondered. No, the sound
was too prosaic. It didn’t carry the same
menace as the last time she heard the
muttering of a live morrim. She walked
forward, her sneakers scuffing through the
grass, and laid a hand on the cool, rough,
lichen-covered rock. She felt a faint tremor,
and then the rock went still.
She gasped. For an instant the morrim had
responded to her touch. Energy had zinged
into her hand as if she had touched a live
wire. She turned around and looked back up
the trail to the ridge, trying to imagine the
sight line to Hunter’s Chase and Gordath
Wood on the other side of the New York State
line. In between, somewhere, there was the
gordath . . .
Wait a second. This morrim wasn’t attached
to the one in New York. That morrim was
Balanced Rock, and it anchored the gordath
between itself and the old morrim high up on
a ridge in Gordath Wood in Aeritan.
So what gordath did this morrim connect to?
“Shit,” Lynn said out loud to the empty glade.
“There’s more than one.”

As if her recognition sparked something in
the gordath, she felt the tremor again, only
this time it shocked her from toes to head.
The old oak trees rustled, and the grass bent
with a shiver from a wind that came from
nowhere. The hair lifted at the nape of her
neck. In an instant Lynn had an impression of
a flare that ran from the morrim straight into
the woods, like a line of underground
lightning. Then it was gone, and the
atmosphere subsided.
“Lynn!” Sue called her from the trail. “Are
you ready? Henry thinks a storm might be
brewing . . .” She trailed off. “Are you all
right?”
Lynn backed away from the morrim and
began to run back up the trail, her breath
coming hard.
“We have to go,” she said. “Get everybody
together, Sue. We have to get out of here.”
Sue gave Lynn a strange look, but she said
nothing to the others as they hastened down
the hill from the old morrim. The strange
weather had blown over, and no more was
said about an impending thunderstorm. Lynn
kept looking back as if she could see the

morrim behind her, but it was hidden in its
little glade.
When they got to the parking area, everyone
said their good-byes and got into their cars
with promises to meet again. Sue and Lynn
faced off in the empty lot. They were both
sweaty and grimy and tired.
“Goodness, Lynn,” Sue said finally. “What on
earth is going on?”
Lynn drank the last of the water in her water
bottle and carefully tossed out the last drops
onto a dusty Queen Anne’s lace poking up at
the edge of the lot. “Sue, why is it called
Gordath Wood?”
“Lynn—”
“Everyone always said the woods were named
that because some Colonial guy in the sixteen
hundreds called it God’s earth. But what if it
wasn’t? What if the name of Gordath Wood
came from the same place the oaks come
from? Somewhere else?”
“Well, I don’t know how that could be,
although anything is possible, I suppose.”
Sue was humoring her. Lynn smiled and
screwed the cap back on her water bottle.
“Yeah, you’re right. Listen, as long as you

think I’m crazy, can you do me a favor?” Sue
began to protest, and Lynn waved her off. “I
mean it. A promise even.”
“I’ll try.” Sue sounded dubious.
“Stay away from that little glade. In fact,
maybe you and the rest of the perambulators
can find other borders to patrol for a while.”
She half expected the older woman to protest.
Instead, Sue just said, “You know, that’s what
Joe told me. Last year, after you disappeared.
Stay off the trails. I didn’t understand then,
and I certainly don’t now. But Lynn—I think
that’s not such a good idea.”
Now it was Lynn’s turn to look confused. Sue
went on. “Whatever happened last year, with
the earthquakes and Balanced Rock coming
off its supports, and my goodness, that was
more frightening than the earthquakes, I
think—” She paused and got herself back on
track. “What I mean is, that we
perambulators guard the town borders and
make sure they are safe and sound. If
something is going to happen, like last year,
we need to be here.”
In Aeritan they were called guardians, and
here they were called perambulators.

Whatever they did, it protected the borders.
She couldn’t force Sue or the others to leave
their post, and she knew Sue was right; it
might be a mistake to try.
“Just be careful,” Lynn said finally, and Sue
gave her a smile.
“We always are, my dear.”
When she got home, the day had become
humid and gray, the sunshine washed out.
Everything drooped under the heat, from the
horses in the fields, standing head to toe to
brush flies from each other as they grazed, to
the flowers and shrubs that Mrs. Felz had
coaxed back to health. All of the clients had
gone home for the day, now that it was too
hot to ride.
Lynn parked her little car and trudged up to
the house. Mrs. Felz sat on the front porch,
fanning herself and rocking slowly, iced tea
condensing in a glass on the table.
“Oh, that looks good,” Lynn said.
“Plenty in the icebox. By the way, be careful
in the kitchen. You’ve got another stray.”
The scrawny dog lay in a makeshift bed, a
cardboard box that was lined with

newspapers and an old frayed towel from the
ragbag in the mudroom. A bowl of cat
food—all the kib ble they had was for the
barn cats—and of water was set next to it.
The dog looked up at her and thumped its tail
shyly. It was filthy and matted, its longish fur
patchy in places. It was a gingerish color, and
its tail had once been a plume, but this dog
needed a bath, plenty of food, and some
patient brushing.
“You’re kidding,” Lynn said out loud. The
dog wagged harder, hopefully. “I don’t want
you,” she told it, getting herself ice and
pouring tea from the pitcher in the fridge. “I
don’t want any more strays.” First Mrs. Felz,
then Red Bird—might as well name the place
Bleeding Heart Barn.
The dog got up unsteadily to greet her with
the innate politeness some animals had:
horses, too, will rise to their feet when
someone comes to their box, not out of fear
but out of courtesy.
“Oh, come on,” Lynn said in despair, but her
words trailed off. The dog had something
wrapped around its neck; she hadn’t noticed
it earlier because the rope blended in with its

fur. Lynn set her glass down on the kitchen
counter and knelt. The dog licked her hands
and strained for her face, but she moved its
head aside and looked at the rope.
Twisted around the rope was a piece of
T-shirt. It was frayed, stained, and faded, and
it had once been black with the name of a
long-ago band on it. She recognized it because
of all the time it spent on the floor of the barn
apartment where Joe stripped it off after a
day’s work.
He had sent her a message from Aeritan.
“Joe,” someone whispered, shaking him.
“Hey, Felz. Get up.”
When did Arrim learn his last name? Joe
thought grog gily. He opened his eyes and
tried to focus. It was dark, the sky midnight
blue, dotted with stars. The air was chill. He
had a fever and shook with ague.
Inside him the gordath hummed. It was
closed, but his nerves still felt hypersensitive,
as if his skin could not stop feeling things.
Memory came back. Who had closed the
gordath? Had Arrim managed it? Because I
sure couldn’t.

“Felz. Jesus. Wake up.”
He turned his head with great effort. Mark
Ballard loomed over him. At least he thought
it was Mark.
“What do you want?” he managed. Of all the
people he didn’t want to see, Mark was up
there.
“Just get up, okay?”
Joe sat up, stiffly and in great pain. He looked
around when the world stopped spinning. The
forest was still in the darkness. They were
alone, or at least it looked like it. He couldn’t
see much in the forest. He listened, but he
couldn’t hear the sounds of men sleeping.
There were only the dead horses and the
fallen trees. I must have been out of it, if I
could sleep through the smell, he thought.
“Where’s Arrim?” he whispered.
“Who? Oh. He’s over there. Don’t worry
about him. We gotta go.”
Not without Arrim, Joe almost said. “Why
aren’t there any guards?”
“Never mind. Listen, you gotta do this thing.
You gotta open the gordath. We have to go
through.”
Something was wrong. The last thing he

remembered, he had opened the
gordath—well no, more like the gordath had
burst open inside him.
“Who closed it?” he said.
“Forget about that. You opened it once. You
have to open it again. Listen, let’s just get out
of here.”
Yeah, he had remembered that. So why was it
just him and Mark? Had everyone else died
when the gordath burst open? Had Arrim
died?
“Listen, you open it, and you go through, too.
You can close it from the other side. Come on
man. I know you don’t trust me, but you got
to do this. Do it for yourself.”
The gordath waited, trembling, wanting to be
open. God, Joe thought. He could, so easily.
He didn’t need Arrim. He could open the
gordath, and he could go home.
Not without Arrim. He stalled for time. “How
was it closed?” Joe said.
“What?”
“Who closed the gordath?”
“I don’t know. One minute there was a big
fucking hole in the air like usual, and the next
thing it slammed shut. You passed out, and so

did the other guy. But come on. You can open
it again. You have to.”
Damn thing closed on its own. Unstable. Well,
the only stable gordath was a closed one. They
had been given a reprieve, through no ability
of their own. But that meant that Hare was
no closer to controlling the gordath than he
had been before, unless Joe gave in to Mark’s
cajoling.
“Where are the guards?” he said again.
“Again with the guards. Hare left me with
you. Now come on, let’s go.”
“No,” Joe said.
“What the fuck? You like it here? You like
getting the shit kicked out of you?” Mark’s
voice had risen to a shout.
Behind them a torch flared sulkily, and Joe
closed his eyes against the reddish light, his
night vision shot to hell. He could hear the
sound of swords drawn all around them and
crossbows being armed.
“Lord Bahard,” came Hare’s voice. He
stepped out of the woods, a silhouette against
the torchlight. Another torch flared and
another, and they were ringed by smoking,
flickering light. Joe raised himself up achily

and looked around. He and Arrim had been
left to rest where they had fallen, near the
closed gordath. Everyone else had camped a
bit farther out. A smart move, Joe thought,
considering the danger—and the smell.
“You aren’t trying to leave me, are you?”
Hare said. His voice was silky, and his men
ranged themselves behind him. In the fitful
light Joe could see Mark touch the safety on
his rifle, a small movement.
Crap, Joe thought. He was going to get them
both killed.
Instead, every crossbow came up and aimed
straight at Mark, the sharp points catching
the dull light.
“Set it down, Lord Bahard,” Hare said. After
a moment Mark obeyed, but as he did, he
burst out, “Screw you, Hare! I’ve done
enough! You promised me the same deal as
Tharp gave me, and I haven’t seen one cent!
I’m through! God damn it, I want to go home!
”
Hare smacked him. The sound was loud in the
night. As Mark stumbled backward, Hare
grabbed him by the front of his bulky camo
jacket and pushed him up against a tree. Hare

was smaller than Mark, but Mark could do
nothing against the man.
“You fool,” Hare said, and all the smoothness
was gone from the Brytherner’s voice. “You
go nowhere without my leave. Is that
understood? One more try, and you are
useless to me.”
He stepped back, and Mark pressed himself
against the tree, cursing. Hare ignored him.
He picked up the hunting rifle and handed it
to one of his men. “Bind him,” he ordered,
and with eagerness three of their guards went
forward, two to hold a struggling Mark and
the other to yank his arms around his back.
“God dammit, Hare!” Mark blustered, but
Hare ignored him. He looked at Joe and
Arrim.
“Are you strong enough to try again?”
Joe shrugged, though every bone hurt. “That
depends. Are you crazy enough to want to go
through that again?”
“I tire of your recalcitrance, Guardian.”
As if to remind them of the gordath’s
presence, the ground rumbled, and they all
caught their balance. Joe could feel the
energy zipping beneath him. Here we go

again, he thought. So much for keeping the
gordath closed. Pretty soon the earthquakes
would start up on the other side, and the hole
between the worlds would spread. They had
barely closed the gordath the last time it
burned between the two worlds. He
remembered the soldier who fell through into
emptiness back then, and shivered. This one
was worse, much worse. And if Hare made
good on his threat and killed him and Arrim,
nobody was going to be able to stop it.
He hoped Lynn knew the gordath was open,
even if she hadn’t gotten his desperate
message with the dog. Run, Lynn, he thought.
Don’t stick around. Because Arrim and I are in
a shitload of trouble, and when this gordath
opens for good, we aren’t going to be able to
control it.
How far did a person have to run before they
could outrun a gordath?
“Well? Why won’t it stay open?” Hare asked.
He faced his two reluctant guardians under
the circle of torchlight that smoked in the
little clearing. He sat on one upended tree
trunk. The stench of death, of upended trees,
and maybe even the stink of energy that came

with the gordath, surrounded them. The
forest trembled continuously. Hare’s men
gathered close, all of them, even Mark,
fidgeting nervously.
Arrim said, “The gordath is a living being. It
can’t be controlled, only persuaded.” His
voice was tired. He’s given up, Joe thought.
Arrim was on the verge of panic. Another
beating, or even the threat of one, and the
man would break, if he hadn’t already.
Hare lowered his voice and said almost gently,
“Then why can’t you persuade it, Guardian?”
“It’s not—this isn’t—” Arrim faltered at
Hare’s expression.
“Hare,” Joe said. The Brythern leader shot
him a sour look. “Lay off.”
“You don’t give the orders here, Guardian.”
Drav growled and stepped forward, but Hare
waved him to a halt. Joe pressed his
advantage. “Look, this gordath is too much
for us. It’s closed now, and it’s still shaking all
the time.” All around them the leaves and
grasses quivered, though the air was still. “I
don’t know what you got us into, and you sure
as hell don’t know what you got us into, but I
think you need to come at this from a

different angle. We can’t open it and keep it
open. You keep making us try, and we might
not be able to close it. Now we all know what
happens when the gordath can’t be closed.”
He looked about meaningfully at the dead
beasts all around them. But did Hare really
know? Joe remembered the earthquakes in
New York, so violent that they dislodged
Balanced Rock from its support stones and
flung it onto the highway. He looked straight
at Hare, and the man’s expression in the weak
light lost its single-mindedness. Hare was
starting to think.
For a long moment they were all silent as they
waited for him. The constant ceaseless
rustling hummed in Joe’s bones. Finally Hare
turned, and when he looked at them, he shook
his head. His voice became thoughtful.
“Do I know?” he said. “Yes, I know. Last
winter, the first time this troublesome
man”—he indicated Mark, who
sulked—“came through and brought his
weapons of war, we felt the tremors in the city
of Cai-sone. And then, the weapons showed
up on our borders, and we knew we had to
understand what your country was doing.

While Aeritan went to war, our learned men
and historians searched deep into our
histories and discovered what these tremors
meant. It wasn’t the first time Cai-sone had
felt these earth shakings, and here we were,
through no fault of our own, facing them
again.”
“So,” Joe said. “After all that, now you want
to open the gordath anyway?”
“To control it, Guardian!” Hare snapped.
“The country that controls the gordath
controls the world. Your weapons, what this
man has told me of your country’s
mechanisms, its thirst for fuel, all the trade
between nations would go to Brythern, not
Aeritan.”
He controlled his voice. “Our histories tell us
of a stranger who came to Brythern
generations ago. He wasn’t a barbarian like
you, Guardian.” He gestured to Arrim. “Nor
was he from across the oceans. He said he
came through the forest. He spoke of distant
countries we had never heard of, and he bore
many marvelous objects. We still have some
of his possessions in the university at
Cai-sone.” He held out his hand, and one of

his men placed Mark’s hunting rifle in it.
Mark whined and strained toward it, but
Drav cuffed him on the back of his head. “He
had an ancient model of a gun like this. Not
much more dangerous than one of our
crossbows.”
A flintlock? Joe thought.
“But as much as Brythern marveled at this
stranger, he marveled at Brythern, our
alchemists and our scientists, our cities and
our holdings. He wanted to deliver our
country to his god, he said. He was insistent
upon that fact, so insistent that finally he was
beheaded, and his head was placed on top of
the great stone cairns that he said was a
gatepost to his world.” This time he looked at
Joe. “I’ve met two of you now, from your
world, your ‘god’s earth.’ I’m not impressed,
Guardian. Not impressed at all.”
“Tell him the rest,” Arrim said suddenly.
They turned to look at him. He swayed,
caught himself, but his voice had strength and
intensity. “They didn’t know what they had.
And after they killed the stranger man, there
was no one who could close the gordath. It
opened wider and wider until finally a great

cataclysm struck that marred Brythern, the
same one that destroyed half of Gordath
Wood as well. You arrogant fool. You killed a
guardian, and you let the gordath rain
destruction down on the world. And now you
mean to do it again.” Disgust filled his voice.
The guards moved uneasily, muttering among
themselves. Joe knew how they felt. Arrim’s
sudden strength sent a shiver down his spine.
“No,” Hare said, as if explaining something
simple to an idiot. “This time, we have two
guardians. I only have to kill one of you.”
“God dammit,” Joe said. “Hare, for the last
time, you can’t control it. The only control is
to keep it closed. Once you open it, once you
wake it up—it’s out of your hands.”
“Then I have no need of you, do I, Guardian?
For the last time,” he mimicked, “if you don’t
control the gordath, either you or your friend
dies.”
“And then what?” Joe said. “So what are you
going to do? Shout at it? Wave your hands,
threaten it with your knife? You are going to
cause the same disaster that happened three
hundred years ago! All this will look like a
party!” He gestured at the carnage

surrounding them.
“We can’t fail,” Hare said. “We won’t fail. If
we had kept at it, the gordath would be under
our rule now.”
“Or maybe you couldn’t make it work
because everyone was dead!”
“Christ, Felz, give it up,” Mark said with
disgust.
Joe fought for control. “Hare, listen. Let me
and Arrim work on quieting it. We’ll shut it
down—yes, shut it down,” he repeated as
Hare made to protest. “Then we can work on
opening it up again little by little, instead of
just allowing it to blast its way free. It’ll take
time, but this way, we have a chance that we
might all live through this.” He could tell by
Hare’s expression that the man listened to
him, albeit grudgingly. “You want it under
control, this is the only way to do it.
Otherwise, it’s just like last night, Hare, just
like a few weeks ago right here, and just like
three hundred years ago.”
Hare said nothing, and Joe held his breath.
Finally, reluctantly, the man nodded. “All
right. Do your best to quiet it. For now. But
when I say it’s time to open it again, you will

obey. Understood?”
They had been given a reprieve. A pain lifted
from Joe’s chest. But he needed to ask for one
more thing.
“We’ll get to work. But maybe you guys could
start on burying the horses.”
As dawn rose over the woods, turning the sky
from black to gray and starting the birds to
piping, Arrim and Joe faced the center of the
clearing. Around them the guards were set to
chopping the fallen trees to create sledges to
haul the horses away. Even Mark had been
unbound and made to work, complaining
soundly. But all that faded into the
background as the guardians began their
work.
A gordath wants to be open, Joe thought,
concentrating. It was the first thing he
learned as a guardian. He could see the livid
afterimage of the portal against his closed
lids. But a guardian wants to close it. He and
Arrim were only following their nature. He
drew strength from that concept and found
himself making a kind of peace with himself
and with the entity in front of him at the
same time.

Twelve
Lynn drove the small, one-horse trailer
around to the driveway in front of the
farmhouse, parking it so she could pull out to
the street. It was early, the sun barely up, the
mist collecting on the fields. The lights were
on in the barns for the girls who came to feed,
their bikes and old cars parked out of the way
for when the clients showed up. The horses
were already snorting and whinnying, eager
for their morning grain and turnouts, some of
the more impatient ones kicking their stalls.
Lynn could hear the sounds of rock ’n’ roll
pouring from the tinny radio in the tack
room.
Just a regular morning at Hunter’s Chase,
she thought, leaving the parked trailer and
truck and heading back down to the lower
barn. She had already given the girls their
orders. Until she returned, Mrs. Felz was in
charge.
Just how she was going to tell Isabella was
another story.
She had grained Red Bird herself earlier, and
now she tacked him up. She put him in a

western saddle and hacka more and led him
up the hill to the house. He loaded easily into
the trailer with only the slightest hesitation.
Good boy, she thought. An old horsewoman
had once told her you could add two hundred
dollars to a horse’s price if he went into a
trailer without fuss. Lynn knew she
appreciated it. She tied him with a safety knot
and left him with a pat on the rump.
Isabella came out from her barn apartment,
wrapped in her tatty robe, a look of
puzzlement on her face.
“Lynn, what on earth?”
“I have to go away for a few days,” Lynn said.
With Mrs. Felz following, she went into the
house and gathered up her things from the
kitchen: a bedroll, a pack with Aeritan
necessities: clothes, matches, aspirin,
bandages, toothbrush, toothpaste, and toilet
paper, and trail food for her and grain for the
horse. She figured that she would get heartily
sick of granola bars before she found Joe, but
she didn’t have time for anything else. It was
high-calorie food and would keep her going.
That’s what counted.
With her back to Mrs. Felz so she wouldn’t

see, she put the gun from the attic chest on
top and tugged the straps closed. Lynn hefted
the pack. It would all fit on the saddle. “I’m
leaving you in charge.” She picked up a fat
envelope from the table. “If I am not back in
ten days, I want you to open this.”
Mrs. Felz took it, dumbfounded. “Lynn—”
“Look, believe me, I know how weird this is.
But please. You have to do this for me. Just
sit tight, run the farm like you’ve seen me do
it, and ask Sue Devin for help if you need it.”
Sue. She needed to call her—well, that could
wait. She’d call her at the entrance to the trail
to the morrim and let her know what she was
doing.
Mrs. Felz looked at her like she wanted to say
a bunch of different things but didn’t quite
know how to begin. Finally she settled on,
“Does this have something to do with Joe?”
It was time to come clean. She nodded.
Mrs. Felz sat down heavily at the table, her
face crumbling. “So he’s alive,” she
whispered through her tears. “I thought—I
thought he must be dead.”
Lynn waited awkwardly, and then she set
down the pack and knelt by the older woman.

“Please believe me,” she said, “It’s more
complicated than you—or even I—can
understand. But the dog was a message. I
think Joe needs help.”
Mrs. Felz got herself under control, wiping
her eyes. “Then go. I’ll take care of things
here. Call me when you find something out.”
“I’ll try,” Lynn lied. “Now I really have to
go.”
She picked up the pack and whistled to the
dog. It got up, wagging, from its little bed. It
was still thin, but a warm night and a full
stomach had done wonders for it. It followed
Lynn to the truck and hopped in as if it knew
what was going on. Lynn threw her gear into
the bed and got into the driver’s seat.
The farm truck handled the single horse
trailer with ease, as Lynn put it in gear, and
they bumped slowly down the driveway. She
pulled out onto the road and accelerated
smoothly away from the farm. She glanced at
it in the rearview mirror. She might never see
it again. She tried to put that out of her head.
The envelope she had given Mrs. Felz
contained the papers for signing over the
farm to her as well as instructions as to what

was in the chest in the attic. Lady Sarita
wouldn’t mind; she had left it there, after all.
She meant it for the farm.
The morning’s slanted shadows striped the
little gravel parking lot at the trailhead to the
Connecticut trail. Lynn parked the horse
trailer and got out, the dog jumping down
behind her. She let down the ramp and led
out Red Bird. While the dog and the horse
touched noses, the dog wagging eagerly, Lynn
called Sue Devin.
“This is Sue Devin speaking.”
“ ’Morning, Sue. This is Lynn. I need a favor.
Well, two favors, actually.” While she talked,
Lynn strapped her gear and her bedroll onto
the back of the saddle one-handed, holding
the phone at her ear with the other. It was
awkward, but she needed to hurry. She didn’t
want some early morning walker to come
upon her.
“Lynn?”
“I’m at the trailhead to the hiking trail in
Connecticut. Can you come by and bring my
truck and trailer back to Hunter’s Chase?”
There was a long silence. Then, “Those aren’t
riding trails.”

“I know, and I’m sorry.” The perambulators
had all in veighed against riders on the hiking
trails because horses’ hooves cut into the soil
and caused erosion. Lynn knew she was
committing a cardinal sin. “Please, come get
my trailer and bring it back to the farm.”
“Lynn . . .”
“I’m going to leave the keys in the water
bucket. There’s still water in it, so be
forewarned.”
“Lynn, don’t you dare . . .”
“So the next thing is, I want you to call out
the perambulators. You need to watch the
woods in two places. Up here, in these woods,
and over by the old house at Daw Road. Keep
an eye out for anything strange. And I
think—I’m not sure but I think you’ll know
what to do.”
“Lynn . . .”
“Bye.” Lynn closed her phone and put it in
her pocket, locked up the truck, and plunked
the keys into the water bucket as promised.
She flipped the reins around Red Bird’s neck.
She swung aboard and pushed Red Bird up
onto the trail. With luck she would be
through the gordath before Sue came to get

her horse trailer. With the dog following, she
pushed the horse into a trot, and they headed
up the trail.
It wasn’t a riding trail. It was too rocky, and
the trees closed in until she was thrashing
through branches and brush that she had not
noticed on foot. But they made good time,
and Lynn dismounted for the steep climb up
to the overlook, taking long strides next to
Red Bird as they made their way to the
summit. When they got to the top, Lynn let
the horse blow, walking him in gentle circles,
his coat darkened with sweat. The dog sat,
tongue lolling. When they had rested, she
turned off to the little glade that held the
morrim.
It was as silent as before, the still-long
shadows concealing most of the rock except
for a slice of sunlight passing over it. The dog
whined and pressed against Lynn’s legs. She
patted it and clucked to the horse. When they
got close, she put her hand on the cool, rough
rock.
Just like the last time, energy zipped in a
straight line, and she jerked her head up to
follow it. As if she could see the underground

pulse, she saw where it led: away from the
trail, away from the old Gordath Wood, and
far deeper into these woods. Along that line
was a new gordath, she thought. Go that way,
and find a new way into Aeritan. Or . . .
somewhere.
Out of habit she checked the saddle girth and
then turned to the dog. She fished out the
piece of Joe’s T-shirt from her pocket and
knelt and held it to the dog. The dog nosed it
and whined, and its tail tucked under its legs.
Lynn patted the dog.
“Show me,” she told it. “Just show me.”
She mounted up and headed along the line.
The dog trotted in front now, occasionally
looking back at her. Once it gave a low woof,
the first she had heard, when they fell behind.
There was even a faint trail, though it was
probably a game trail. For now, though, it led
in the direction she wanted. She thought she
could even feel the energy line zip under Red
Bird’s hooves. The horse tossed his head and
snorted but kept up a long, loose stride. As
they headed deep into the heart of the forest,
the trail taking them downward where the
sunrise had not yet reached, Lynn refrained

from looking back. She was not sure she
wanted to see the morrim disappear from
sight, either because she descended or because
she rode from one world to the other.
The last time she did this it was dark, and she
rode Dungiven straight through a three-rail
fence. She hoped this time worked a little
better. She pressed her heels against Red
Bird’s sides, and the horse broke into a
flat-footed walk, a smooth, comfortable gait
that could carry them for miles. Lynn settled
into the saddle, one hand light on the reins,
the other down at her side.
It occurred to her that if it didn’t work and
she ended up out at the highway, she was
going to have a lot of explaining to do. She
had better not think on that, though. It had to
work. With the amount of blood on the
T-shirt, Joe’s life might depend on it.
Lord Favor lay in the guest bedchamber, his
body washed and scented candles and clean
straw surrounding him. Offerings to the grass
god, the god of death and renewal, were piled
at his feet. Crae stood next to Jessamy as she
offered prayers to the high god for her

brother. She was still pale with horror and
woe, her tears for her brother mixed with her
worries for her daughter, her anger at Crae,
and her unrelenting shock.
Tevani had regained consciousness but didn’t
remember a thing of what happened. She lay
in her small bed, querulous and crying.
Jessamy was at her side as much as she could
be. The little girl was confused, thinking she
had gotten injured by the crows during her
and Crae’s adventure. It took hard work
from everyone to keep her still and quiet so
she could heal.
Jessamy began crying again, quietly. “He was
my brother,” she whispered brokenly. “He
was my brother.”
He was a fool, a tyrant, and a petty bully who
had struck out without thinking and almost
killed her daughter. But he was her brother,
and he had been Crae’s brother. Crae felt a
muscle jump in his cheek.
And now the Council would take sides. Crae
saw it all in his mind’s eye, the march to war
again. Any of the allies they had counted on
just days before were as dust. The Council
would turn on him as easily as they had

granted him a lordship.
He thought he had been Trieve’s savior. He
had promised Stavin he would protect
Jessamy and his children. Instead, he brought
doom upon them. He had become bad luck to
all he touched. To Stavin, to Jessamy, to small
Tevani, even to a hapless crow. It were best he
become crow himself and outlaw, destined to
wander ragged and alone. He had broken
Council law, first by daring to presume the
high god had touched him, and then to
commit a brother killing.
Favor had wanted to see him brought down
and broken, and in his death he got his wish.
Crae would be broken.
He would send them all away. Jessamy and
the children would go to her House with the
body of her brother. He would remain and
await his fate. Crae turned to tell her this
when she crumpled up at the side of the bed,
one hand clasping her brother’s cold one. She
whispered to her brother, telling him private
things only a sister could say. “I loved you
even when we fought,” she told him. “You
were my brother. I protected and scolded you,
and now you’re gone. Please, Jori, please

forgive me. I couldn’t protect you. I’m so
sorry.”
Stricken, Crae felt the blood rush from his
face. The angry buzzing that nagged at him
ever since he committed murder heightened
its pitch. He stepped backward, away from
her and her blame, and felt awkwardly for
the door. He stumbled down the stairs.
No one looked at him. No one spoke to him.
He could barely see; he had gone blind, his
vision dark. All of the householders fled at his
approach, and he staggered to the kitchen, his
first thought only for strong drink.
He pushed through the door and stopped
dead. There was the place where Favor had
fallen, the flagstones whiter where they had
been scrubbed and scrubbed of blood. It was
a telltale of his guilt. Bile rose in his throat,
and he swung away, outside.
Even the clear, cold air did not relieve him.
The pressure mounting in his head, Crae
found his way to the stable. He couldn’t trust
himself to tack up his horse, so he looked
around. He saw one of his men, standing
hesitantly, waiting for orders. Crae did not
recognize him.

“Get my horse,” he ordered. His voice rasped,
harsh and implacable.
The man bowed and said hurriedly, “Yes, my
lord Crae.”
He waited until they brought Hero to him, the
horse playing up and snorting. It took Crae
four or five tries to get his foot into the
stirrup, and he swung aboard clumsily. Hero
neighed and backed nervously. Crae spurred
him forward, punishing him with his hands
and his boots. The horse bolted, men
scattering out of his way, pulling the barn
door open just in time. Crae managed to duck
under the lintel, and they burst through.
He didn’t ride down the terraces. Instead, he
reined his horse out and around to the fields.
The sheep baaed and scattered, the dogs
barked, and the shepherds shouted, but soon
they were through, galloping up the grassy
hill toward the endless sky. Here and there
rocks dotted the hillside, as if they had been
sheep turned to stone by a playful sky god.
Hero bolted straight out, mane and tail flying.
Crae kept him moving with his hands and
feet, and when the horse flagged, he kicked
him hard again. Up they galloped until they

reached the top of the hill.
He pulled the horse up, and Hero snorted and
reared. Above them the sky arched deep and
blue, a few clouds dotting the expanse. Far
below them Trieve spread out, the great house
and the outbuildings looking small from his
vantage point at the top of the mountain.
Crae looked down. The baaing of the sheep
reached him faintly, but the only other sounds
were those nearer to hand: Hero’s deep
breathing, the piping of a mountain bird, the
wind.
His tears.
He gave a great cry. He fell rather than
dismounted and tumbled to his knees, his
grief like pain, panting and heaving in his
tears. He had lost everything. Jessamy,
Tevani, even if she healed. He would have no
son, no daughters. He had no House.
I am crow. I am crow. I am crow.
When he came back to himself, he lay on the
hillside, the grasses warm against his back,
looking up at the sky. It had gathered more
clouds, and the sun played chase among them.
Even as he watched, a shadow raced across

the fields, bending the grasses before it. A
chill swept over Crae. Nearby, Hero cropped
grass, his reins trailing carelessly around his
feet. Once he would never have left a horse
like that, where he could step into his reins.
Habit forced him to his feet to take care of his
horse, and the animal nickered at him,
nudging him and forgiving him for his
temper earlier.
In his great unrest he had not realized where
he was; they had buried the young crow up
here. The cairn, a pile of rocks stacked neatly
together, hulked a few feet away. The crow’s
grave was silent and at peace. The sun went
behind the clouds, and the wind picked up.
The high god kept his silence, but Crae could
hear the words of another behind the silence.
We kill and we ravage, and our god laughs.
This was crow land now, and by his murder
he was the crow lord. The Aeritan Council’s
retribution would be swift. Favor’s threat
would come true, and no matter how he
fought this time, Trieve would be broken,
stone by stone.
He saw Jessamy off the next night, the better

to travel in the cool of the darkness. They
gathered at the bottom of the terraces, where
the grooms brought down the two carriages,
one to carry Lord Favor’s body and one to
carry his sister and her children and servants.
They harnessed the teams there. Lord Favor’s
guard surrounded him, dark red sashes
cutting across their chests, denoting a funeral
train. Tevani was bundled into the carriage,
wrapped in a warm cloak, and laid on a pallet
of padding and pillows, the better to cushion
her. Jessamy sat with Jori on her lap, her face
still and white. She, too, wore a red sash, and
her kerchief was tied precisely, not a hair
peeking out from beneath the cloth. She was
so still now, it stayed in place. She looked at
Crae over the baby’s head, her expression
somber and remote. Crae knew there would
be no handclasp, no kiss, not even the kiss of
lord to lady.
So be it. There was no comfort for a crow. He
spoke coldly.
“It is best you return to your old House,” he
said. “I do not expect to see you back here. I
would advise you to petition the Council to
dissolve our marriage.”

“You turn me away?” Her voice was dull.
“Then there is no refuge for me or the
children.”
“The House of your childhood is your only
refuge now,” Crae said, lowering his voice so
that Tevani would not hear. The little girl
didn’t seem to be aware of anything except
for her hands picking and picking at her
blanket. Crae looked at Jessamy. They had
fought—and then fought together. They had
even taken their first steps toward love. He
was crow now, and all that was over.
“Crae,” she said, and her voice broke. “Don’t
do this. Don’t send us away.”
Didn’t she understand? “Jessamy, they will
come and tear Trieve to pieces. You cannot
stay. Besides—” He could not speak further.
Besides, I killed him. I took up a sword and slew
your brother.
She swallowed her tears and looked away.
When she regained her composure, her voice
was dull. “If you wish, it must be so, Lord
Crae,” she said. She leaned forward. “I am
ready. Take me home.”
He stepped back as the driver whistled up the
team, and the horses threw their strength into

the traces.
“Captain Crae! Captain Crae!” Tevani cried.
Even the driver heard, and he pulled up with
a whoa.
“Tevani, hush. You must lie still,” said
Jessamy. But Crae walked a few paces and
opened the door again. The little girl
struggled against her wraps, and despite his
coldness, his heart ached for her.
“Captain Crae, please take care of Hero for
me,” she said.
“You must go now, Tevani. Be a good girl for
your mother.”
Her face crumpled. “I’m sorry I made you hit
me,” she whimpered.
Crae couldn’t breathe out enough to protest.
Jessamy snapped, “Drive on, please!”
He watched them go, trundling into the night,
Favor’s outriders led by Breyan.
Then he turned and headed back up the
terraces, the torches guiding his way up the
giant steps. This time there was no small army
to prepare for war, no willing men to lead. He
was alone against his enemies.
Colar knew they were on the wrong track as

soon as they reached the old house at the end
of Daw Road. Cicadas buzzed in the hot
summer sun, and when they walked around
the vacant house and entered the woods, the
air was still and humid. The cicadas stopped
their buzzing in alarm, and he could tell they
were the only people there. Sweat trickled
down the small of his back under his T-shirt,
and he was thankful he had waited to put on
his heavy armor. He hadn’t wanted to call
attention to himself, and it looked like there
was no need for it after all.
“I don’t understand,” Kate said, frustration
in her voice as they stood by the three tall
trees. “He has to be here. Where else can he
be?”
They had been so sure they would find
Marthen here, but the woods were
abandoned, the house empty, the gateway
between the worlds closed up tight, as if it
had never existed at all. Colar scanned the
ground, looking for any sign he could, and his
heart leaped. He knelt.
“What! What is it?” She knelt next to him.
He frowned.
“Someone was here not too long ago,” he said.

He pointed out the footprint. “But it was only
one person, and the print doesn’t look big
enough.”
“Dammit,” Kate said. “We can’t just wait for
him to come back to the house again.” Her
voice held a strange note, and he looked at her
as she gave a strange half laugh, half sob.
“My mom and dad will ground us for life if
they find out we went out looking for him.”
Sometimes Colar thought that her parents
were more frightened of the truth coming out
than about the danger. He didn’t understand
it, but he didn’t understand a lot about this
world. Though it doesn’t matter, since I won’t
be staying for much longer.
Although, with the gordath shut tight,
perhaps that wasn’t true after all. He shook
his head in frustration. Marthen had to have
come through, and there should be some sign
of it. So where was it?
Kate sighed and sat down against a tree, arms
folded across her chest. She had ruined the
footprint, but he supposed it didn’t matter
since, whoever it was, it wasn’t their man. She
looked up at him, her blue eyes clear and her
expression worried. She had a sprinkling of

freckles across her nose, and her hair
gleamed, even in the dim forest light. His
heart hammered. She’s my foster sister, he
told himself, but he slid down next to her,
letting his shoulder press against hers. She
was muscular from riding, but she was soft,
too. She moved uneasily, reddening. I
shouldn’t have done that, he thought, but he
didn’t move away.
“All right,” she said, her voice unsteady. “We
have to think. Why isn’t he here?” She bit her
lip, thinking. “When I saw him, it was closer
to Connecticut and the highway. That’s like
ten miles from here. If he came through the
gordath, he’d have had to walk all that way.”
“Or get a ride.”
She shook her head. “Not with what he was
wearing. No way would anyone pick him up.
And he would have attracted a lot of
attention.”
Colar nodded. From what little he knew of his
new world, he could agree with that.
“And then there are his men,” he said,
thoughtfully. “The police said they came from
the highway, too.”
She was thinking furiously, he could tell.

“What if there was another way through?
Could there be another portal?”
Another way through the woods. Another
path home. There can’t be, he thought first.
How could there be? But it made sense that
Marthen had come through near where Kate
had first seen him. But where could the
gordath hide itself? All he had seen were
roads, houses, and stores. All the towns here
bustled day and night, not like the small
villages at Terrick’s outskirts. “Is there forest
near there?” he asked dubiously.
Kate sucked in her breath, her eyes wide.
“Yes. Oh my God. It’s all protected habitat,
and it’s just a few miles from the highway.
There’s old growth forest there, and there
aren’t any houses or roads, just a hiking trail.
There aren’t too many places you can hide a
bunch of people in the woods around here,
but in that forest, you totally could. That’s
where we’ll find his army, and that’s where
we’ll find the gordath. He’s there, Colar. He’s
got to be.”
She jumped to her feet, and he followed suit.
“Come on. We have to hurry.” She headed
off, back to the old house and the dirt road

where they had left the car, and he got up to
follow her. He could see it falling into place.
They couldn’t manage the army; there were
just the two of them, and from what Maddy
had said, there were about a dozen men in the
ambush at the beach. The police could take
care of the crows. He would take care of
Marthen. Colar rubbed his sword hand
against the side of his jeans. He knew the
general had a gun. He didn’t care. Ever since
the eve of the final battle, when he found out
what Marthen had done to Kate, he had
wanted to face him down.
And then what? He knew enough that if he
killed the general in this world, it would be
murder. He could go to jail. No. He would
have to go back to Aeritan. He glanced at
Kate. She held onto his arm, still trying to tug
him toward the Jeep. She had become
doubtful now at his hesitation.
“What is it?” she said.
“I’ll fight him,” he said, and he could hear the
anger in his own words. “But I can’t fight
him here. It will have to be in Aeritan.”
Her face changed as she steeled herself. “I
know,” she said. Her voice started out strong

but broke at the end. “But I still don’t want
you to go.”
He didn’t know how they ended up kissing,
but they did. He pulled her close, and they
kissed, making up for months, he thought
dazedly, when they weren’t allowed to even
think of each other except as brother and
sister. He wrapped his arms around her,
wanting more, wanting to set her down on the
forest floor, but when he started to kneel
them both back to earth, she made a noise of
protest and pushed her hands against his
chest. “No,” she said, pulling away from him.
She was breathing hard. “You know we
can’t.”
He was the son of a lord; he could do what he
wished. He almost said that, but instead he
stepped back. He held onto her hands,
making sure she couldn’t go away. “You’re
right,” he said. “Not now. But you can come
with me, and I’ll petition my father. He’ll let
us marry, I know he will. He’ll be so grateful
he’ll give me anything.”
That was not even close to true, and he didn’t
know why he said it. His father would be
grateful, to be sure, but he was also Lord

Terrick. Kate’s expression was unreadable,
and then she looked away.
“I think right now we should concentrate on
finding Marthen,” she said, in the general
direction of the woods. She pulled her hands
from his.
“All right,” he said evenly, catching her tone.
Was she angry? Just because he wanted her to
come with him? Even if they couldn’t marry,
what of it? In her world people paired up all
the time without marrying. Almost
immediately as he thought it, he knew that
wasn’t fair. If they tried that in Aeritan, the
whole Council would come down on him and
his parents, most likely. And he wanted to kiss
her again. “Don’t be angry, okay?”
Whenever he talked the way they did here, it
always made her smile, and she did now. “I’m
not angry, just—Colar, let’s not talk about
it.”
Just then, her phone rang, startling them
both. She pulled it out and looked at the
display, and her heart sank. “It’s Mom.” The
theme to “Kung Fu Fighting” stopped, took a
breath, and rang again.
“Don’t answer it,” Colar said immediately.

Kate grimaced, dithered, and finally flipped
open the phone.
“Hi, Mom,” she said, looking back at the old
house on Daw Road. He could fill in her
mother’s side of the conversation.
“With Colar. We’re off to Lynn’s place.”
“I’m sorry. Sometimes I don’t hear the ring
when we’re in the car.”
“Got it, Mom. We’re going to the stables.
Bye.”
She snapped the phone shut. She looked at
Colar and rolled her eyes. “She’s going into a
meeting to discuss a plea bargain, and then
she said she’s coming home early. Let’s just
stop off at the barn anyway. I can leave the
saddle, and we can figure out how we’re
going to do this.” He nodded. It was a good
plan, and more importantly, Lynn might be
able to help them. She would understand they
needed to find a new gordath. It would be
nice to have someone on their side in this.
The wind lifted the hair on Marthen’s neck,
and the cooling breeze felt good. The summer
air here was damp and hot, and the biting
insects were numerous and persistent. The

camp had to remain hidden in the woods, and
they had to stay in the hollows, but that
meant they were in the stillest part of the
forest. So the breeze was welcome.
The camp remained hidden, in part due to
Gary’s management of things. He kept
Marthen posted on outside events. So while
Marthen felt trapped in his wooded camp,
with logs for seating, and shelters half made
of musty tents and deadfall, Gary went out
and about and brought back the news and
sent out men in squads to bring back food
and drink from the midden bins.
“The police are keeping a pretty sharp eye out
for us,” he told Marthen. He had a fresh
bottle of whiskey, purchased for him by a
sympathetic driver who was just passing
through. He nursed it carefully, his old faded
khaki shirt and blue trousers covering a body
burning with alcoholism. He couldn’t have
been much more than Marthen’s own age of
forty years, but he looked twenty years older
at least. “Our appearance at the lake, plus all
these guys finding the camp has gotten us
noticed. We are going to seriously have to
think about moving, but we’re running out of

woods.”
On this side of Gordath Wood, that was true,
Marthen thought. If he could get everyone
back through the gordath, though, the police
would never find them. That was, if the
Brythern gordath cooperated. He had been
dead drunk when he came across it, led there
by tips and rumors paid for with his
dwindling coin. He followed the whispers
until finally he stumbled through, eventually
finding himself in a stand of pines next to a
black road, and there, driving by, was Kate
Mossland.
First step. Once Garson delivered the guns
and the ammunition, he would take care of
Garson’s commission and ransack the holding
called Hunter’s Chase. He had already sent
out men to scout the farm, and it was a simple
holding with no defenses, settled only by
women. After his crows killed the women, he
would have his men set fire to the house and
outbuildings, and that would be that. But he
needed an escape route once the attack was
complete, because it would bring down the
police on them with no mercy. He had to
move his men back to the other side of the

gordath.
“Gary,” he said, “I am giving you a
commission. Attend carefully.”
The man lowered the whiskey bottle. Marthen
went on. “Do you know the place where there
is a grove of pine trees, near a pond and
where the roads cross at a marketplace?”
The man stared at him, shook his head. “No
offense, dude, but you really aren’t from
around here, are you?” Marthen gave him a
level stare, and the man added quickly, “I
think so, I think so. I bet I could find it.”
“Good. Now let me tell you what to do when
you find it.”
Gary listened intently, his eyes only slightly
wavering from time to time. If Marthen’s
experience was anything to go by, being
drunk could only help. The hard part would
be moving fifty men through town without
being noticed, so Gary would have to move
them well after dark. By then the Hunter’s
Chase holding would be on fire, drawing
attention away from Marthen and his men.
As for himself, it was time to draw in Kate
Mossland. While his men were at their work,
he would go to her house. Once he had her,

his star would ascend once more. He was an
outlaw now with only a small army of crows,
but he was General Marthen of Aeritan, and
he was returning with her and with his own
weapons. Let the Council make what it would
of that, but this time he would not be
thwarted. The girl would be his, and a
lordship would be his, and anyone who would
stop him would face his crows and his guns.
“Hey!” It was one of his men, standing watch
at the edge of the camp. He had Garson with
him. “He says he got ’em!”
Marthen felt a rush of excitement surge
through him. He picked his way up to them.
“Where?” he said. Garson gestured toward
the road.
“I’ve got a crate for you. You’ll need a couple
of strong backs to bring it up.”
Marthen sent two of his sturdiest men to pick
up the crates. They lashed it to strong limbs
they had cut from deadfall and hoisted it onto
their shoulders, and the rest of the men all
trailed back to the camp in a ceremonial
parade. The men set the crate down, wiping
gleaming sweat, and Garson stood back,
beaming with pride.

“Just a taste,” he said. “Just a taste.”
They pried open the crate and pulled out the
weapons nestled in straw. Garson was saying
something about SKS semi-automatics, but
Marthen wasn’t listening. He pulled one out,
hefting it. It felt better than the small
handgun. It felt better than a sword or
crossbow. He looked around. His men waited,
some eagerly, some uneasy. He caught Gary’s
eye, and his lieutenant stared at him. He
might have been befuddled with drink, but
his expression held fear and disgust. Marthen
turned away from him pointedly as he loaded
the clip. You cannot back out now, he thought.
You are my man, and you will serve me. But if
he didn’t, if he couldn’t, Marthen would
replace him. He turned to two of his men. He
had marked them as the two most crowlike;
they were violent, almost mad. Gary had said
that most of his men were peaceful, harmless
drunks, but not these men. He would send
them to the holding.
Last year in Aeritan he had ordered his
outriders to burn down the smithy in every
village on the border between Temia and Red
Gold Bridge. Burn the smithies, kill all the

smiths. This was no different.
Garson was watching him, the same easy
smile on his face. “So,” he said, dusting his
hands as if he had concluded his task. “I’ll
leave you boys be. I figure you’ve got a lot of
planning to do. You can have your man
here”—he indicated Gary—“let me know
when you’re done, and then we can negotiate
on the rest. I’m looking forward to a long and
lucrative relationship, General.”
After Garson had trudged back to the road,
Marthen half expected Gary to protest, to tell
him he couldn’t use the weapons. Instead the
man just looked around him as if he were
sickened. He sat by himself, nursing the bottle
of whiskey. Marthen felt a prick of irritation.
If the man passed out, he would be no good to
him. He went over and grabbed the bottle.
Gary looked up at him in protest.
“No more. Not until you complete your task.”
Self-disgust warred with self-preservation; he
could see it in the way the man looked at the
bottle. Marthen tasted contempt in his
mouth. The man was useless, feeble. “Go,” he
ordered. “Before I make an example of you.”
Gary stumbled to his feet, backing away,

falling again. The men laughed, all except for
Marthen’s two crows. They had already
begun to separate themselves from the rest
and only watched with dark and distant eyes.
Gary finally found his footing and fled.
Marthen watched him go. The man would fail
him soon. He wondered if he should have had
him killed anyway. No, gunshots would bring
down attention on his head, and he had no
time for that.
He had no doubt Gary intended to go against
him. Very well, then. He could use his
weakness. Let Gary go to the police to warn
them about the pending attack on the farm
holding. It would divert their forces, so that
when he went for Kate Mossland, there would
be no help to be found. Marthen scanned the
camp for the next likely man. “You,” he
ordered. “I have a commission for you.”
Thirteen
Dawn broke over the high seat of Trieve, the
mists shrouding the terraces so that from
Crae’s chamber it looked as if the house
floated on a gray sea.
He shivered as he dressed, a chill seeping up

from the floor. His hearth was cold, the smell
of ashes mingling with the smell of leather
and sweat-suffused clothes. He got into his
warm trousers, his thick overshirt, and drew
on his socks and boots.
Stavin’s old room was thick with ghosts. Crae
sat on the edge of the bed and thought how he
had failed his friend. When Stavin begged
him to care for his wife and child, he could
not have imagined that Crae would kill his
brother-in-law and exile his wife.
He went over to the desk and pulled out a
sheet of thick, rough paper and a pen. The ink
had dried in the inkwell, but he used the last
of the water from the pitcher by his bedside,
and it loosened sluggishly. He wrote with a
careful hand and then waved the letter to let
it dry. When it had dried, he took off his
chain of lordship and tucked it inside, folding
the letter around it. He scratched a match, lit
a candle, and, when the wax dripped,
carefully sealed the letter. He should have
used the seal of Trieve to mark the wax, but it
was no longer his by right.
Crae gathered up his pack with his few
belongings, his gear, and, stuffed down at the

bottom, Lynna’s shirt and the little device. He
took one last look at the chamber he had so
briefly owned, and then shouldered out of the
door.
The house was mostly empty, the
householders having already fled ahead of the
war that would come to their doorstep. He
had brought the crows down upon them, and
now the Council. Well, as his last act as Lord
of Trieve he could protect the house the only
way he knew how. Crae went into the
kitchens. They were empty, too, the ovens
cold. He scavenged for bread and dried meat,
stowing them neatly into his pack. He found a
jar of vesh herbs and poured them out onto a
kitchen cloth, folding them up and putting
that in, too. A noise caught his attention, and
he looked up.
It was Alarin, his captain. The young man
watched him without a word. He wore his
leather armor and carried a sword, a far cry
from the young farmer he had been. He was
all soldier now. He had always been a strong
man, well- muscled from hard work, with a
strong neck and back. He was still raw, still
not yet seasoned, but the battle against the

crows had turned him into a fighting man.
Crae nodded to him and went back to his
work.
“You are leaving, then,” Alarin said, and it
was a mark of how young he was that his
voice shook the slightest bit.
“If I stay, the Council will come. You know
that.”
“So! We held off the crows! We have the
defensive position. We can hold them off,
too.”
“Don’t be a fool,” Crae snapped. The Council
would lead an army that would show up the
crows for the rabble they were. There was
silence. Crae finished tying up his pack and
looked at the young man he had made captain
on the battlefield. He held out the letter.
Alarin made no move to take it, so Crae set it
on the kitchen table.
“If you still serve me, you will carry that letter
to Lady Jessamy at Favor, and after she reads
it, you will do as she tells you.”
Alarin looked stubborn, swallowing, but he
looked away, drew a long breath to steady
himself, and then turned back. “I serve
Trieve.”

He served the House, not the man. It was the
sign of a captain. Crae nodded. He tapped the
letter. “Then know that by delivering this
letter to Lady Jessamy, it will serve Trieve.”
Alarin relented. He picked up the letter. Crae
could tell that he marked the weight of it and
the feel of the chain sliding inside the folded
package. He looked at Crae, understanding in
his expression. Crae went back to tightening
the strings of his pack. After a moment,
Alarin asked, “Where will you go?”
Finished, Crae swung the pack onto his
shoulder. He filled the kitchens with the bulk
of his gear.
“Away,” he said.
Hero laid his ears back and tried to evade the
bit as he always did, then gave in sulkily. Crae
saddled him and led him out, the horse
weighted down with his pack and bedroll. He
pushed aside the big doors of the ancient barn
and let in the cold light and early morning
air. The fog had lifted, though down in the
woods at the foot of the terraces, it still
drifted through the forest. He didn’t bother
to get into the saddle but started walking

down the terraces, Hero jumping like a mule
for each level. They were both sweating
lightly when they reached the bottom, and the
crow king was waiting for them. He stood
before Crae, all sinewy arms and legs, as
skinny as the staff he carried. Now he rested
on it and looked up at Crae with rheumy eyes.
Crae sighed. He wasn’t surprised. He
tightened Hero’s girth and stepped into the
stirrup, swinging aboard. He waited, and the
horse tossed his head, attempting to move out.
“I knew I would find you lurking around
here, old man. What do you want?” He did
not need to be pestered. Of course, the crow
had other ideas.
“Do you know the law of the crow?” the crow
king asked.
Crae shook his head and clucked to Hero to
move him out. “I have no time for riddles.”
“What Aeritan gives, we crows must take. For
we have no House, no land—only Aeritan,
and Aeritan alone must sustain us.”
It was the first time he had ever thought of
the crows in those terms. To be sure they were
Houseless, lordless, spurned by all. Were they
the true inheritors of Aeritan? Impossible.

They were lawless men, most of all, and far
from belonging to Aeritan, they were its
scourge. He thrust down the thought that he
had become one of their company. “I’m going
now,” he said and pressed his heels against
Hero’s sides. The crow raised his voice.
“We crows are but harbingers, Lord Crae.
Aeritan faces a great danger. It is time you
brought it to its end.”
That made him stop. Crae turned Hero on his
haunches to face the crow. The man had not
moved from his spot, still leaning on his staff.
“I am a simple man, crow king. Make yourself
clear.”
“The lord of all crows is coming through
Brythern, and he aims nothing more than the
destruction of the Council, one by one. He will
destroy the fragile truce that has sustained
Aeritan for generations. Instead, chaos will
take root, and in its wake the crows will
reign.”
Aeritan under the reign of crows would mean
all of the Houses and the holdings under
attack. Fear spiked along his spine. Crae said
finally, “And if that were so, crow, why do
you warn me? Is that not what all crows

desire, to kill and ravage and burn? Hear the
laughter of your god?”
The crow king looked at him for a long
moment. He said, “No one chooses to become
crow, Lord Crae. You of all men know that.”
That stung. With effort he kept his emotions
in check. The crow king gave him a curious
little smile. “So now that you are crow, what
is it you choose to do? Seek the laughter of the
crow god, or seek to save your Aeritan?”
Lynn never reached the highway, as she had
half feared. Instead, she, Red Bird, and the
dog wound down off the ridge, entering the
deep woods where the sun stabbed through in
pale, narrow columns. Mosquitoes and
deerflies buzzed incessantly. The air was
dank. The twisting trail ran along a marshy
area, skunk cabbage and hummocks lifting
out of the mud. Red Bird left clear hoofprints
along the trail, his footfalls squelching. His
tail lashed constantly, whisking at Lynn’s legs
as he swept away the flies from his flanks, and
he tossed his head. Lynn stopped,
dismounted, and broke off a leafy branch
that she twisted over his bridle. He looked

ridiculous, but he tolerated the leaves as if he
knew it helped protect his eyes against the
flies.
She had to constantly wave the insects away,
smacking at deerflies at the back of her neck.
That and curses didn’t help much. It was hot
and muggy, and she and the horse both had
dark patches of sweat. The dog panted but
trotted along resiliently.
Lynn checked her watch. They had been
traveling steadily for about an hour,
alternating between a running walk and a
trot, and she had let the horse blow when
necessary. After all, this wasn’t the Pony
Express, though she supposed she had the
right gear for it. I don’t even know if we’re
going the right way, she thought. I don’t even
know if we’re in Aeritan. All I have to go on is
the dog, and who knows what the dog is doing.
She sat back in the saddle and pulled Red
Bird up, scanning all around her. The dog
flopped down instantly, its tongue dripping.
She dismounted and took a swig from her
water bottle, letting the cool water sit in her
mouth before swallowing. Then she poured
some into Red Bird’s mouth, and let the dog

lap it from her cupped fingers. Fastidiously
she wiped the water bottle onto her shirt
before capping it. She had another full water
bottle, but they needed to conserve. Don’t
know how long I’m going to be out here, she
thought. Last year the gordath had reached
out and pulled her between the worlds, and
she had walked for hours before she was
found by Crae and brought to Red Gold
Bridge. Who knew where this portal had
deposited her?
She put the water bottle back into her pack
and felt a tremor. No, more of a shiver, the
ground sliding for a moment out from
beneath her. Lynn caught herself. Red Bird
threw up his head and shied sideways. The
dog put her tail beneath her legs and
crouched. Overhead the leaves rattled, then
subsided.
“Well,” she said out loud, trying for some
kind of bravado. “Looks like this must be the
place.”
She didn’t want to be mounted if a bigger
earthquake hit, so she shook the reins over the
horse’s head and whistled for the dog. She
patted the dog’s head when it responded. “It’s

okay, pup. You’re doing fine.”
The tremors reignited her sense of urgency,
though. If the gordath was waking up, that
meant that Joe and Arrim were losing
control. Hang in there, Joe, she thought. I’m
coming.
They were deep in the woods. It smelled wet
and rotting. The sky between the tall trees
was white, late summer heat bleaching out the
blue. The marsh dozed under the buzzing of
insects. Out in the distance she could see dead
trees, ghostly and stark against the sky.
Farther out was a line of blue where the
marsh turned to lake, and across from there
was another line of hills.
From a distance, it looked beautiful, cool, and
inviting. “I could go for a swim,” she told the
animals. Red Bird twitched an ear back at
her, but the dog was having none of it. They
trudged on, and now the trail bent toward the
lake. For the first time, a cool breeze swept
over them. Everyone perked up.
A quarter of an hour later they were on the
banks of the lake on a small, shingled beach.
A circle of blackened wood and stone showed
where someone had already camped there.

Lynn breathed a sigh of relief at the sign of
life, no matter how stale. The dog went to
nose at the water, standing in it up to her
belly and lapping eagerly. Red Bird pulled
forward, too, but Lynn took him firmly in
hand. “Hold on there, sir,” she said. She let
him drink a little, then pulled his head up and
walked him around. A horse that drank too
much too fast could give himself colic, and
colic could be fatal. She controlled his sips
until he was sated, and then loosened his
cinch and let him rest. She let herself empty
the first water bottle while she looked around.
Her gaze sharpened as she caught the sight of
some footprints in the rough sand. Her heart
sank. She began to walk cautiously around
the little beach. Dammit, she thought. If she
had thought first, she never would have
walked Red Bird all over the damn place. She
found more footprints where she had never
trodden, and there it was, so clear it made her
blood run cold: the unmistakable footprint
with the narrow heel and spade-shaped sole
of a cowboy boot.
Joe had been here.
Red Bird came up behind her to look, and she

pushed back against his chest to keep him
from fouling the footprint. The boot print
and its mate, a more blurred version, pointed
toward the woods, away from the lake and the
trail. So Joe had gone that way. Sure enough,
a trail led back into the woods, wider than the
one they had followed. There were no more
footprints that she could see, but more
importantly, there were no hoofprints. They
were on foot, and that meant she had an edge.
Lynn cast a look at the sky. It was late
afternoon, the sun shining across the lake,
casting light and shadow across the water. A
heron lifted off as she watched, a fish
flapping in its beak. Let the horse and the dog
rest, she thought, and she removed Red Bird’s
saddle so the horse could roll and scratch
himself. After that, it would be Pony Express
time after all.
Fifteen minutes later, after a granola bar
shared with the dog, she was ready. Lynn
saddled up, tightened the girth, and swung on
board. She gathered the reins, and the horse
alerted at once. Lynn glanced at the dog and
whistled. The dog would have to follow at its
own pace and catch up with her later. She

pushed the horse up onto the bank, jumping
over a tangle of tree roots and driftwood. It
was wide here, and grassy. Red Bird burst
into a trot and then a canter.
Good footing for traveling at speed. Lynn put
Red Bird into a hand gallop. His hoofbeats
drumming into the soft grass, the horse
leaped forward, ears pricked and tail
thrashing. Lynn leaned forward in the big
saddle, hands moving rhythmically, riding
like a cowboy, sliding down along Red Bird’s
neck to avoid low branches. Hang on, Joe, she
thought as Red Bird galloped hard along the
trail. Please hang on.
“She’s not here,” Mrs. Felz said. The woman
sat on the front porch, but instead of rocking
leisurely, she sat very still. Her gardening
gloves and trowel sat on the table next to her,
and her worn hands were clasped very tightly
in her lap over a thick envelope. She looked as
if she were going to cry or had been crying. “I
don’t—I’m not sure where she went.”
Kate didn’t like to talk to Mrs. Felz. She
didn’t know what Joe’s mom knew or didn’t
know, and she hated the idea that she might

spill the beans.
“Did she say when she was coming back?”
Mrs. Felz shook her head, and Kate began to
get worried. That didn’t sound like Lynn at
all.
“And she didn’t say where she was going?”
Kate looked at Colar. He shrugged. Kate
looked around. “Wait. Her car’s still here.”
“She took the truck and horse trailer and that
little old red horse that just showed up—oh,
and the dog. A little stray dog. She said—she
said the dog might have something to do with
Joe.”
“With Joe!” Kate exclaimed. “Mrs. Felz, you
have to tell us. Where did she go? Did she say
anything?”
“Did she say how long she might be?” Colar
put in.
A truck and trailer rig rumbling up the drive
caught their attention. Oh my God, she’s back,
Kate thought with a breath of relief. But it
wasn’t Lynn; it was Sue Devin, and she
parked the trailer and marched up to the
house.
“All right, I need to know what is going on,”
she snapped, her eyes bright and her short

white hair standing on end as if she had been
running her fingers through it. “What is
Lynn Romano up to?”
They repaired into the kitchen. Mrs. Felz got
everyone iced tea. The curtains lifted
sluggishly in the fitful breeze, but the kitchen
was cool and dark.
“She told me she might be gone a week or
more, and if she was, I was to open this.”
Joe’s mom held up the thick envelope. It was
still sealed, as if she was determined to follow
Lynn’s instructions to the letter. “She said
you would help me run the farm, Miz Devin,
while she was away, if I needed.”
“That girl,” Sue said with exasperation. “She
called me from the trailhead out at the nature
preserve, asking me to pick up her rig. She
knows there’s no riding out on that trail. I
have no earthly idea what she is up to.”
“She provisioned herself for a long trip,”
Mrs. Felz said. “She didn’t use one of those
little bitty saddles y’all use, either. She put a
stock saddle on that horse.”
“That’s ridiculous,” Sue said. “What does she
intend to do, play cowboys and Indians three

hundred feet from a major highway?”
Kate and Colar exchanged glances, then
ducked their gazes.
“How are you two involved with this?” Sue
asked, turning her keen gaze on them.
“Us? We were just wondering where she
went,” Kate said as innocently as she could.
“Uh-huh,” Sue said, dryly.
Mrs. Felz spoke up. “Lynn said that it was
something to do with Joe. I don’t know any
more than you, but if she is going to bring my
son back, then I think we should be doing all
we can to help her, not stop her.”
“Something to do with Joe?” Sue said. There
was something else in her expression now,
some connection that Kate didn’t get.
“Interesting.” She turned to Mrs. Felz and
covered her hand with hers. She gave it a
squeeze. “I knew your son. He was a good
man. He was unjustly accused, and I think he
just wanted to disappear, after all that. But if
after all this time Lynn Romano has known
where he was and hasn’t told any of us, well, I
think when she does come back from her little
game, she is going to have to be more
forthcoming with all of us, but especially with

you.”
Mrs. Felz looked on the verge of tears again.
Kate was relieved when they heard a knock
on the door.
“I’ll get it,” she said. She went through to the
dark living room and peered out the screen
door at the strange man standing there.
“Can I help you?” she said dubiously. He
didn’t look like a client or a client’s father. He
smelled of booze, and his clothes were worn
and stained . . . He’s a crow. He’s one of
Marthen’s crows. Kate stumbled back, on the
verge of screaming, and started to slam the
front door shut.
“No, wait!” he cried out, tearing at the flimsy
screen door and pushing back at her. “No,
I’m here to warn you! Lynn Romano! Where
is Lynn Romano! She’s in terrible danger!”
He said his name was Gary. Mrs. Felz took
one look, or one smell more like, and
immediately put on water for coffee. Gary
spilled the details, his hands and his voice
shaking.
“Listen, the restaurant guy, Mike Garson, has
it in for Miss Romano, and he said he would

give the general guns if he would take her out.
I didn’t think he’d do it. I thought he was just
leading Marthen on. But he brought the guns
today, and they’re all armed now. Marthen’s
crazy, man. I know I helped him some, but I
was trying to get him to stop. I didn’t let him
kill that kid, and I swear I wouldn’t help him
kidnap that girl, that Kate kid.”
“That would be me,” Kate said with a dry
voice. Gary looked at her, and to her horror
he started to cry.
“I didn’t know what he was like,” he said, his
words hard to understand. “I didn’t know.
I—I couldn’t stop helping him. He got inside
my head and made me crazier and crazier.”
He covered his face with his hands. “I wanted
to stop drinking, and he just made it worse.”
Sue Devin put her hand on his shoulder,
patting him a little. Kate was impressed with
the way she didn’t ask any questions, just
faced all the weirdness confronting her with
equanimity.
“Sir,” Colar said. “What is his plan?”
Gary lifted his tear-streaked face.
“He’s sending two of the worst guys over here
to kill Miss Romano and anyone else who’s

here, and to torch the place after.”
The horses. Kate could feel the blood drain
from her face. The barns going up in flames,
the horses screaming in their boxes . . . She
looked over at Sue and Mrs. Felz and saw that
both women had the same expression.
Scorched earth. It was his solution to
everything. I have burned lots of villages, he
once told her.
“Not this time,” she muttered. They all looked
at her, and she realized that she had spoken
out loud.
Sue Devin got to her feet. “Well, I believe this
is a credible threat, and I’m going to call the
police. In the meantime, we need to start
evacuating horses, just in case the police can’t
put a stop to it.”
“That’s not all,” Gary said. His broken
whisper had become stronger. They all turned
to look at him. “He’s going to use the attack
here as cover for when he goes after you, kid.”
It didn’t shock or frighten her as much as she
had feared. Now that the moment had come,
Kate became suddenly clear-headed. She
looked over at Colar.
“This is it,” she told him. “It’s time.”

He nodded.
“What?” Mrs. Felz, Sue, and Gary all said at
roughly the same time. Kate looked around at
all of them, all these well-meaning adults who
could not fathom, not even Gary, what they
were in for.
“He’s my problem, and I’m going to take care
of him once and for all.”
Sue put the word out that there was a gas leak
at Hunter’s Chase, and all the area farms sent
over their vans and horse trailers to evacuate
the horses. Fancy Pendle ton sent their head
groom and stable girls to help, along with
their biggest van. Howard Fleming also sent
word that Hunter’s Chase was welcome to
any help he could offer. Kate and Colar got to
work loading horses and notifying clients.
Quite a few came out to help. Kate didn’t
know how many people would move their
horses permanently when this new crisis was
over, but the first priority was the safety of
their charges. That’s what Lynn would do.
Horses first, business later.
Sue also put Gary on to talk to the police, and
soon there were fire engines and patrol cars

parked all around the farm. Helicopters
rattled overhead. Spare, gray Lieutenant
Spencer came and talked with Gary for a long
time, the homeless man telling him where the
camp was. The police sent out another
response team to find the camp in the woods
that they had been looking for all this time.
Under cover of the chaos, Kate and Colar
plotted.
“Do you think they’ll still try it, after all
this?” she said in a low voice, after leading a
pretty little Arab up the ramp of a High
Hollow van and tying her with a safety knot.
Colar faced her over the back of the
horse—they had a bit of quiet to themselves
for a moment. “Or will he call it off?”
“It might be out of his hands,” he said, his
face strained. “Once he sets the crows in
motion, they may just come on of their own.”
She nodded. She had seen the crows at work
in the camp and then in battle. They were
fearsome and fearless. The police would stop
them—eventually. And if the police
underestimated them, as they likely would, it
could take too long. And let’s say the police
take Marthen into custody, she thought. She

knew from her mom’s cases that there would
be little they could book him on. Attempted
kidnapping? It was the word of a drunk
accomplice against his. He had threatened to
kill Austin, but he hadn’t committed murder.
They’d keep him for a while, maybe even a
few years, but he would get out eventually.
And when he did, he would come after her
again and again. The only way she would ever
be safe was if Marthen went back to Aeritan.
No, scratch that; even the gordath couldn’t
stop him. The only way she would ever be safe
was if he were dead.
Last winter, in a snowy clearing a few miles
from where they were standing right now and
a whole world away, she had picked up a rifle
and held Marthen in her sights. She could
have killed him then. By the laws of Aeritan,
she had every right, not to mention every bit
of sympathy. But she lived by the laws of her
world. And look where it got me, she thought,
stroking the mane of the pretty little horse.
Colar reached over and caught her hand. His
fingers were strong and rough. She laced her
fingers with his.
“I meant what I said,” he said, his voice low.

“I want you to marry me. Come to Aeritan.
My father will give us his permission. You’ll
be my lady when I am lord of Terrick.”
We’re too young! she wanted to say. We can’t
get married. She swallowed against the lump
in her throat, because the most important
thing wasn’t getting married, it was what she
had to tell him, what she had been trying to
tell him in the woods off Daw Road.
“So here’s the thing,” she said, fighting tears.
“You know I’m supposed to go to Harvard,
right?” Colar looked at her, but his
expression was quizzical. She laughed a little.
He couldn’t help but know; her parents made
sure the pressure was on all the time. “Yeah,
well, I won’t get in.” There were too many
hardworking girls with great GPAs and all
the right bullet points on their résumés to
compete with. She knew from Mojo that all
the heart in the world only gets you so far.
She looked down at their interlaced hands.
“So it’s tempting to go with you, because I
know they’ll be disappointed that I don’t get
in. But I can’t use marriage to you as
a—safety. I don’t know what’s going to
happen to us, but I can’t go with you. I want

to become a doctor, and it’s going to mean a
lot of hard work.” She blinked back tears. “I
don’t think that I can do that and be your
lady.”
He was quiet for a long time. The horse
remained perfectly still between them, her
ears slack and her eyes drooping. The air in
the van was thick with the scent of horses and
manure.
“I think you could do anything and be a
Lady,” he said finally, and she could almost
hear the capital letter. “I just don’t want to
lose you.” He ducked under the mare’s neck
and came around to Kate’s side, taking her in
his arms in the narrow space. He kissed her,
and she shivered, lost in the kiss.
“I don’t want to lose you either,” she
whispered. “You have to stay. Colar, please.”
She tried to laugh. “You could go to Harvard
for me.”
He kissed her again. “If I stayed, it would be
Annapolis.”
She drew back, knowing surprise was written
all over her face. When did he learn about
Annapolis? He kind of shrugged. “Remember
when you had to tell all the lords about how

war is waged here?”
Boy, did she. It had been the end of a long
ride as the army trundled off to meet Lord
Tharp’s men, not knowing what they were
facing. Lieutenant Grayne had bundled Kate
off to General Marthen’s tent, and all the
officers were there. Then they had been so big
and frightening with their strange accents
and clothing. She was too scared to
distinguish between them then, but she
eventually learned to recognize Colar’s
father, the gruff Lord Terrick; the almost
grandfatherly Lord Shay, who loved to talk to
her and Talios about his ailments, both real
and imagined; and creepy Lord Favor with
his avid eyes. That night, though, she told
them what she knew about arms, warfare,
tanks, jets and bombers, and—aircraft
carriers . She looked at Colar, the question in
her eyes. He grinned a little.
“My father told me later what you said.
Floating cities that launched flying machines?
It was like something out of a kitchen tale.
Then at school Mrs. Patterson talked to us
about colleges, and I asked her where I could
learn to fly. She gave me a lot of brochures,

and one was for Annapolis. And so I thought,
wouldn’t that be something, the son of the
lord of Terrick flying jets?”
In the silence, “Kung Fu Fighting” blared out
in the little space. The mare tossed her head
and whinnied, and Kate scrabbled frantically
for her phone, prying it open. The sound cut
off. Heart hammering, she snapped into the
phone, “Mom! We’re at the stables! What
more do you want?”
The general’s deep voice filled her ear. “It’s
time for you to come home, Kate Mossland.”
Fourteen
The summer grasses were gray and gold, their
tassels sweeping over Crae’s stirrups and
stroking Hero’s flanks while they cantered,
trotted, walked, and cantered again in a
rhythmic, steady pace as they headed
northeast. He had left the crow behind in the
first hours, the man striding along as if he
were a pilgrim on his way to a holy place, with
a far different purpose than Crae’s urgent
one. Crae didn’t need his cryptic guidance
anymore anyway; once he had been set on his
path, it unfurled before him, though he

didn’t know if he was hurtling himself toward
the crow’s prophecy or fleeing from it.
It sent a cold spike of fear down his spine. The
trouble he had brought down on Trieve was
nothing as compared to the grief Aeritan
would suffer if the crow’s prediction came
true. If the Council fell, and the crows
rampaged across the land, the stones
themselves would weep for Aeritan.
It wasn’t as if the Council were peaceful in
and of themselves. As Jessamy had teased
him, he had joined an unruly family. But the
shifting alliances and small wars were enough
to keep Aeritan from breaking up and feeding
upon itself.
There was Brythern, too, ever itching on
Aeritan’s north-eastern border, its ambitions
toward its squabbling neighbor always
couched in diplomatic terms, and always
clear. And no one really knew what happened
to all those guns in last year’s war. Crae knew
the Brythern lord Hare had his heart set on
those weapons; he even took Bahard off with
him. If Brythern got the weapons or could
forge them, based on what Bahard had with
him, then all of Aeritan would need to come

together to face this new enemy.
It was the only sense he could make of the old
crow’s prophecy, and his heart sank. He was
one man, he needed to stop either a mad crow
or an invading army, and if he turned aside to
Red Gold Bridge to plead for help, he might
not be believed. Now here he was, riding right
into the strange country. If Hare came across
him, he would not be pleased.
Amused perhaps, but not pleased.
Night fell, and Crae camped under the hazy
sky, the stars few between the clouds. There
was no moon. After lighting a small fire to
heat up vesh and making himself a meal of
flatbread and dried meat, he doused the
flames and rolled himself up, making sure his
crossbow and sword were near to hand. Hero
munched on grain, and Crae fell asleep to the
comforting sounds.
He woke at gray dawn. The wind had risen,
and the mist promised by the night clouds fell
over him. Everything was slick and cold and
damp. Hero nudged him in his bedroll and
whickered low, demanding breakfast. Crae
sat up, and there in front of him sat the old

crow, watching him steadily from across the
blackened fire circle. He sat on his haunches,
his legs crossed, as if he had been there for
hours, which, Crae suspected, he had been.
Crae grunted and got to his feet, rolling up
his wet blankets. He grained Hero and had
the fire going before he said anything to the
crow.
“Vesh?” he offered.
“You break bread with me?” the man said,
his voice raspy and thick. The chill and wet
had affected him as well. He might have been
able to move fast enough overland to catch up
to a man on horseback on no sleep, but he was
affected by the damp the same as anyone.
Crae was inexplicably heartened. He was
mortal, not the fearsome creature of kitchen
tales. Well, he was that, too; Crae would do
well not to fool himself.
“Why not?” he said. “You don’t even have to
tell me your name.”
The man snorted. “Don’t you know we crows
have no names? Soon you will forget yours,
you know.”
Crae ignored the needling. He waited till the
water in his small kettle boiled, threw in the

ground herbs, and let it steep before turning
to look at the man. “Lordless, landless,
nameless. You travel light, to be sure.”
“We give it all to our god,” the crow said, his
voice short. “And he carries us.”
“If you ask me, he uses you ill for the
privilege.”
“No one asked you.” The crow sounded
irritable now, and Crae looked at him. He
snorted with laughter. First a cold and now a
temper. Fearsome kitchen tales
notwithstanding, the crow sounded more and
more human by the minute.
“We’ll make a man of you yet, crow,” he said,
cheerful now that he had gotten under his
companion’s skin. The man just scowled at
him, his eyes narrowed.
The aroma of the steeping vesh rose above
them, rich and tantalizing. Vesh smelled
better than it tasted, but out in the cold and
after a hard day’s ride and a night of sleeping
on the damp ground, it tasted just fine to
Crae. He poured the first cup of vesh for the
old crow. The man sipped judiciously and
nodded.
There was only one cup. Crae waited for his

turn, making another meal of traveling bread
and meat and breaking camp. The crow
handed over the cup, Crae poured himself
some now very strong vesh, and sipped down
to the dregs.
He kicked over the fire, doused it thoroughly,
and saddled up. With one foot in the stirrup,
he looked back at the crow, one eyebrow
raised. “See you tomorrow morning?” he
asked.
“I can give no assurances, Lord Crow.”
Crae made a pained face at his designation.
He swung into the saddle and gathered the
reins, pointing the horse north and east. He
left the crow behind without a farewell
between them, but he had the thought that if
the old man wasn’t at his campfire tomorrow
morning, he might just miss him.
The sun was high when Crae stood at the
lonely crossroads of northern Trieve.
Brythern lay north, Red Gold Bridge to his
west. The mountain range that flanked the
stronghold’s lands rose blue in the distance.
He stood at the entrance to the Ring Road,
the last of the great roads built in the days of

the high king, and its cracked and broken
surface stretched straighter than any trail.
The road was flanked by two straight lines of
trees, their branches stretching overhead and
shutting out the sun. Dappled shadows played
across the broken road as far as he could see,
and the air was cool and pleasant.
He and Lynn had come this way last winter
when they were taken hostage by Hare and
led back to Red Gold Bridge. The gordath
had reached this far, sending tremors that
had toppled them like so many chess pieces on
a board. Now the land was peaceful, if empty,
the remnant of a last great kingdom
stretching before him to his west, and a
rougher, less-traveled trail heading north. He
hesitated because he had a decision to make.
Go north and face the menace from Brythern
alone. Or, turn west and beseech Lord
Tharp’s help, and convince the man who held
him in disregard that danger came from
Brythern and to call out the Council. Even if
Tharp hadn’t heard yet of Crae’s brother’s
murder, he had little chance of success. The
first I tell him that a crow told me, he will likely
have me clapped into his prison cells. Again.

He almost wished the crow were here to help
him make a decision, but he doubted the man
would make it so easy on him.
Crae dismounted, hoping to find an answer.
He stretched his back, loosened Hero’s girth,
and the horse heaved a sigh of release. As a
reward the animal rubbed his head against
Crae’s side, trying to scratch an itch under his
pesky bridle. Crae tolerated it while he
thought.
Once as a young man, before he sought a
position as a man-at-arms to one of the
Houses of Aeritan, Crae had gone to
Brythern. It was an adventure. He landed in
the great city of Cai-sone along the banks of
the Aeritan River, with its pile of old stone
houses climbing on top of one another. Not
even Red Gold Bridge was so big, and that
stronghold was built out of the side of a
mountain. Cai-sone had streets that were
broad enough for two wagons to rumble
along abreast, even rigs drawn by four or six
horses. Its streets were made of flat stones,
not the rough cobblestones of most of the
villages he had been in, and there were
covered gutters alongside the street. People

bustled along to market, on errands, the
merchant houses and shops with their gaudy
signs thick with energetic crowds. There were
taverns on every corner, and men and women
of learning with great books and curious
instruments at almost every table, talking
animatedly with their hands.
Besides Brytherners the city was filled with
foreigners from down the river and across the
sea, some with faces browned by the sun,
others as pale as if they were warmed only by
the moon. The markets were roiled with a
cacaphony of tongues as people haggled over
goods from all over the world. Sometimes he
saw something that was undeniably Aeritan,
such as linens from Favor or mined ores from
the mountains of Temia, and he felt a pang of
homesickness, but mostly the markets were
full of marvels he had never seen and could
not afford to buy. Crae had stayed in a cheap
inn, found romance with a barmaid, had his
pocket picked, and drank and brawled, and
when he shipped back upriver with an aching
head and an empty wallet, he was full of
wonder at what he had seen.
He had never gone back. He had taken his

position at Red Gold Bridge shortly
thereafter, and he no longer had the leisure
for wandering.
Until now. For the first time he recognized
that as a crow, he was free. He had no duties.
He could ride south or east, or anywhere but
north, away from the crow, his cryptic words,
and his maddening purpose. He could
disappear into exile, could even ship out and
go downriver and out to sea to the countries
of the pale people or to the lands where the
people were darkened by the sun. He didn’t
have to follow the crow and his prophecy and
try to save his country from a distant menace.
He could just . . . go.
And watch Aeritan burn from a distance and
know that he had abandoned his promise to
keep Trieve safe.
“Damn you, old man,” Crae said out loud. He
tightened Hero’s girth and swung back into
the saddle. He turned the horse’s head west,
toward the Ring Road that led to Red Gold
Bridge. Maybe he was a crow, and maybe he
wasn’t, but he was a captain at heart, and a
captain did his duty. He’d make Tharp listen
to him.

With a careful nudge from his mind, Joe
reached out and touched the gordath, closing
it with a firm touch. It almost zippered up at
his direction. The forest grew still and calm,
and only the faintest rumbling shook the
ground.
What do you know—the gordath responded
to a gentle touch, after all. He glanced over at
Arrim, and together they lowered their hands
and their guard. He let his mind reach out.
He felt the presence of the gordath, but it
remained still, a rattle of leaves the only sign
that it had ever been open.
They had been practicing for the better part
of three days. They had the devil’s own time
closing the thing down at first. After all the
abuse it had taken—and they had taken, Joe
thought—the gordath resisted their efforts,
but it finally sealed itself. And then he and
Arrim conferred, and Hare, Ballard, and the
rest of the men let them be.
They finally got it that they need us, Joe
thought. At least they weren’t being stomped
on regularly, though Arrim still looked pretty
bad.

Joe wiped his forehead of sweat and sat back
on a nearby fallen log for a rest. The forest
mostly stayed cool and green, but controlling
the gordath was hard, even though it was all
mind work. He squirted himself some
lukewarm water, wincing at the taste of it
from the leather skin, and passed the rest to
Arrim.
The other guardian reached out for it, but his
hand shook, and he fumbled at the neck. Joe
looked him over with concern. He needed a
good long bed rest and food.
“Hey, hang in there,” he told him under his
breath. Arrim made a sound like assent. Joe
held up the waterskin for him and he finally
drank, coughing a little.
“I don’t know if I can keep doing this,” Arrim
muttered.
“You’re doing fine,” Joe said, but he
frowned. Had he been doing most of the
work? It was hard to tell. He had assumed
that this gordath had been harder to work
than the one in Aeritan, just—well, just
because. But maybe he was sweating it out
because Arrim wasn’t pulling his weight.
Not that he could blame him, but it made him

uneasy. If push came to shove and they had to
close the gordath down fast, he didn’t think
he could do it by himself. If Arrim couldn’t
help, they could be back in the same trouble
as before.
“So, it goes well,” said Hare, coming over to
them. He stood before them, his hands
playing with the long knife, flipping it from
point to pommel.
Joe snorted. “Subtle as always, Hare,” he
said. He nodded at the knife.
Hare stared at him levelly, but he sheathed
the knife.
“Yeah,” Joe said. “I think we might have it
under control. Don’t know how long we can
keep it that way, but at least it’s not trying to
kill us anymore. Maybe.”
At the last word he could see Hare react the
smallest bit. The men listening to the
conversation exchanged glances. It was mostly
for their benefit he had thrown that last word
in. The more uneasy they were, the more
control he might have over Hare. Hare
wouldn’t back down in front of his captives,
but he might listen to his men’s protests.
From the back Mark made a rude noise.

“You keep acting like it can think,” he said.
“It’s just a—a thing. Hell, I had it under
control last year.”
Joe looked from Hare to him. He shrugged.
“Feel free to give it a try,” he offered.
“Fuck you, dumb ass,” Mark said.
“Quiet,” Hare said. He started worrying with
the knife again, and then actually
remembered and put it away in the small
sheath on his belt. “Can it think?” he said for
Joe’s ears alone.
We’re in this together now, and he knows it, Joe
thought. He shoved away the feeling of
triumph. If Hare knew what he was thinking,
he doubted the man would appreciate the
fellowship. “It might have only one driving
impulse,” he said. “It wants to be open.”
“It wants to consume,” Arrim said. He looked
out over the forest, toward the now-empty air
where the gordath had centered.
He said it loud enough for the men to hear.
Joe saw a few of them make a
sign—unfamiliar, but he knew what the
signal meant. Every culture had a sign against
evil. At Arrim’s words he felt the sweat chill
down his back.

“All things seek to consume,” Hare said
thoughtfully. “And pass on their seed. This
gordath—can it reproduce?”
Joe was thunderstruck at what he was asking.
Could a gordath make baby gordaths? God,
he hoped not. His life was too complicated
already. Maybe it was only half-sentient. It
only wanted to eat a hole in between the
worlds. He looked at Arrim, but the man gave
a grimace and shook his head.
“Guess not,” Joe said.
“Small mercy,” Hare said, and Joe couldn’t
help it—he grinned. Then his grin faded as he
got back to the original point.
“So, looks like what you want is to feed it.
Give it just enough to keep it satisfied and
controlled, not enough to set it loose.”
“You are a most astute ally, Guardian.”
Maybe. But how the hell they were going to
be able to pull that off was more than Joe
could come up with. He just nodded sagely at
Hare. “Yeah, exactly. It’ll be tricky, though.”
Hare nodded. “Rest and food. You can try
again later.”
He was almost solicitous as he let them be. Joe
took another swallow from the waterskin as

the men set up the night camp, and he
watched the activity around them. Even Mark
pitched in, though he was sullen about it.
Well, he thought. I have Hare right where he
wants me. Now what?
Kate closed the phone, all the color draining
from her face. Her lips felt stiff. “Marthen’s
at the house. He has my parents.”
They ducked out of the horse trailer and
looked around. The farm hummed with
activity, as vans pulled away with their
precious cargo. It looked like the end of a
horse show, she thought dazedly, with all the
vans leaving.
More patrol cars had arrived, and more
SWAT guys, too. At least they took the threat
seriously. But the driveway was blocked. How
were they going to get the Jeep out without
calling attention to themselves? She moved
purposefully toward the Jeep. She would ram
through them if she had to.
Colar grabbed her. “Wait. Think. He wants
you to go straight home and walk into his
trap. You have to tell the police.”
She could barely speak. “If he sees the police,

he’ll kill them.” She knew he would because it
would punish her, and if he couldn’t have
her, then he would settle for her pain.
Sickness came up in her throat, and she
wished she could unknow the knowledge of
his madness. She felt complicit, guilty. She
hated him, and she knew more about him
than anyone else right now.
Use what you know, then.
She thought for a minute, then opened her
phone and re-dialed home.
“What are you doing?!” Alarm made Colar’s
voice rise.
“He’s not the only one who’s crazy,” she said,
and she didn’t even recognize her own voice.
The phone picked up, but there was no
salutation. Of course. What is he going to say?
Hello?
“You’re nothing but a bully,” she told him.
Still silence. She snapped. “Talk to me. Or are
you frightened?”
“I am holding a gun to your father’s head. If
you are not here soon, I will be forced to shoot
him. And then your mother. And don’t
bother to tell your police, because by then it
will be too late. They’re much too far away to

help.”
Soldier’s god. She stopped dead still. When
she was able to speak again, it was with eerie,
self-contained calm.
“Let me talk to them.”
There was silence. Then her dad came on the
phone. “Kate?” His voice was breathless, as if
he had been running.
“Daddy—”
“Call the police, Kate! Call—”
The phone went dead.
Think, Kate, think. Had she just put her
parents in even graver peril, or had she
bought them time? It would serve him no
purpose to kill them now. Only if he was
under direct threat would he murder his
hostages. He didn’t murder Austin, she thought
hopefully.
Of course, that was because Gary stopped
him, and Gary was talking to the police fifty
feet away from her. She took a deep breath
and punched in the number again, her hands
shaking. Soldier god, please let me be right.
Please. Help me protect my parents. She didn’t
know if the soldier’s god would or could help
her in such a peaceful prayer, but he was the

only god she had any familiarity with. They
had been on speaking terms once, and she
thought that maybe he would remember and
come all this way and help.
This time when the phone was answered, she
didn’t wait for him to speak. “Marthen. I give
in. I’m on my way.” She closed the phone
before she found herself begging him not to
harm her parents, and willed herself not to
cry. Without looking at Colar, she said, “All
your gear is still in the Jeep?”
“Kate, you can’t go face him alone.”
“I have to. I have to. If he sees you or anyone
else, he’ll kill them in front of me.” Her voice
hardened. “I’ll make sure I separate him from
Mom and Dad. I’ll let him take me to the new
gordath. That’s where you’ll meet us. We
need to keep three horses back. Allegra and,
um, Cinnamon and Hotshot.” They were two
of the school horses: sturdy, quiet beasts who
would bear up to a long ride. Allegra was
more delicate, but she was Kate’s, or
practically so. Anyway, Lynn would
understand. She was on the same mission.
“You’ll need to get the gear and the horses to
the new gordath and wait for us there. I’m

going home, and I’ll bring Marthen there.”
“There’s a problem. I don’t know how to get
there,” Colar said.
“That’s okay. Gary does.”
They both turned to look at the homeless
man. He stood with the police, talking
seriously with them. Somehow, the crying,
desperate man had disappeared. He stood a
little taller in his worn and dirty clothes, his
back straight.
“Can he ride?” Colar said skeptically.
“Probably not, but you can put him up on
Cinnamon on the way, and you can lead
Allegra. Or Hotshot,” she added hastily.
Colar was a good rider. She could trust him
with Allegra as she had trusted him with
Mojo.
He grinned at her. He kissed her quickly and
said, “I’ll take care of your horse.”
She shivered at the kiss and blushed. “I
know.” Deter- minedly she turned back to her
task. She had to go rescue her parents and
face down Marthen. “All right. Call me if you
run into any trouble, and I’ll call you.”
“I don’t like you facing him alone.”
“Me, either,” she said, wrinkling her nose.

“But I don’t want to push him too far. If he
saw you, he could—he could—” She couldn’t
finish the thought. Kill my parents. Kill you.
“Wait till we get to the gordath. We’ll take
care of him then.”
She didn’t say how, and he just nodded. He
didn’t look like a kid anymore.
They kept one eye on the cops as Colar got his
gear and her backpack out of the Jeep, trying
to keep the sword out of sight. He hustled the
bags off into the lower barn, where the school
horses were waiting their turn to be loaded
onto the vans. Kate watched him go, then got
behind the wheel and started the Jeep,
bumping up the driveway and over the grass
behind the hill barn. She turned out onto the
road, accelerating away from the farm. All
she had to do was go home, rescue her
parents, and bring Marthen back through the
gordath. Piece of cake.
Her house appeared silent and undisturbed
from the outside, except that the garage door
was open. Both her parents’ cars were parked
inside. She parked the Jeep in the driveway
and steeled herself, walking up to the front

door. It felt strange to have to knock on her
own front door, but she wanted to alert him
to her presence, let him feel he was still in
control.
Well, he was, she admitted to herself. But he
was expecting the quiet little mouse he had
captured last year, and she would give him
that, right up until the time she roared.
The door opened, and she was yanked inside.
Kate stumbled forward, putting out her
hands as she was shoved roughly to the floor,
her face mashed down on the smooth parquet
hardwood.
“Got her,” a strange voice called out. So he
had brought his crows. She thought about
what Gary had told them. With the attack on
Hunter’s Chase foiled, he brought his worst
men with him. Her stomach roiled at the
thought of her parents having to face crows.
“Don’t hurt her. Bring her in here.”
That voice she knew. It had terrified her to
her bones last year with its quiet menace, its
softness hiding violence to come. The crow
pulled her to her feet and pushed her forward
into the kitchen.
Her parents sat at the table, her mom

white-faced, with tears welling in her eyes.
Her dad was curiously ashen and unwell. He
had just been put on heart medication, and
Kate felt a squeezing of her own heart. Please
hang on, Daddy. Please. She hurried over to
them, pretending to ignore the two crows and
Marthen, and knelt and hugged them both.
“You shouldn’t have come. You shouldn’t
have come,” her mom said, her voice
breaking. And her dad, low-voiced, “Did you
call the police? Where are the police?”
“Shh, shh, it’s going to be okay,” she said,
reaching around and patting them both
awkwardly, trying to think. Two crows, both
armed with rifles. Marthen, armed as well
with a rifle of his own and a handgun tucked
into his belt. She waited for a second,
gathering herself before she had to face him.
Finally, she stood and turned to him.
The meticulous man she had known last
winter had transformed into a homeless
drunk. His hair was long and tangled. He had
not shaved. He stank. His clothes were no
longer the fine clothes she remembered,
pressed and brushed by his orderly. His boots
were covered with mud. Only his eyes were

the same, burning dark, almost black. Her
back itched, and she clenched her fingers into
fists, letting her fingernails bite into her
palms. He had not wielded the whip that had
been used on her, but he had ordered it.
“General,” she said curtly.
“Kate Mossland,” he said, and he gave her a
courteous bow. She heard her mom gasp.
“So you have me,” she said. “Now you can let
them go.”
“No.”
Both her parents started protesting. Before
Marthen could order the crows to silence
them Kate raised her voice. “Mom, Dad,
stop.”
“Kate—” her father began.
“Dad, he’s really dangerous. You have to
stop.”
Her mom put her hand on her husband’s
arm, and he subsided, but grudgingly. Kate
turned back to Marthen.
“Again, let them go.”
“Again, no. They are your safe-conduct.”
“I’m not leaving them here with your crows.”
Despite her attempt at calm, she could feel
her mouth twist in disgust. “Let them go, call

off your crows, and I’ll go with you willingly.”
“Kate!” her mother screamed. Kate held up
her hand, and her mother began to sob. The
crow who had knocked her down in the foyer
advanced on her mother, and in one swift
movement, Kate moved in front of her to
block him, hands up to ward him off.
“Back off,” she said, eyes and voice blazing.
She didn’t know where it came from, this
sudden strength, but she rev eled in it, and
she let the crow see it. To her astonishment,
he stopped, lowering his hand, and she could
see uncertainty in his expression. She turned
on Marthen. “Call them off.”
His expression was soft, approving, and she
felt sick to her stomach again. Ewww. Ewww.
Gross. He nodded at the crows, and they
stepped back by the fridge, but they kept
their weapons trained on the little crowd.
“You have fire in you,” he said. “I always
knew you were strong. I think you have
something of a warrior in you. Yes, we will do
well together. The Aeritan Council will agree
to our alliance, or will be made to agree, and
then we will see. We will see.”
With an effort, Kate kept from puking.

Instead she said, her voice only shaking the
least bit, “I propose this. We drive to the
gordath, all of us. I go through with you and
the crows. My parents stay here. I’ll see if you
or your men shoot them, and if that happens,
not only won’t I marry you, I’ll kill you
myself.”
The only sound in the kitchen was her mom’s
crying and her dad’s shallow breaths. The
crows stood silently. Marthen considered her
proposal.
“Where’s young Terrick?” he said.
“Helping at the stables,” she said.
He didn’t believe her. She could see that. She
kept her silence, challenging him.
“If he shows up at the gordath, I’ll shoot them
all myself.”
She let herself shrug. “I have the car, and he
doesn’t even know where it is.”
Again he considered, and again she kept her
attention focused on him. Finally, he nodded.
“Done,” he said. “But if there is any
treachery, any trickery, if I see Terrick or the
police, or anyone else, your parents will not
live.”
Kate just said, “We need to wait until

nightfall.”
Twilight came down over the peaceful barns
at Hunter’s Chase. The vans had all gone, and
the stalls were empty, their doors swinging
wide and the comfortable wood shavings
bedding waiting for their occupants. Only
three horses remained in the farthest stalls in
the school barn. Allegra had been indignant
at her move to rustic quarters, but Colar
forked down a few flakes of hay, and that had
mollified her. He tacked up the other two
horses and left them in their stalls with their
halters on, but he knew that it would drive
the sensitive mare crazy to be treated that
way. He’d tack her up last, when it was time
to go.
The police kept a few squad cars at the farm
and a fire engine, but Colar could tell that
they thought the whole thing was a bust, and
their interest in Gary had changed into
disgust. Although he had told them the truth
about the crow camp, by the time they found
the place, it was empty except for a few tents,
a few firepits, and a broken crate that had
once held guns. Marthen must have already

sent them on to the gordath.
Kate had not called, and he didn’t dare call
her, lest he ruin whatever she had going on.
He hated letting her go alone, but he knew
that Marthen would not hurt her, or at least
not yet. The idea of the general touching her
sickened him. Had she been his paramour in
camp? Everyone thought so, but now he
wasn’t so sure. Kate would have been worse
off if it had been so.
He started to notice a few stars in the twilit
sky. Time to go. He gathered up his gear and
Kate’s backpack and lashed both packs onto
Cinnamon’s saddle. The chestnut gelding
nudged him peacefully. He was a
broad-backed horse and would do for a
packhorse, though the small English saddles
were not the best for the job. Colar balanced
the load as securely as he could and bridled
the horse.
He heard a noise. It was Gary, ducking into
the barn. “We better go,” the man said. “The
police are talking about bringing me in for
more questioning.” He looked nervously at
the horses. “Which one am I riding?”
Colar brought out Hotshot, another chestnut

who had once been a police horse and could
be relied upon to stay calm under stressful
conditions. He could be stubborn, but he
would follow the others, because that’s what
horses do.
“Here,” he said, lowering the stirrups to the
end of the leathers. He held the rein and
helped Gary into the saddle. The man was
awkward and leaned forward, grabbing the
reins and the horse’s mane in a big tangle.
“You won’t have to guide him,” Colar said.
“He should just follow.”
He left Allegra for last. There was no way the
light-boned, temperamental mare would go
easily. He spoke softly to her, and though she
laid her ears back, she let him saddle and
bridle her. She got nervous around the other
two horses, and it took a few minutes to sort
them all out, Colar on Allegra, leading
Cinnamon, Hotshot bringing up the rear so as
not to be left behind.
They clopped softly out of the back of the
barn, their stirrups scraping the sides of the
narrow door, toward the trails. The little
train wound up toward the roads.
“Can you get us there from here?” Colar said.

Gary nodded, clutching the reins and looking
around to catch his bearings.
“I think so. You want to stay off the roads,
right?”
“As much as possible.” To emphasize that,
headlights showed up ahead as a car came
around the bend. They waited for the car to
pass. It never slowed down, the driver never
catching sight of three horses and two riders
on the side of the darkening road.
“All right then. Let’s try this way.”
They rode like ghosts in the night. Gary led
them overland, from horse farm to horse
farm, cutting cross-country and only riding
for short distances along the road. They
opened gates and closed them behind them, so
the only creatures that would know of their
passage were a few horses that had been
turned out to enjoy the cool night air. They
came out along driveways of houses that had
been shut up tight for the night, the horses’
hooves crunching on gravel. A few times they
set dogs to barking, and at one farm a light
went on in a second-floor window. Once an
owl wafted overhead on silent wings, and a
few moments later they heard the shuddering,

high-pitched cry of a dying mouse. Gary
stopped occasionally to get his bearings, but
he managed to cross them over the major
roads with no one to see them. The night was
dark, not even a bit of moonlight to
illuminate their path. All they needed was a
horse to injure itself, but they had luck—or
the gods of this world—on their side. By the
time they reached the trailhead, they had
been riding for a couple of hours. There was a
gravel parking lot and an information kiosk.
It was silent and empty.
“This is it,” Gary said, low-voiced. “Marthen
said he came out here and walked about a
mile into town, where he saw the girl the first
time.”
Colar nodded, recognizing where they were.
Yes, that would be about right; the crossroads
and the stand of pines Kate had seen
Marthen in was less than a mile away. The
gordath was near here.
“All right,” Colar said. “We need to hide our
mounts, make sure that when Marthen comes
he doesn’t know we’re here.”
They backed all three horses into the woods
and dismounted, Gary with difficulty and

thankfulness. He rubbed the seat of his jeans.
Colar, meanwhile, prepared. He took down
his gear bag from Cinnamon’s saddle and
pulled out his leather armor, throwing the
duffel bag into the bushes to hide it. The
smell of oiled leather and chain hit him. He
hadn’t worn his gear since last winter, when
he had been shot and almost killed by one of
Tharp’s weapons. No, one of this world’s
weapons, he reminded himself. He pulled the
leather shirt on over his T-shirt, strapping
himself in awkwardly. He and his father
helped each other dress for battle, but he
didn’t think Gary would know what to do. He
buckled on his sword belt and drew his sword.
With Gary watching him, wide-eyed, Colar
sank to one knee, planting the sword in front
of him. He kissed the pommel.
Soldier’s god, if you can hear me all the way
from Aeritan, give me strength. Help me protect
Kate, her parents, and Gary. And if you can, let
my father and mother know that I’m coming
home.
The sound of a car caught their attention, and
they both looked up. Once again headlights
stabbed through the darkness, and then a car

slowed and turned in to the parking lot.
Fifteen
Lynn came out of the woods into unfamiliar
country. The land rolled away from the
outskirts of the forest, the trees thinning and
then becoming scrawny and finally giving way
to scrub and brush. The dirt was black but
hard, covered with gray and brown and gold
grasses. A ridge to her east made a jagged line
against the sky.
The warmth of the sun on the grasslands felt
good, but it was bright despite her baseball
cap. She pulled out her sunglasses and put
them on and scanned her surroundings. The
dog sat beside her, panting, and Red Bird
waited patiently, whisking his tail lazily. Lynn
stood in the stirrups to ease her butt and
shaded her eyes against the diffused sunlight.
The trail, a roughly chopped-out path over
the rocky, inhospitable soil, stretched toward
the ridge.
She frowned. She guessed that was the way,
but . . . Some instinct prompted her, and she
closed her eyes. For a moment she could see
nothing except the afterimage of the ridge.

She waited though, and then she thought she
could see it. A spark, almost at the edge of her
vision, lit like a firefly and was gone. She
waited again, and the spark showed again.
This time Lynn swung her head toward it, a
few degrees to her left, and now it stayed in
the center of her vision. Warily, she opened
her eyes again, blinking at the brightness.
She was looking at another trail. It curved off
the one she was on and was so faint as to look
at first as if it were nothing but a depression
on the rough terrain. But it was a trail, and
though it, too, led to the ridge, it would take
her slightly more north.
“Okay then,” she said. “Thataway.”
She gathered the reins and pushed Red Bird
onto the new trail. The dog sprang up and
took its usual point position, trotting ahead.
Hero clattered across the soaring bridge, and
the gate to Red Gold Bridge rose above them.
Crae took it in with mixed feelings. The
strongholders had patched the walls of the
mountain keep, the fresh mortar still dark
against the reddish stone. The big gate was
open, and there was plenty of bustling foot

traffic. He pulled Hero to a walk and they
threaded between the strongholders,
merchants, and forestholders, all coming back
and forth, laden with goods. He couldn’t see
the wide river from here, but the forest
stream that crashed under the bridge
tumbled merrily down toward the waters.
“Halt, rider!” called a voice from above.
“Name yourself!” Crae pulled up and looked
overhead. A guardsman he didn’t recognize
challenged him from the guard post over the
gate. Two men beside him each carried
crossbows. Good, he thought, approving. Tal
had trained them well.
He no longer wore Trieve’s colors of gray and
green. He no longer carried the chain of
command. But he was still Lord of Trieve
until the Council officially revoked his rights,
and, he supposed, the high god turned his
back as well. But neither of these things had
happened, and so Crae stood in the stirrups
and shouted back,
“I am Lord Crae, late of Trieve. I have come
to Red Gold Bridge on a matter of great
urgency!”
Now he would find out if he would be clapped

into irons and thrown into prison. With
difficulty he kept his sword hand off the hilt
of his sword.
The guardsman disappeared, though the two
with crossbows held their position. Crae
waited as men and women eyed him curiously
as they passed by. The air was cool, the bridge
mostly in shadow from the tall trees pressing
in. It felt good after his long ride. Hero
remained collected underneath him, neck
arched against the light pressure on the reins.
He didn’t want to flee, but in case the two
guards had been given orders to shoot, he
wanted to have some chance to live to fight
again.
Nor did he wish to have yet another good
mount shot out from under him.
When the guard came back it was through
the main gate, and he had Tal with him. The
young captain’s face lit up and he hastened
over to Crae.
“Captain! My Lord, that is!”
They shook hands, and Crae said, “You’ve
got the place well in hand, I see.”
Tal beamed. “I made a few changes—but you
have urgent business, you say. I sent word to

Lord Tharp and Lady Sarita, and I wanted to
bring you in myself. Here, dismount, and
we’ll have someone take care of your horse.”
Crae did, with relief intermixed with
wariness. “What news have you heard?” he
said bluntly, shaking the reins over the
horse’s head and leading him through the
gate. It would be best to know exactly where
he stood before he stepped into a den of
trouble.
Tal shrugged. “We have enough trouble of
our own to be getting news from the rest of
Aeritan.”
The wariness increased, now with alarm.
“What is happening, Tal?”
The young man, barely older than Alarin now
that he noticed, looked at him frankly, his
expression hard. “I’ll let Lord Tharp tell you,
lord to lord. It may be that your urgent
matters mesh with his.”
More likely, it only meant that with his own
troubles, Tharp would be less likely to help
him. In the courtyard, Tal had a boy take
Crae’s horse. Crae stopped the boy from
leading him to the stables.
“Rub him down here, and grain and water

him lightly,” he told the youngster. “Have
him waiting for me after I speak with Lord
Tharp.” He saw the way the boy checked in
with Tal first, and the captain nodded his
head slightly. Crae followed Tal to Lord
Tharp’s Council chamber.
Tharp had aged. The man had more gray in
his hair and beard than brown, and he had
gotten thick in the middle. His mouth drew
downward disapprovingly at Crae’s
approach, but then, Crae had never known
the man to be anything but disapproving.
Next to him waited Lady Sarita.
Her exile had agreed with her. She had hardly
aged. Her dark hair, uncovered, gleamed in
the dim light coming from the window
overlooking the woods, and her face still held
the same youthful beauty, though she was no
longer young. She was dressed in outlandish
clothes, even more strange than Lynna’s garb
when he’d first seen her. They showed off her
figure in a way that no Aeritan woman would
ever be seen. No wonder Tharp seethes, he
thought.
A strongholder came in with vesh, and they

waited for the man to leave before setting to
counsel.
“What brings you to Red Gold Bridge?”
Tharp began abruptly.
“I have word of danger from Brythern. I’ve
been told the lord of crows comes and intends
to take on the Council, killing the lords and
sowing chaos in his wake.”
Tharp snorted. “You have been listening to
kitchen tales.”
“I wish that were true. But Trieve was beset
by crows less than a half month ago, and I
fear that this crow lord could bring upon
Aeritan what my House faced.” His breath
caught. One lord was already down. Was his
killing of Favor a portent of the war that
would break out?
Tharp and Sarita exchanged glances. “So why
Red Gold Bridge? Why not Kenery? Have
you sent word to him?” Tharp said testily.
Lady Sarita gave a displeased snort.
“Knowing Kenery, he is probably counting
out all the alliances he intends to break before
he makes them,” she said.
Crae wondered if Lord Kenery knew that last
year’s games during Aeritan’s war had put

him in a position where no lord would ever
trust him again.
Sarita wasn’t finished. “And you ride alone,
Lord Crae,” she said. “A great danger comes,
and yet you bring no men with you.”
She would point that out. He looked from
Tharp to Sarita. They were great lords, both
of them, but Tharp had tried to take all
Aeritan for himself, and Lady Sarita looked
as if she had a foot still in her other world.
And then there was Crae himself. A lord in
name only, a brother murderer, led by a mad
crow toward a destiny he didn’t desire. They
were in this together, like it or not.
“Well,” he said. “That’s quite a story.” He
proceeded to tell it.
To Crae’s vast relief, they did not throw him
into prison upon hearing of his kin murder.
“Lady Jessamy’s daughter—did she
recover?” Sarita asked, when he finished.
“She was on her way to recovery when they
left for Favor.” She nodded as if that was all
she required. Tharp cast a glance at his wife
as if he could not understand her meaning
but said only, “So the crow told you that this

great danger was coming through Brythern,
the lord of the crows himself. Why Brythern,
do you know?”
Crae shook his head.
“You see, Lord Crae, we are having Brythern
troubles of our own,” Lady Sarita put in.
“Just more than a month ago, smallholders
told us they saw a troop of masked
Brytherners moving through the Wood. Not
long after, our guardians disappeared. Our
guards—your old command—tracked them
to the border of Brythern but lost the trail.”
Crae’s blood ran cold. If Brythern wanted
guardians, it could only be for one thing.
They had a gordath to control. But what did a
gordath and a crow lord have in common?
“I fear that Mark Ballard is up to his old
tricks,” Lady Sarita pressed on, and she
pronounced the name the same way Lynna
had. Her face went hard. “He is likely trading
with the same merchant as you did, Eyvig. I
knew him. On the surface he was nothing but
an innkeeper, though well-respected.” Her
mouth became bitter. “Underneath he was
very dangerous.”
She didn’t have to say more for Crae to know

that she had faced this man and knew
firsthand what he was like.
“So it’s curious that your danger comes out of
Brythern, too, as well as ours,” she finished.
She looked at her husband. “We will throw
our lot in with yours.”
“Sarita!”
“Eyvig, we’re all outcast lords here. You
because of the war you started last year, Crae
now because of his stupidity. Yes, stupidity,”
she snapped at him, when he made to protest.
“Lord Favor was nothing more than a
bothersome gnat, certainly not worthy of
death. I always thought Lady Jessamy should
have been the one summoned, but there is no
accounting for the high god’s taste, or the
Council’s. No matter. You’ve been told there
is this great danger coming through Brythern,
and we know there is a gordath and now
guardians to control it. I don’t think it’s
far-fetched to combine the two and know that
some evil is coming through the gordath
itself. And believe me, we want to stop it as
soon as we may, or this time Mike Garson and
Mark Ballard may get their way.”
Her words came to a close in the small room.

Crae and Tharp looked at each other. Sarita
regarded the both of them, her arms folded
and one elegant eyebrow raised as she waited
for them to make a decision. No, Crae
thought, she is waiting for us to give in. He
lifted his shoulders and gave her a crooked
grin.
“You are as formidable as your mother, Lady
Sarita.”
She made a disparaging noise at the flattery,
but he could tell she was pleased.
“Yes,” said Tharp. He didn’t look happy
about it. “But we are one House, and while we
could fend off one crow, we cannot hold off
an army of Brytherners, no matter where
they come from.” He looked at Crae,
disgruntled. “Since you didn’t bring your
men with you, I suppose you want ours.”
“No,” Crae said. “I will ride on ahead and
scout out matters, and leave sign for your
men to follow.” He had to trust the crow and
his cryptic words. They had led him so far. He
looked at Lady Sarita. “Your husband may
no longer be able to call on old alliances, and
as for me—”
She nodded. “But my goodwill might not be

completely in tatters. I will send word to my
old friends and see what we can see.”
“I’m sitting right here,” Tharp said, with
some irritability. Lady Sarita cocked her head
and smiled at him sleekly.
“I know, Eyvig.”
Crae pulled up Hero and looked down at the
rough trail that led north and west. He had
been following the sign for a day and a half,
and it was clear enough. A company of men
had come this way on foot, days earlier. Those
were his Brytherners. He frowned. Tharp had
said that his men had turned back after
having lost the trail from Red Gold Bridge.
He was no great hand at tracking, but he had
found the trail easily enough. He clicked his
tongue. Had Tal given up too easily? He
would not have believed it of the man.
Or had the guard been drawn off at Tharp’s
bidding, perhaps? Tharp had never liked his
guardians, for all that he had lordship over
the one stronghold that faced Gordath Wood.
He never liked Arrim because the man had a
power that he could not understand or
control. Arrim had crossed Tharp last year by

trying to close the gordath against his orders.
Now there were two guardians, one from the
other side of the Wood. Crae had never met
the man, not even during the aftermath of
last year’s war, but he knew the man had
known Lady Sarita and had come back to
Aeritan with her and Arrim.
And so it would stand to reason that Tharp
disliked this man also and might be jealous of
him as well. So when they were taken, he
might have thought good riddance and coun
seled Tal not to look too hard. That was until
Crae came, and they learned they faced a
greater danger.
Crae cursed under his breath. If that were the
case, he lost all sympathy for the man. To be
ruled so by jealousy . . . A thought struck him.
If the new guardian knew Lady Sarita, had he
also known Lynna?
When he found him, he would be sure to ask.
He wasn’t sure he wanted to hear the answer,
though. He dismounted and grabbed the end
of the Trieve banner he had been carrying
and tore off another strip. He planted a small
stake in the ground with the strip tied around
it. He had been leaving the sign at intervals

for the men Tharp had promised would
follow. Now he trusted Lady Sarita more to
come through on that account. Crae stood
and swept his gaze over the trail one last time
before remounting. His vision sharpened.
Oh ho, he thought, looking down at another
set of hoofprints.
The Brytherners had another pursuer.
It was hard to tell how fresh were the
hoofprints on the hard, dry terrain, but they
held their shape and did not look too old or
too crusted out. They overlay the trail he had
been following. What game was Tharp
playing at? Or was this a wild card in the
game? Crae’s curiosity was aroused. Whoever
this man was, he was likely to be armed.
Whether he was an ally or an enemy was less
certain. Crae swung back into the saddle and
pushed Hero after the horseman.
If the old crow were here, he would ask him,
but even before Crae made his plea for help
at Red Gold Bridge he had not shown up for
his share of morning vesh. On the one hand,
Crae was relieved to be free of his cryptic and
sometimes annoying company. On the other,
he missed the old creature.

He kept Hero to a walk, the better to watch
for sign. The hoofprints became no fresher,
but he came across two piles of dried horse
manure and other scat. Crae pulled up
alongside one pile and frowned, then
identified it: dog shit.
A horseman and a dog, following a group of
around a dozen men. The whole thing grew
more curious. But he wasn’t more than a half
day ahead of Crae, if that. Crae made a
decision and put Hero into a hand gallop. His
horse snorted and bucked a little, then lit out,
running strongly. The crow would just have
to catch up as best he could, Crae thought.
Lynn topped a small rise at a walk, the trail
leading down toward grasslands. They headed
toward a narrow canyon as far as she could
tell, and the trail undulated through the
terrain, a pale scar etched out on the dry and
grassy hills. She and the horse were covered
with dust and sweat, and the dog flopped
down as soon as they reached the top of the
rise and halted. The setting sun was
unrelenting, and she was grateful for her
sunglasses. She lifted them and squinted, the

better to catch sight of any sign of Joe and
whoever he was with.
The land was empty except for herself and
her beasts. Earlier they had passed a few
homesteads, but they were tucked far off into
the distance, and she hadn’t stopped in,
preferring to make good time. And she didn’t
trust Brytherners. Even though her encounter
with Hare and his men last winter had been
her only experience with them, she didn’t
want to find out that ordinary Brytherners
were her enemy, too.
Something caught her eye, and she peered
again toward the hills in the distance and the
dark line of a canyon. A spark? It was hard to
tell. Perhaps a bit of metal had caught some
light. She looked hard, then remembered
when she had closed her eyes and found the
trail. Well okay, she thought. Lynn tried it
again, closing her eyes and waiting.
Red Bird snorted and shied, and Lynn
grabbed hard with her legs and for the saddle
horn. Her eyes flew open, and she looked
around wildly.
A man stood there, a skinny, scrawny man. A
crow. Lynn grabbed for the saddlebag where

she had stowed the gun, at the same time
backing Red Bird away from the danger.
“Stand back!” she ordered, keeping her voice
as firm as she could, cursing herself for
packing the gun so securely. Red Bird snorted
and half reared, stamping onto the ground.
The crow merely watched her, his cloak
covering a body as skinny as a rail. He carried
a walking stick but not a maul or a spear.
“What do you want?” she said, her heart
hammering.
He merely watched her. His eyes were dark,
narrow slits against the sun, and his skin was
browned and scarred. Except for the tattered
cloak he was naked. Finally, he nodded. He
pointed with his stick and she turned to
follow his direction. Straight toward the
canyon, where she thought she had seen a
flash of light.
She turned back, and he was gone. Lynn
stared. “What—” What the hell just
happened?
Hoofbeats caught her attention, coming
faintly over the distance. She saw the tiny
horseman in pursuit behind her. He galloped
up over one rise and disappeared as the trail

dipped down again.
Oh no. What do I do now? Brazen it out,
confront the rider, or make like a bat out of
hell?
He was maybe twenty minutes behind her, at
the most. She didn’t wait. She gathered the
reins, clucked to Red Bird, moved him into a
gallop. Retreat first, ask questions later, she
told herself as Red Bird took off, the dog
racing after them.
His quarry had seen him and broken into a
run. Crae bent low over Hero’s neck, urging
him on. Whoever the man was, he couldn’t let
him get away. Whether he was the vanguard
of his mysterious army, or whether he was an
enemy of it, Crae needed answers. Hero
answered his call for speed, giving him a
burst, foam flying off of his sweat-darkened
neck where it had been carved by the reins.
The trail narrowed between two ridges, and
the terrain began to rise. Red Bird faltered,
and Lynn pulled him up, keeping him to a
walk. The trees grew thick again, though
these were not the tall trees of Gordath Wood

but wind-blasted scrub. Red Bird breathed
hard, and she winced for him, but she had to
keep him walking. She ducked under low
branches as the trail wound down from the
ridge into another little woods. There. A
tangle of vines cradled a massive rockslide. It
jutted from the side of a cliff, and Lynn could
see that it was supported by smaller stones, as
well as the vines.
A cold shiver of recognition went through
her, even as a rattling of wind came to her,
along with a burst of static in her head. She
had found the mate to the morrim on the
hiking trails back in Connecticut.
The dog came trotting up, panting hard, and
she shushed him, as if the morrim could hear
and be woken. It’s already awake, she thought.
Awake along with the gordath that had
brought her here.
The last time she was this close to a live
morrim, she had jumped down a
mountainside to get away from it. She began
to back Red Bird away from the rock. The
dog alternately growled and barked, its tail
tucked between its legs. I know, I know, she
thought. She had to get out of there, but Red

Bird was spent, and the other horseman was
right on her heels. She didn’t want to lose
Joe’s trail, but she didn’t know how she was
going to get rid of this other guy.
The trees here were nothing like Gordath
Wood, but they would have to do for cover.
Lynn closed her eyes and tried to find the
trail again. The spark was faint here in the
woods, but she could see it. She turned to
center it on her eyes and found her direction.
Then she dismounted and led Red Bird and
the dog off into the woods to find cover.
They backed themselves into a little copse, far
enough away that she could no longer see the
morrim or the trail. Red Bird halted
willingly, and her heart pounded for him. He
needed to be walked cool, but they had no
time for that. Some horses could take such
abuse. Please be one of them, she prayed. As if
it now understood the need for quiet, the dog
flopped down to the ground, panting tongue
dripping. Lynn took the gun out of her
saddlebag, unwrapped it, and edged forward
as far as she dared, settling herself behind a
green bush of thin, whiplike branches. She
hoped it obscured her, but she knew she had

to sacrifice cover for the ability to see her
pursuer. She looked behind her; she could
barely see the dog and the horse, and they
were keeping still. Lynn thumbed the safety
on the gun, then left it on. If she needed to
shoot, it would take just a moment to flick it
off.
Now she heard trotting hoofbeats scraping up
the slot. She couldn’t see her pursuer yet, and
she took a deep breath, released it, breathed
again, trying to slow down her heartbeat. If
he went on ahead, she could reassess her
situation.
The horse slowed to a walk, and Lynn bit her
lip, keeping herself from bobbing up to take a
look. He had to be just on the trail right
where she turned off. If he saw Red Bird’s
hoofprints . . .
At the approach of a strange horse, Red Bird
lifted his head and neighed, his nostrils
quivering. The bell-like neigh rang in the
woods. Lynn turned to look at her horse,
aghast at his betrayal, then whipped around
again, thinking curses about horses and their
social needs, and what had she been thinking
not to anticipate that? She held both hands

on the gun, braced herself in her bushes, and
aimed at the way she had come.
Whoever he was, he was being cautious. She
heard a familiar sound, and it took her a
moment to identify it. Of course. A crossbow
was being loaded, its mechanism drawn back
and locked into place. She knew what one of
those could do; she had killed a man with one
herself. At close range it was as lethal as her
gun. So they were equally matched.
With grim determination, Lynn thumbed the
safety off. She could see him now, a patch of
dull-colored movement through the trees.
The neigh of the other horse still rang in his
head. Crae swung his leg over Hero’s saddle
and slid to the ground. He waited, taking his
time. He had the crossbow at the ready. He
had one shot, and then he would have to use
his sword. He didn’t like the terrain. He was
surrounded by woods and would have no
clear shot for his crossbow. The trees were
thick and squat, their branches a tangle
reaching toward the sky. He glanced at the
mess of rock and deadfall that cascaded down
the side of the ridge. It made him uneasy, as if

it could come loose and fall on him at any
second. He scanned it carefully to see if the
horseman was hiding in the underbrush, but
he could see no sign of him.
Now he had a ringing in his ears. He shook his
head impatiently and edged forward so he
didn’t have to stay near the rock. Anyway, it
looked as if his quarry had gone ahead. He led
Hero forward, looking for sign, but there was
little to be seen in this wood. There was a
trail, but no sign of hoofprints. He looked
around, trying to make sense out of the
woods, knowing he was taking too long. The
horseman would have him in his own sights if
he was armed as well.
High god, don’t let that dog be a bear hound or
boar-hound. He’d have to use a bolt on it to
stop it, and there would go his shot.
There. He saw a patch of chestnut. The
telltale horse was imperfectly hidden, far
back into the woods. And closer to the trail,
barely visible through a patch of cloudy
brush, clothing and a glint of something else,
something small and metallic. Crae pushed
back at Hero, seeking cover, his blood
surging. That was neither sword nor

crossbow. A knife—or did the man have one
of Bahard’s weapons?
Lynn watched from her vantage point in the
cloud of vines. She could see him hesitate. He
had moved his horse into cover, much as she
had, and waited, crossbow loaded and
cranked, ready to fire. She ducked down,
waiting, willing him to give up and go away.
She kept her breathing quiet, meditative. I’m
not here. I’m not here. She could barely make
him out through the woods.
He hesitated, still peering at her cover.
Then, bless his heart, as Mrs. Felz would say,
Red Bird neighed again. The man looked that
way and raised the crossbow. Lynn counted to
five and stood, her hands shaking a little.
“Hold it.”
He froze.
He remained obscured by the brush and the
trees, but from what she could tell, he was tall
and skinny, wearing standard Aeritan gear, a
long sword at his side, a long knife in the
other hilt. Hard to see anything else about
him. She kept the gun steady, supporting it
with two hands.

“Set down the crossbow,” she said.
After a moment, he did. Those things were on
a hair trigger, she knew. She breathed a sigh
of relief when it was placed gently on the
ground.
“Keep your hands away from your belt. Raise
them.”
He did.
“Now what?” he said. His voice sounded odd.
He sounded as if he were—smiling? Laughing
at her? She felt a wash of rage. What a jerk. I
have the gun, asshole. And wait. Why did he
sound . . . familiar?
“Why are you following me?” she said, her
voice short.
“I would follow you anywhere.”
She couldn’t say anything for a long moment.
Her breath came short. She thought it would
be best to put the safety back on the gun, and
so she did, and for good measure she set it on
the ground, too. When she could talk, it took
her a moment for her voice to work. Finally
she managed.
“Crae?”
It came out as a whisper, but he still heard.
He dropped his hands. She pushed through

the woods, the vines and brush scratching at
her and trying to hold her back, but she just
pushed harder until she was in his arms and
he folded them around her as if he would
never let her go.
She tried to keep from crying. “Crae,” she
sobbed once more. He smelled of sweat and
dust and leather and cloth, of the faint
metallic scent of sword and knife and chain.
She stayed in his arms, letting him hold her
tight, their breathing coming together.
When they kissed, it was like the secret kiss
they shared in Hare’s camp, slow and sensual.
Her knees weakened, and she tightened her
arms around his neck. He pressed his whole
length against her, and she remembered how
tall and lean he was, every inch of him hard
muscle, how good it felt when he wrapped his
arms around her the few times they had
shared an embrace. His hands were hard yet
gentle. She remembered when he had bound
her broken arm, taking as great care as he
could. She remembered how she would watch
him out of the corner of her eye on their long
journey across Aeritan, attracted to him
physically and liking him more and more,

even as she missed Joe. And falling in love,
finally, only to know that she would never see
him again.
He ended the kiss, and they drew apart. He
was so skinny. His beard had come in mostly
gray. His clothes hung off of him. His smile
was the same, though, the rare smile she
thought she would never see again.
“High god, I never thought I would see you
again,” he said. “What are you doing here?”
Lynn felt a bittersweet pang. Oh God, what
am I going to do? How can I tell him?
One crow drove her mom’s car to the
trailhead, and the other one sat in the back
with her parents, and Kate was crammed in
between the driver and Marthen. She
shivered with revulsion at his nearness, at the
smell of him. He didn’t try to touch her, but
they were pressed together, and she had to
take deep breaths now and again to keep
from throwing up. The ride was silent. Her
parents were so frightened they had given up.
They had lost hope. Kate wanted to tell them
that they would be all right, that Colar was
waiting for them, but she could only sit still

and quiet, hoping they wouldn’t do anything
foolish in their fear.
When they pulled in to the little graveled lot,
the crow turned off the car and got out,
leaving the door open and headlights on. The
car chimed softly. Only then did Marthen
touch her. He put his hand on the back of her
neck, immobilizing her. She heard her mother
gasp at the familiarity, and she swallowed.
Keep still, she told herself. Just keep still.
“Do not move until I say so.” His hand was
hard, gripping her as if she were an animal to
restrain. Then he moved his thumb to stroke
the nape of her neck, and she knew it was a
caress. Tears leaked from her eyes, and she
almost sobbed out loud.
No. Find anger. Anger. To her relief it came
blazing up. She kept still, all of her muscles
gathered, waiting for her moment.
The back door opened, and her parents were
hauled out, their backseat guard following
them. One of the crows came around and
opened Marthen’s door, and only then did he
release her. He slid out. “Come,” he said, and
she followed.
She didn’t look around for Colar. She kept

her eyes on Marthen.
“You have me,” she said. “Let them go now.”
“We aren’t at the gordath, and I know
Terrick is here somewhere. Call him out.”
“I told you, he’s at the barn. I drove back to
the house alone.”
“Call him, Kate Mossland, or your parents
die right here and now.”
There was a loud thunk, and the crow
guarding her parents dropped his rifle with a
hoarse curse, holding his eye. Another rock
came out of the woods, hitting the windshield
of the car with an enormous crash. The car’s
alarm began whooping, the sound ripping at
the peaceful woods.
Kate didn’t wait. She rammed herself into
Marthen, sending him off balance, and
grabbed his rifle. They wrestled for it as the
little parking lot exploded into chaos around
them. He was much taller and stronger than
she, but she held on to the gun with the grim
determination of a Jack Russell terrier.
A war cry came from the woods. No, two war
cries. She saw two bodies bursting out from
among the trees. Marthen tried to bring his
weapon to bear, but Kate screamed in his ear

and backed her body up against his. He
stretched his arms up over his head, and for a
second her toes left the ground as she kept her
hold on the stock. As he tried to bring them
both around so he could shoot, she found his
finger on the trigger, tilted the barrel up, and
squeezed, shooting into the trees. Marthen
roared with frustration. Kate jumped off her
toes and swung her foot back, her heel
catching the man in the shin. This time he
roared with pain.
She heard gunfire and her mother screaming.
Kate screamed herself, more in anger than in
fear. The scream cleared her lungs, gave her
strength. She let go with one hand and
grabbed the handgun in his belt, wrestling it
free.
Marthen finally pried her fingers off the rifle
and threw her from him. She landed hard on
the driveway, clutching the handgun. For a
moment the breath was driven from her
lungs. She couldn’t scream, couldn’t make a
sound, could only watch as Gary dove for the
loose rifle the crow had dropped, scooping it
up and turning it on the other crow. For a
moment the two homeless men faced off,

weapon to weapon, and then the crow
toppled, Colar’s sword protruding through
his belly.
One down, she thought. Two to go—and there
were her parents, restraining the other crow,
the one with blood running down his face.
She wanted to yell in triumph, but her lungs
still couldn’t get air.
Marthen turned now, training his weapon on
Colar. In the headlights the chain and leather
armor gave the boy bulk. He pulled the sword
free and held it up as if it could ward off
bullets.
“No!” Kate found her voice. She lifted the
handgun, aiming at Marthen, her hands
shaking.
“Sword down, boy,” Marthen called. “You
can’t win here.”
“I challenge you, General, in a fair fight.”
Oh, Colar, no. Even as she thought it,
Marthen said, “Fighting is not about fair,
boy.”
“Don’t call me boy.”
Marthen laughed. It sounded surprisingly
carefree. “Is that what this is about, Terrick?
You think you are the one for her? She has

the soldier’s god in her, boy, and she wants a
real warrior, not a child playing at soldier.”
Time slowed. Marthen raised his rifle, and
Kate shot him, the single crack reverberating
in the night air.
Marthen staggered back a step, his arm flying
up and blood spraying, as the rifle fell from
his hands. He grabbed his arm, panting
hoarsely. His eyes were wild but also, for the
first time, uncertain. She stepped forward,
ready to fire again.
“Kate, no!” her mother screamed, and she
hesitated long enough for Gary to lunge for
the fallen rifle, blocking her shot.
It was all Marthen needed.
The funny thing was, she knew what Marthen
was going to do even before Gary got within
reach. She could see it in his eyes and the way
he held his body. She wanted to shoot him
again, to kill him this time, but Gary was in
the way, one rifle in hand, bending to pick up
the other one. With a quick movement,
Marthen kicked him backward, grabbed the
rifle from him, and shot at close range. Gary
cried out and fell to the ground with a grunt.
“No!” Kate pulled the trigger, but she did

something wrong, and the gun didn’t fire.
Marthen sprayed gunfire over them, and
everyone dropped.
He reached down and grabbed her by the
arm, hauling her to her feet. She struggled,
but he held the rifle close to her head, the
barrel burning against her hair, and his arm
was around her throat, so she couldn’t
breathe again. Her hand loosened, and the
useless handgun fell to the ground.
“Quiet,” he said, and his voice had gone soft
with rage. Somehow, everyone in the parking
lot heard. The only sound was harsh
breathing and Gary’s dying cries. “Weapons
down, or she dies.”
No, Kate tried to say, but she couldn’t
breathe. Her vision was starting to fade.
Marthen dragged the both of them back into
the woods, and she could hold on no longer.
She let the darkness take her.
As soon as Marthen and Kate disappeared,
Colar picked up his sword, sheathing it and
heading toward the woods after them. Allegra
was the fastest, but he already knew he would
need to take one of the sturdier horses. Then

he heard a gunshot from the woods and the
scream of a horse.
Soldier’s god. There was the sound of crashing
hoofbeats, and his heart sank. Marthen had
taken two of the horses, it sounded like, and
killed the third. He could see it all in his
mind’s eye. Put them both up on one, and
lead another for when Kate came to.
“Oh God, oh God,” Mrs. Mossland
stammered, and he wondered for the first
time which one she meant here. Her eyes and
hair were wild, but she knelt by Gary and
held his hand, checking his pulse. “Where are
the police? They have to find her!” Her voice
rose into a scream, but even in the
background they could hear the sound of
approaching sirens. “Oh thank God,” she
breathed.
“The police can’t find her,” he said. “But I
will.”
He would be on foot, but he could track, and
Marthen would have to ride carefully to avoid
laming the horses. And he could not help but
leave plenty of sign.
“Where is he taking her?” Kate’s mom
whispered.

“Back through the gordath. But I won’t let
him. I’ll stop him.”
Mr. Mossland said, “I’ll go out to the road
and flag them down. Cole, wait here. Tell the
police where they’ve gone. Don’t go after
them by yourself.” He limped off to the
driveway entrance.
Mrs. Mossland looked at Colar. “What
happens if he takes her through?” Her voice
was very quiet.
“I’ll follow him.” He was itching to get
moving, eager to get on the track.
“Can you bring her back?”
“I don’t know if I’ll be able to.” He said it as
honestly as he could. “I’ll try.”
She nodded. “Go. Bring her back if you can,
but if you can’t—just stop him.”
He nodded. “I will. I promise.” He leaned
forward and gave her a quick kiss on the
cheek, a guerdon of son to mother. He would
have knelt, but she wouldn’t have understood,
and they didn’t have time. “If I can’t bring
her back, I will take her to my parents, and
they will never let her forget who she is and
who her people are.”
As the emergency vehicles turned in to the

little parking lot, their lights strobing and
their sirens blaring, Colar ran off into the
woods.
The horse on the ground was poor Cinnamon,
blood pouring like black ink from across his
neck. Colar ran past him up the rocky hill.
Behind him he could hear the chaos of the
rescue, and then the sounds were lost in the
deep woods. Soon all he could hear was his
own breathing as he ran as hard as he could
up the trail toward home.
Sixteen
Crae waited with Hero and watched Lynn as
she fetched her horse and dog, leading them
back out onto the trail. She was as thin as he
remembered, the angles of her face pure and
sharp. Her hair was pulled back into a braid,
and she wore a strange billed cap that shaded
her face and dark spectacles unlike anything
he had ever seen. He didn’t like not being able
to see her eyes. All he could make out of her
was her mouth, her lips chapped and broken
from lack of water, and the tip of her nose,
reddened from the sun. The horse was a
sturdy chestnut, not nearly as tall as the big

gray she had ridden the last time, and her
saddle was tied down with supplies and a
bedroll. This time she had come prepared for
her journey through the gordath, including
the weapon. She checked it once more and put
it in the small saddlebag.
She tightened the horse’s girth with the same
competency he remembered and flipped the
split reins over the horse’s neck. She mounted
with fluid ease and glanced at him.
“I was worried that you might have died.
Those soldiers on the road that night—I
should have stayed and helped.”
“It was better that you fled. It would have all
been for naught, had you been captured.”
And he would not have been able to fight as
well if she had stayed and he’d had to protect
her.
She nodded. “So what happened?”
He shrugged. What could he tell her? “We
fought. Stavin was cut down, and then there
was a great earthshaking from the gordath,
and the rest fled.”
“Cut down?” Her voice failed her as she saw
from the expression on his face the worst
news. “Oh, Crae. I am so sorry. He was your

friend. He was a good man.”
“Yes,” he said roughly. “And before he died,
he gave me his chain of command and bade
me take care of Jessamy and Tevani. I was
made lord of Trieve upon his death. Jessamy
and I are married.”
And then I killed her brother, and so it is truly a
marriage in name only. He didn’t say any of
that. She was thunderstruck, as he meant her
to be. Hoped she would be. “Oh,” she said at
last. “I—congratulations.” She turned away.
“Oh God. I shouldn’t have kissed you. I’m
sorry.”
“All our kisses end in sorrow,” he said,
bitterness lacing his words.
She looked back at him, and even with her
eyes covered, he could see she was crying.
“Crae, I never wanted to hurt you. I never
meant to—let myself—” She broke off.
“Was it true, when you said you loved me?”
He meant when he had kissed her on the
snowy road outside Red Gold Bridge and
watched her ride up the ridge into the woods.
She bit her lip and then said, “Yes.”
High god, why wouldn’t she let him see her
eyes? “Uncover your eyes,” he said, furious.

He startled her. Her mouth dropped. For a
moment she waited, chin up, and then she
took off her spectacles and met his gaze.
“Yes,” she said again. “I meant it. I still do.”
Her eyes were as he remembered, dark and
direct. She did not look sidelong the way an
Aeritan woman would but met him head-on.
We would have done well together. He let
himself think how it could have been, the two
of them. He would not be a lord, but would be
a captain still, and she his wife, and they
would have lived in Red Gold Bridge or at
any House that would have had them.
“Is that why you returned?” He kept his voice
rough to hide his emotion. If she had come
back to him, what would he do? But he
needed to know, even though it would hurt
both of them to have to say it and for him to
have to turn her away.
She shook her head the tiniest bit. “I’m
sorry,” she said, and her voice was quiet. “The
gordath had opened, and it looked like the
guardians were in trouble. So I crossed,
because I needed to try to help.”
It stung, and he welcomed it because he knew
he had deserved that, just for asking. “I

know,” he said. “I was just at Red Gold
Bridge; they told me the guardians were
kidnapped by Brytherners.”
“Oh, I knew something bad had happened. I
just didn’t know what.”
He frowned. “What news had you gotten of
their trouble?”
“The dog.” She nodded down at the thin
mongrel, which wagged happily under their
attention. “She showed up at the farm with a
bit of Joe’s shirt tied around her collar. I
knew then he was in trouble. I didn’t think—I
didn’t know what it was. But if the gordath
was open, then I knew it was bad.”
Joe, the other guardian. Crae recognized the
name from the one she had whispered
drowsily a year ago, under the influence of a
pain draught for her broken arm and on the
verge of sleep. She had come back, braved the
gordath, for him. She frowned, looking at
him.
“Crae, I don’t understand. If you are Lord of
Trieve now, what are you doing on the
outskirts of Red Gold Bridge looking for
kidnapped guardians?”
Well, she was being led about by a dog, and

he by a crow. Crae stopped worrying about
being believed. “A crow made me a
prophecy,” he said. “He told me that Aeritan
was in great danger from Brythern and
beyond. And so he led me here.”
She nodded. “Really skinny, wearing nothing
but a tattered cloak?” At his look of
astonishment, she said, “Yeah, he pointed me
this way, too. He didn’t say anything about a
prophecy. He didn’t say anything, actually.”
“You saw him? He was here?” And he hasn’t
shown himself to me in days. Perhaps some of
his annoyance showed in his expression,
because she looked a little puzzled.
“It must be another gordath,” she said. “The
Brytherners must have kidnapped the
guardians because they want to control a
gordath. And something’s coming through it .
. .” Her voice trailed off.
Still annoyed, he said, “Well, it’s good to
know there’s truth to his words, I suppose.”
She grinned. “That’s something,” she agreed,
and just like that, they were comrades again,
as they had been last year. He had missed her
sudden smiles. “There’s something else, too,”
she added. “A—spark. I can see it when I

close my eyes. It’s like a line leading me.”
He hadn’t seen any spark, but the sign was
the clearest he’d ever tracked, and he
wondered if that were somehow akin to her
spark. “I’ve just been tracking. You, mostly,”
he added wryly. She gave a reluctant smile
back.
“Okay, then,” she said. “Let’s go.” She
whistled for her dog, and the animal took
point. Crae fell in behind her, watching her
ride. She rode as elegantly as always, one
hand down by her side and her body moving
fluidly to the horse’s flat-footed walk. It was
as if she were the daughter of the horse god.
He knew that despite what she had said, if he
kissed her again, she would kiss him back.
They might even lie together, even though he
would be breaking his vow to Jessamy, and
Lynna would be breaking her handfasting to
her guardian. They were neither of them free,
and somehow that made them both free.
And then what? He had another glimpse of
that other life, this time fleeing with Lynna,
catching a river ship and sailing out for other
countries, but their love would sink under
their shame and guilt. They would cling to

each other till their love dried up, and finally
part in bitterness and rue. Cruel is the grass
god’s daughter, he thought, to give love where
it could not be kept.
“He’s going to have us open it for good
today,” Joe said, bending down to pull on his
boots. They had been woken out of their light
sleep a few minutes earlier. After quizzing
them on the state of the gordath, Hare
ordered them to be given a good breakfast, as
if that would somehow help. Joe wondered if
it weren’t more like a condemned man’s last
meal.
Arrim laced up his thick and awkward boots,
hiding his words, as Joe had, by bending
down. “I think you’re right, Guardian. Will
you follow my lead?”
He didn’t have much choice. He was out of
ideas. He had bought them time and a relief
from the physical abuse, but now they had to
put up or shut up. If Hare wanted them to
open the gordath, there was little they could
do to stop it.
“What do you have in mind?” Joe said.
“Guardians!” Hare called to them.

Joe glanced at Arrim, who stood slowly.
Arrim gave him a look that said, Follow me.
He got up and let Arrim lead them over to
Hare.
“Today’s the day that you open the gordath
and hold it open. You’ve quieted it as you
said, and you’ve gotten it under control. Now
it’s time to reopen it.” Hare paused, cocking
his head to look at them. He had his hands
behind his back, and he looked relaxed, as if
he were addressing friends, but his men
ranged themselves behind them. “I let you
rest and restore yourselves, because you
convinced me that you needed all your
strength. But you are still captives, and you
are still under my control. Remember, if you
can’t—or won’t—control the gordath, you
are useless to me. You may pray to your gods,
forest or otherwise, that you continue to be
useful.”
Joe nodded judiciously. “Nice speech. You
sure do know how to keep morale up.”
Hare rolled his eyes and made a face. “Open
it. Keep it open.”
They were left to stand apart in the clearing,
the others moving back. Joe heard a few

swords scrape out of their scabbards and
someone load a crossbow. Yeah, they weren’t
going to be able to get out of this one.
“So what was your plan?” he said under his
breath to Arrim.
“Do as he says, and fail if we must,” Arrim
said. “But if it looks as if the gordath is out of
control, then we let it rampage. With luck it
will kill Hare and his schemes as well.”
Joe fought for control of his voice. “Jesus,
Arrim,” he managed finally. “It’ll kill us, too.
And if it stays open, and we’re dead, who’s
going to close it?”
Arrim grinned, but it didn’t look like he was
laughing. “Who wants to live forever?”
Me. “Arrim, don’t do this,” he said through
gritted teeth.
“Guardians,” Hare said in a warning voice. “I
grow impatient.”
So here it was. Joe would have to control the
gordath on his own, and at a certain point
Arrim would be trying to goose it wide open.
“Don’t do this,” he said again. “Don’t try to
push it out of control.”
“You said you would follow my lead.”
“That was before I found out you were

crazy!”
“Guardians!” Hare said again.
The crack of a gunshot sang out through the
woods.
Joe threw himself to the ground. Hare’s lost it.
He’s finally lost it, and he’s shooting at us.
The Brythern men exploded into shouting
chaos. He could hear the twang of crossbow
shots, Hare shouting orders to get into
position. Joe rolled behind a tree and
flattened himself, trying to make sense of
everything. The shot had come from the
woods. Was it the cavalry come at last? Had
Captain Tal finally found them?
The woods quieted. He took a risk and peeked
out. Men had found cover, and the clearing
was mostly empty.
Hare shouted, “Show yourself! Who are
you?”
“Back off, Brytherners, or the next one goes
through your lord,” a strange voice shouted
from the woods.
Hare looked puzzled. “I know your voice,
Aeritan,” he said at last. “I know you. Name
yourself.”
“It doesn’t matter, Brythern lord. Throw

down your weapons, or we’ll pick you off one
by one.”
Joe could see Brythern soldiers fading back
into the woods toward the voice. The forest
might be sparse here, but cover wasn’t
completely thin. He hoped his rescuer had
plenty of company and a lot more guns.
Just then, to his dismay, he felt a familiar
sensation, a kind of crawling inside his brain.
No no no. The gordath was opening, only he
hadn’t had anything to do with it. He looked
around for Arrim. The guardian had found
another tree and had pressed himself behind
it, but his eyes were open and his hands were
outstretched. He was opening the gordath. Oh
shit, Arrim, no. The gordath shivered inside
Joe, humming along to his heartbeat and the
air that bellowed in his lungs. It pulsed inside
his head and opened up in a flare of blinding
light.
Marthen had trouble holding on to the girl.
She wasn’t completely unconscious, but she
couldn’t hold herself upright. He had her
snugged in front of him, her hands lashed to
the D rings on the front of the saddle, and he

kept her secured by his sound arm for good
measure. His other hand, blood dripping
down from the shoulder wound where she
had winged him, held the reins. They kept
slipping from his bloody fingers. The rifle was
slung across his back.
He had them up on the back of the stolid bay
gelding, the flighty mare led by the rein. She
was a bitch. She bucked and squealed and
pulled against the rein, and he wished bitterly
he had shot the mare and kept the other
gelding, but it was too late now. She finally
settled down as he kept them at a fast trot up
the hill, past the muttering rock that hulked
in the darkness, and down toward the
gordath that he knew was there.
Kate began to recover, thrashing, but she
couldn’t loosen her bonds. He tightened his
grip. If she kept struggling she could bring
down the horse.
“Give me any more trouble, and I will throttle
you again,” he said in her ear. To emphasize
his threat, he brought up his arm around her
throat, and instinctively she began to fight it,
but she managed to calm herself, sobbing a
little. He released her only slightly. He

thought she might be exhausted and cowed,
finally, and felt a pinprick of relief. It was
better this way. Soldier’s god knew, he didn’t
have time for her to fight him all the way to
Aeritan.
“When we cross the gordath, you may ride
alone,” he said, a promise to lift her spirits.
They were almost through. His men should be
waiting for him at the entrance. It was a small
enough army, but it was all he needed to take
down the Council.
He could feel it now, the strange humming in
his heart and head that signified the opening.
The ground trembled a little, and the gelding
snorted and shied, and the mare squealed. He
kicked the horse harder.
He could see flashlights up ahead, the clear
cold burning torches people used here. Better
than fire, they gave off a more efficient light,
and they could be extinguished in an instant.
Marthen trotted into camp and pulled up the
horses as his men surrounded him, armed
with the weapons from the crate.
“It’s the boss!” someone called out. They kept
their flashlights low, but he could see their
expressions as they took in the horses and the

girl.
“Follow me,” he said. “Look sharp. Fire on
any pursuers.”
“Wait—what about Chris and Sonny?”
someone asked.
For a second his world reeled. These men
weren’t crows. They had names; they had
lives. Yes, they were destitute, but not mad.
This is not Aeritan. They are not crows. Maybe
it was the pain from his wound, but
Marthen’s head cleared for the first time in
months. What was he doing, leading these
men, stealing this girl? He had never been a
good man, but this was folly.
Stop this, he thought, and he opened his
mouth to dismiss them all. Then he heard
faint laughter and shook his head to clear it.
When he looked at them again, they were still
watching him, their expressions puzzled and
alarmed. The feeling of clarity faded as if it
had never been.
“They are dead,” he said, and his voice was
harsh. “Let’s go.”
He had suffered momentary madness, he told
himself, as he pushed the horses forward.
That’s all it had been.

The ground trembled underneath them, and
then shook hard. Then light flared up around
them and he, the girl, and his men burst
through into daylight.
Joe peered through the black-limned opening
that hung in front of them, its edges bleeding
into the reality of the woods. The blackness
focused, and he could see another forest, in
darkness now, full of men on the other side.
For a moment he thought he looked into a
mirror, but these men were not Brythern
soldiers. They were dressed like him, and they
carried some serious weaponry, and behind
them came two horses and one, no two, riders.
He was conscious of Hare and his men falling
back.
The earth shook again, and he stumbled, and
at his loss of balance the gordath jerked
wider.
The men started coming through. Hare didn’t
wait. “Fire!” he shouted, and the
crossbowmen set to work, firing their
crossbows at this new army, who fired back,
the gunshots rolling over the crossbows.
Hare’s men fell, and the army burst through.

The opening shuddered, and the gordath
cranked wider. Then another earthquake hit
the forest, and Joe lost his balance. The hole
was growing, eating at the edges of the world.
This was not the portal that gently gathered
in wayward travelers. This was the gordath
that he remembered from last winter. This
gordath was full-bore, cutting open a direct
hole between worlds. The newcomers came
through just in time, Joe thought dazedly. Sure
enough, one of Hare’s soldiers screamed as he
was caught in it, and he toppled in. Joe
struggled for control, but the gordath had
taken over his heart and his breathing now,
speeding them up until he knew he was going
to pass out. They were done for. Arrim’s plan
to take everyone out was going to work, and
there would be another cataclysm for
Brythern’s history.
His vision turned black, and he fell to his
knees. Shhh, he could hear his abuela say in
his head. Shhh, go to sleep, little Joe, go to
sleep, let yourself sleep. He could hear her
little breathy lullaby and the Spanish words
he had never bothered to learn. His breathing
slowed, and his heartbeat slowed, and he

knew he couldn’t fight it anymore. Okay,
grandma, he thought. Okay. As he slackened
his grip both on the gordath and on
consciousness, the last thing he thought was
that the gordath had loosened its grip on him.
From her vantage point above the clearing,
Lynn watched Joe fall. The gordath hung
over him, a growing menace. He would be
consumed like the man who had fallen into
the emptiness. She began to slide down the
ridge toward him. Crae yanked her back by
the back of her shirt.
“No!” he shouted. She fought him, furious,
but he wouldn’t let her go.
“I’m not letting him die.”
“What good can you do him if you get pulled
in with him?” Crae went back up to the
horses, scrambling for balance as the earth
shook, and grabbed his pack. He dumped out
his supplies, grabbing the thin rope he used to
hobble his horse at night. He tied one end to a
tree and tugged it, testing its strength. It held.
“All right,” he said. He braced himself. “I’ll
get him. You cover me.”
She tightened her grip on the handgun and

watched him slide down the rope toward Joe.
The entire clearing was chaos. Two men had
fallen in the gordath, or been pulled in, and
the Brytherners had scattered but were
regrouping. There was a horseman, struggling
to control two mounts and hold on to
someone riding double in front of him.
Hey. That’s Allegra. And my Hotshot.
Gunfire came through the gordath, and the
Brytherners that had been firing their
crossbows dove for cover. Hare caught sight
of Crae’s rescue attempt and brought up his
gun, but Lynn aimed, took a deep breath, and
fired. The shot went wide, but it got their
attention. Hare stumbled back, ducking for a
tree trunk.
She made herself calm down and aim for
Hare’s shoulder and side, all she could see of
him through the trees. She prepared to
squeeze the trigger when an arm came around
her neck, hauling her backward. Lynn’s
scream was choked off, and she struggled
against her attacker. The gun was plucked
from her hand, and an unwelcome voice said
in her ear,
“Hey, babe. Long time no see.”

Mark.
Seventeen
Colar came upon the gordath just as Marthen
and his men disappeared into it. He ran
harder and dove through after them,
disoriented by the rush of daylight he
suddenly dropped into.
He landed in the middle of a war. Marthen’s
men faced off against a squad of Brytherners.
Marthen was off to the side, holding Kate in
the saddle in front of him. She jerked her
hands, but she was tied to the saddle. Hotshot
reared and backed up, and Allegra just
bucked wildly at the end of her reins.
Colar ducked behind some brush. It was hard
to make sense of everything, what with the
ground shaking and the empty hole of the
gordath behind him growing and contracting
like a bellows, its edges wavering. It made him
dizzy to look back at it. He grimaced, drew his
sword, and wished he had a crossbow.
Marthen would be an easy shot from behind.
He watched as a man fell into the gordath
and disappeared, his scream choked off.
Colar felt a little sick. He had just come

through the portal, but he didn’t think
anyone would be getting back that way. If you
tried to go through the gordath now, it didn’t
look as if you would get anywhere.
First things first, he told himself. He had to get
Kate away from Marthen.
The Brytherners had received the worst of the
attack, but they had taken cover and were
regrouping under their orders. Whoever their
officer was, he knew what he was about.
Colar admired the way they regathered,
taking careful shots and maintaining their
cover. Marthen’s ragtag handful of men were
disoriented from their passage through the
gordath. Here in the daylight they were not
fearsome crows, despite their rifles. They
were going to be easy targets for a disciplined
fighting force.
“Retreat!” Marthen shouted, but they didn’t
know where to go. Two made to go back
through the gordath but were immediately
swallowed up. The men’s screams were cut
off as if they had never existed at all, and a
shiver ran down Colar’s spine.
The Brytherners laid down another rain of
crossbow fire, and more men fell.

Colar watched the general cut his losses. He
cuffed Kate hard to keep her from struggling,
dropped Allegra’s rein, leaving the mare
behind, and kicked Hotshot into a gallop,
away from the furious gun battle.
“Lower your sword!” someone shouted. He
looked up at a Brythern soldier, who had him
covered with a crossbow.
Mark hauled Lynn down into the clearing,
keeping her arm pushed up behind her back.
She bit back her pain, but she couldn’t
control her despair. We lost, she thought. If
the gordath doesn’t kill us all, Mark and Hare
will.
The gordath hung before them, an eerie sight,
and the earth shook violently. Joe and the
other guardian lay unmoving, and dead men
and wounded men were scattered all around.
“Take them,” Hare ordered, and the rest of
his men went about making prisoners of the
confused homeless men, taking up their
weapons and binding their hands. They had
taken Crae, too, and surrounded him, several
swords at his throat. They tried to disarm
Colar, but the boy resisted.

“Don’t try it, boy,” Hare said. “I will show no
mercy.”
“Brythern lord, I mean no trouble to you,”
Colar said, still holding his sword, practically
begging. Lynn’s heart sank. If he was here,
where was Kate? “You must let me go. My
friend is in terrible danger—”
“Enough,” Hare said.
“There’s no time!”
Hare held up a hand, fury in his expression.
He almost brought up his gun, then held
himself back. “Your mission doesn’t concern
me right now. Be silent, or you will not leave
this clearing.” He turned to Lynn and Crae,
shaking his head. “You two,” Hare said in
disgust. He looked down at Joe. “Is he dead?”
he asked. Mark, still holding on to Lynn,
dragged her forward and planted a solid kick
in Joe’s side. Lynn muffled a scream as Joe
moved sluggishly and groaned.
“Nope, guess not,” Mark said cheerfully.
As if the gordath sensed the abuse, the woods
shook harder, and the hole in the air
expanded again.
Lynn kept herself from telling him to stop; it
would only egg him on. One of the Brythern

guards dragged the other guardian forward.
She recognized him. He was the one who had
stolen her horse last winter in a mad bid to
close the gordath. He looked past her, no
equal spark of recognition in him.
“Good,” Hare said. “Now, we get
somewhere.” He nodded at Mark. “So, you
can go home now, go to your world, and begin
the trade we talked about.” He gestured at the
hole between the worlds.
Mark’s smugness turned to panic.
“Wait—what? No! I didn’t go through the
gordath when it looked like that! Are you
crazy? You saw what it did to Drav and those
other guys!”
Hare looked impatient. “It’s open. They are
holding it open. What more do you want?”
“No! I’m telling you, that’s not how it’s
supposed to work. It’s supposed to be invisible
. Not—not this black shit.”
Hare turned on Arrim. “You! Is this how the
gordath works?”
Arrim giggled. “Yes, Lord Hare. First
earthshakings, then a hole that eats between
the worlds, then death and destruction.
Exactly how it’s supposed to work. After

you.”
Hare slapped him with all his force. His
studded glove drew blood as Arrim’s head
snapped back. Then he grabbed Lynn and
began to shove her forward.
“You will go through,” he said through
gritted teeth. “You misbegotten bitch, if the
gordath swallows you alive, so be it. I never
want to see you again.”
Lynn fought back, her heels sliding in the
dirt, as he pushed her toward the hole
between worlds. She could smell it now, a
smell of death and decay, and she could hear
it call to her with whispered cries. She
grabbed for Hare’s arms to keep herself from
being pushed in. He struck at her to make her
lose her grip, but she clung, digging in her
fingers so that they grabbed at his shirt,
armor, and skin. If I’m going in, so are you.
Out of the corner of her eye she could see
Crae struggling, Brythern guards pulling him
back.
“Lynna!”
She grabbed at the gun at Hare’s belt, and he
knew what she was going for and redoubled
his efforts to push her in. He was strong, but

she was desperate. They fought over the gun,
and she twisted it around so that it was aimed
at his belly.
His eyes widened as she pulled the trigger, the
muzzle jammed above his belt, the shot loud
between the two of them.
Hare tumbled backward, holding his belly, a
bewildered look in his eyes. He tried to keep
his hold on her, but his arms released. Lynn
pushed herself out of his deadly embrace, and
Hare kept going, falling into the gordath, and
was swallowed in the darkness.
Lynn took in air, gasping and sobbing, and
stumbled back, even as the ground shook
harder and the gordath expanded. The sound
of hoofbeats and war cries made her turn
around.
It was Red Gold Bridge. She saw Dungiven in
full battle armor, ridden by Lord Tharp. The
big horse rolled steadily forward in a
controlled canter, his neck arched and his
nostrils bright red. He was followed by
another fifty or so horses and soldiers.
The cavalry had arrived.
The pain of his broken ribs made it hard to

breathe, let alone move, so Joe just lay there
while the fighting raged around him. Besides,
he figured he had learned a few things about
the gordath, and that’s what he could do to
help.
For one thing, control was overrated.
For another, he had been wrong all the time.
It wasn’t that the gordath wanted to be open.
It just wanted to be left alone. He figured he
could get behind that. And so he quieted it the
only way he knew how, by quieting himself.
Maybe he had his mother’s mother to thank
for that. It was almost as if he could feel her
cool, rough hand against his forehead, the
way she touched him when he was sick as a
kid. He couldn’t remember all the words, so
he sang what he could remember and hoped
that it would do the trick.
A la nanita nana, nanita ea, nanita ea,
A la nanita nana, nanita ea.
“Lord Tharp,” Crae said, bowing lord to lord.
He looked up at the man, sitting the great
gray horse. “It is very good to see you.”
It was. Tharp grinned in a rare good humor.
The easy fight had put him in a good mood.
“Your crow didn’t lie, then,” he said, resting

his arms on the saddlebow as he looked
around with great satisfaction. The big horse
pawed and snorted, froth tossing from his bit.
There were the Brytherners, many dead, the
rest being bound by his men, including Lord
Bahard. There were a few remaining crows as
well, but the few survivors were thoroughly
cowed.
“Lord Tharp,” said the boy. Crae had
recognized him finally, the young Terrick. He
wore blue trousers, the same as Lady Sarita’s,
Lynn’s, even the guardian’s, but the rest of
his clothes and armor were Aeritan. The boy
bowed, but he shifted his weight anxiously.
“Sir, I am Colar of Terrick. My friend has
been carried off by General Marthen, who
has gone crow, sir, and I followed them from
her world back here, and I fear greatly for
her life, and, sir, if I could have your men, I
could bring him down, because I fear for her,
and I promised her mother and father I
would save her.”
Tharp looked down at the boy. “I don’t give
out my army lightly, Terrick,” he growled.
“Especially to a House that has stood against
me in the past.”

“Oh, for the love of the high god, Eyvig,” said
Lady Sarita, taking off her helm and pushing
her horse up next to him. She was a beautiful
warrior in her armor, a long sword draping
down her side.
The silence in the clearing rang like a bell.
She leaned down to Colar. “Is he armed with
Bahard’s weapons?”
The boy nodded. “Yes, my lady. And he has at
least a half hour’s head start.”
“All right. We can give you a dozen riders.
Are you horsed?”
Colar cast around, and brought over the
light-boned dark bay mare. He gathered the
reins and leaped into the saddle. Lady Sarita
looked at the horse, and her mouth dropped.
And she laughed out loud.
War agrees with them, Crae thought, shaking
his head. Perhaps their marriage will
strengthen after all, although all the gods pity
poor Aeritan if this was how they sought
happiness. “I’ll go with the boy, my lady. My
business is with the general.” If the crow was
to be believed, and as Tharp had pointed out,
he had been proved right so far, the general
was his mad crow. Best to stop him now.

“Good,” Tharp said. “We’ll clean up here.”
He glared at Lord Bahard. The man fought
his bonds halfheartedly.
“Look, Tharp, the guardians will bring the
gordath under control again,” the man
wheedled. “Just let me go home, and we can
forget all about this.”
“Unfortunately for you, I have a long
memory,” Tharp said.
“As do I,” put in Lady Sarita. “I think it’s
better for both worlds to keep you where you
can do no more mischief.” She looked over at
the guardians and at Lynn. “I think it’s time
to close this once more, and please, keep it
closed. Can you do that, Joe? Arrim?”
“Yeah,” said the strange guardian. He
struggled to sit up, and Lynn helped support
him. “Yeah, we can do that.”
Joe looked at the hole. It was no longer
gaping, but gathering in on itself. He could
feel it again, the control he and Arrim needed
to keep it open just long enough for them to
go through, though he didn’t know how long
his strength would hold out.
“You know, I figured some things out,” he

said. A lot of things actually, but this one was
the most important.
Lynn looked at him quizzically.
“I can be a guardian on our side, too. Arrim
can handle Aeritan, and I’ll take New York.”
“I know.”
Huh. “You know?”
She smiled. “I met a whole bunch of
guardians back home. You’ll have to teach
them what to do, but I don’t think we’ll have
a problem with the gordath anymore.”
He didn’t know what to say. In the end, he
just said, “Help me up.”
Arrim hobbled over, and Joe took stock of
him. He was in bad shape, as bad as Joe felt,
covered with blood and dirt. Always shaggy,
the man looked like a strange forest animal.
Which, Joe reflected, he kind of was. Arrim
was never happier than when he was
deadheading through Gordath Wood. Me, I’m
a different kind of guardian.
“Hey,” Joe said. “I’m going to go back and
take care of the gordath from the other side.
We’ll still be working together. We just won’t
be able to see each other.” They’d each know
the other was there, though. Even separated

by the gordath, Arrim would still be his
partner. His mentor.
Arrim nodded. “What will I tell your
Corinna?” he managed, and Joe shook his
head. I think he was really hoping we’d get
together.
“Tell her I said you two will make a great
couple.”
Lynn gave him a look, but she said, “Let me
get my horse, and then we can go home.”
There was just one loose end. “Mrs. Hunt!”
he called out.
Lady Sarita turned to look at him, as did
everyone else. He jerked his head at Mark.
“Man’s got something he can’t use here, and
we sure could to keep Hunter’s Chase safe
and sound.”
Mark protested furiously, but it made no
difference. The stacks of cash he had stowed
in his pack were passed over to Joe, who
couldn’t help but grin.
“Thanks, buddy.”
Mark lunged at him, cursing, but the dog
came at him, snarling and barking, and he
dropped back.
“Screw you, Felz,” he muttered, and Joe just

turned his back. He had to trust to Red Gold
Bridge to keep Mark under lock and key, but
the man was like a bad penny. He’d keep
turning up. We’ll just have to keep the damn
thing closed, he thought.
Lady Sarita looked over at Lynn, who had
brought up a sturdy chestnut horse wearing a
western saddle. Another surprise, Joe
thought. “I trust you found the rest?” she
asked, her voice reproving.
“I did. Thank you. It’s safe and sound.”
“Good. It was not easy to reclaim my own
dowry, but I kept an eye on Garson, and he
led me to it.” She smiled, and it was not a
pleasant expression. “I think he knew, but he
couldn’t go to the police. I enjoyed that.”
I bet you did, Joe thought.
Lynn nodded. “Mrs. Hunt, it’s good to see
you again, and Dungiven.” The big stallion
tossed his head and pawed the ground
restively.
The ground jerked and rumbled, and brought
them all back.
“Right,” Lord Tharp said, testy once more.
“Enough pleas antries. Close that thing, and
let’s go home.”

Joe looked at Arrim. “You know what we
need to do, right?”
The man nodded again. “It will work. I can
feel it.”
Lynn brought over the chestnut horse, and
Joe smiled. “You know I can’t ride.”
She gave him a smile back. “That’s okay. I’ll
steer.” The horse snorted and sidestepped as
she held the stirrup for him. “Steady, Red
Bird, steady.”
“Red Bird,” Joe said. “Sure is a Texas name
for a horse.”
“Yeah, I know. Put your foot in the stirrup,
there, and I’ll give you a boost. Your mom
named him.”
“Wait—what? My mom what?”
Crae mounted Hero and prepared to ride out
with Colar of Terrick and the dozen scouts
loaned by Red Gold Bridge. They were hard
warriors all, and they each picked up one of
the weapons brought through the gordath.
Marthen would not prevail. He was just one
man, although he was a crow, and crows were
just men, after all.
He looked over at Lynn, busying herself with

the guardian and the horse, preparing to
cross over to her world one last time. The
guardian caught his eye, and for a moment
the two men faced each other across the
clearing. Crae knew he was figuring things
out. Assessing him. The man’s face went
hard. Lynna looked from him to Crae.
The gordath rumbled again, and everyone
jerked, almost falling off their feet. The
horses scrambled backward.
“Ride out!” young Terrick called out, and
they fell in behind him. Crae cast one look
backward, and then she and the guardian
were gone.
Marthen heard the thunder of hoofbeats
chasing them. The gelding labored under the
combined weight of himself and the girl, his
wind broken, his gait choppy and uneven.
Marthen glanced back. A small troop of
outriders followed at full gallop. He kicked
the horse brutally, but he could get no more
speed out of the animal, so he pulled up. They
were on the Brythern plains, a rolling terrain
of grasses broken up by scrub, and there was
scant cover. He turned the horse’s head and

pushed him toward a slight swale. He could
shoot the horse if he had to and use the
carcass for cover, but he was not a fool. There
would be no escape unless he kept the girl as
hostage. Even then, he was not likely to come
out of this adventure alive.
Kate tugged fruitlessly at her bonds, but the
ropes held.
“Stop,” he said. He dismounted, stumbling a
little as vertigo overtook him. He had not
thought the small wound she had given him
would sap him so much, but his side was
soaked in sticky blood. He saw the way she
took in his weakness, her expression
calculating. “Don’t get ideas,” he said dryly.
“I am still able to hold on to my prisoner.”
“Not for long,” she said, and cocked her head
at the sound of their pursuit.
“If I die, so may you,” he said, and this time
her eyes went wide with shock. He took out
his knife and cut her bonds, releasing her
from the saddle. “Get down.”
She dismounted stiffly, rubbing her wrists.
Her hair was tangled, and she was covered
with his blood, sweat, and dirt. Her throat
was bruised and her face was swollen with

tears. She looked, he realized, much the same
as when he had first laid eyes on her. Then, he
had thought of her as a weapon. Now he
didn’t know what to think of her. Marthen
felt a great weariness. What have I done?
He waited for his thoughts to clear again, but
they didn’t. There was laughter in the back of
his head, but he pushed it away, rubbing his
eyes. He had listened to the madness for long
enough. For a second, darkness sparkled, and
then his vision came back. She stood there,
watching him, and the soldiers in pursuit
drew near, so that now he could hear the
jangling of harness and the shouting of the
men.
“Kate Mossland,” he said, the strange name
still so foreign to his tongue. He nodded at the
horse, the animal’s head hanging low. “Take
him and go, and do not look back.”
He half expected her to protest and almost
laughed at his own foolishness. Still a lovesick
old sot, he told himself. Who would have
thought it?
He unslung the rifle from his back. Just
because he was surrendering didn’t mean he
would go easily. He was the mad general after

all, and he had his pride. He didn’t watch her
go. All his attention was focused on the
enemy.
They came over the hill, a fast-galloping mass
of horses, men, armor, and weapons. Marthen
knelt and fired, dropping the first horse, but
they spread out, returning fire. His last
conscious thought was of the soldier’s god,
welcoming him home.
Eighteen
Lynn watched Joe sit down cautiously at her
kitchen table, the first time he made it out of
the bedroom since she brought him home. She
smiled. He looked good, sitting in the morning
sun. He looked right. As his bruises faded and
his ribs healed, he looked more and more like
himself. She had missed him. I want him here.
He needs to be here. He caught her smile, and
smiled back.
“What?” he said.
“I was just thinking how you look like you
belong there.” She slid into the chair next to
him. She bit her lip, half-guilty, half-smug.
“And I was thinking maybe we moved too
fast. Your ribs okay after earlier?”

He grinned. “Not complaining.” He looked
around. “I don’t think I was in this house but
once or twice, and sure never in here.” Lady
Sarita kept her privacy.
“Me neither. She really was something else.”
Lynn had told him about the fortune in the
attic. The dowry plus Mark Ballard’s loot
would keep the farm going for a good long
time. And this time Garson had skedaddled
for good, after the cops connected him to the
crate of illegal rifles in the woods. Maybe they
would have to worry about him eventually,
but not right now.
Lynn knew Kate’s parents would never
forgive her for coming back without their
daughter, but she told them what she knew,
that Colar had taken a dozen armed men in
pursuit of the general. Kate wouldn’t be able
to come back, not if Arrim, Joe, and the
perambulators did their jobs. And if they
couldn’t, things could only get worse. This
time the gordath nearly killed the guardians.
Who knew how bad it could get the next time
it opened?
Joe looked up at her, and he wasn’t smiling
anymore. “I figure I’m a damn fool for

asking, but I gotta know. You sure looked like
you had something going on with that other
guy.”
Her throat closed. She waited a moment to
compose herself. She knew he would ask
about Crae, or she would have to bring it up.
She just didn’t think it would be so soon. She
looked straight at him. “Yes. But.” She chose
her words carefully. “I went back for you, not
him.”
“Any regrets?” He said it softly.
“God, Joe. Don’t—” Don’t do this to me. She
blinked back tears. “I love you. I loved him. I
don’t know how to explain it any other way. I
can’t tell you what you want to hear. I loved
him, yes, and you’ll have to make peace with
that. But I came for you. Please don’t—” She
couldn’t continue. Don’t leave me. Please,
don’t leave me.
He reached out and pulled her close, holding
her tight, even though it must have been
painful. His hand tangled in her hair, as if he
was trying to pull her inside him, and his
breath was warm against her neck.
“Knew I was being an asshole,” he said, and
his voice was muffled. “I just can’t stand the

idea of losing you again.”
“You won’t,” she said. “I swear it, Joe Felz. I
won’t leave you.”
But you can’t make me stop loving him, too.
The householders told him he would find
Jessamy up in the high sheep fields where
they buried the crow. He left the crow king at
the bottom of the terraces, the skinny old man
turned somber, his keen eyes watchful. Crae
turned Hero and pushed him for the hard
climb up the terraces, letting his horse take
his time. At the House, he dismounted and let
the grooms take the horse; with the help of
his walking stick, he climbed the rest of the
way by himself.
A cold wind blew across the hill, zigzagging
through the grass. Close-cropped grass
hugged the contours of the land. Rocks poked
through everywhere, white and streaked with
moss. The burial cairn looked like one of the
ancient rocks, except for the uneven tower it
made. A vine of pink and yellow flowers
trailed over it. Crae had never seen that weed
before. A curlew called, and another
answered, the birdsong lonely and sweet in

the high upland pasture.
Jessamy sat on a rock looking out over the
distant lands. The mountains of Kenery were
blue in the distance, and far below the silver
line of the Aeritan River curled off toward
the sea. She turned at his approach. She had
her kerchief in her lap, and her brown hair
flew around her face, catching the sunlight
with strands of red and gold mixed with the
brown. Her lips and cheeks were red, but her
eyes, usually so filled with spirit and drive,
were narrowed with strain. Crae sat down
next to her, and she didn’t move away.
Finally, he said, “Tell me what happened.”
She sighed. “We brought him home. We
buried him next to our mother and father.
Favor was a dreadful place. I had forgotten
all the ghosts we lived with. I thought, I will
not raise my children here. So I came home.”
She looked at him challengingly. “I will not be
driven from my home again.”
“Never again,” he agreed. “How are the
children?”
“Well. Tevani misses you.” She smiled a little
sadly. “She isn’t as lively as she once was.
Perhaps when she sees you, some of that will

come back.”
He thought he would do anything he could to
make that happen. But could he return? “Did
Alarin bring you my letter?”
She nodded and pulled the chain from
around her neck. “Here.”
He reached out and held her wrist, stopping
her. “No. It’s yours. I gave up my lordship to
save Trieve from the Council’s wrath. You
are Lord of Trieve now.” He added roughly,
“They will not attack Trieve for my crime if I
am no longer lord here.”
To his surprise, she laughed and sobbed
together. “Oh, the Council. First they take
Trieve from me, and now they take Trieve
from you. It is a wonder they do not throw up
their hands and let it all go back to the grass
god.”
He grimaced. “They may well try,” he said.
“But I will not let Trieve go without a fight. If
you will still have me, Lady Jessamy, I will be
your consort and serve you well.”
He waited, heart hammering. She was lord
now. She could dissolve their marriage and
take another man to husband if she wished.
He couldn’t blame her if she did, but he

hoped she wouldn’t.
Jessamy didn’t speak for a long time, and the
only sound was that of the curlews and the
wind. At length she poured the chain from
hand to hand, the silver links running like
water between her slender fingers.
“When I was eighteen and my parents died,
Jori married me to Stavin. When Stavin died,
the Council married me to you. My life was
never my own to dispose as I will.” She looked
into the distance, and now her gaze was hard.
“Trieve is mine now, and no one will take it
from me. Let the Council fight over Favor,
not Trieve. This House is mine, and I will hold
it for my children.” She turned to Crae and
smiled thinly. “Since you are on speaking
terms with the high god, tell him for me I am
lord here, not you.”
The high god was silent on the matter;
probably, Crae thought dryly, he knew when
he was bested.
“As for the other,” she said, and breathed out
a sigh. “You are an upstart, disreputable
captain. Yet you are the only person who
never treated me as if I were a chess piece.
Not my mother and father, not my brother,

not even Stavin.” She tried to keep back tears
but failed, and her voice cracked. “All I ask is
that you keep crows from my kitchen, please.”
He pulled her close, tucking her under his
chin, and resting his cheek on the top of her
head. After a moment she lifted her face to
his, and they kissed, the taste of tears salty on
his lips and tongue. Crae lost himself in the
kiss, his heart hammering.
He was no longer a lord. He might even be
crow. But they both deserved another chance
to make things right, if not for themselves
then for Trieve. Jessamy deserved all of him,
as captain and husband both. He would strive
to give her all he could. Crae let himself think
one more time of Lynna and then let her
memory go.
Elms lined the avenue approaching the House
of Terrick. Allegra and Hotshot clomped
steadily toward it, and even though the house
was unfamiliar, their pace increased. They
knew what houses meant: water and grain
and a comfortable loose box.
Kate took it all in. It was drawing on toward
evening, the sky was gray, and the air was raw

and chill. She was grateful they would be out
of the weather soon. Her body ached, she was
bruised, hungry, and filthy, and she thought
with longing of her careful pack of supplies
they had left behind at the trailhead. She
supposed the sooner she adjusted to her new
life the better, but a toothbrush would have
been nice.
She swallowed against the thick lump in her
throat that hadn’t moved since she watched
from a distance as Marthen was cut down by
gunfire. She was safe at last, and her parents
were safe, and the price she had paid was that
she would never see them again.
When her rescuers reached her, Colar had
thrown himself from the saddle and taken her
into her arms, and she had cried at last, all
the tears coming after being pent up for so
long. She had freed herself after a moment
and went over and looked at Marthen. A tall
soldier tried to hold her back, but she
shrugged herself loose and stood over the
body.
He was covered with blood and dirt, and his
sightless eyes stared at the sky. His hair had
gray in it. Colar came up behind her and took

her hand, closing his fingers around hers.
“He let me go,” she said, her voice thick and
wobbly. “He looked really tired and sad, and
he just said, ‘Take the horse.’ ”
“He turned crow,” someone said, but she
shook her head.
“Not at the end.”
They took the body away, and then the tall
soldier, who turned out to be a lord, gave
them some of his supplies for their long
journey to Trieve.
First they had gone back to the gordath,
though, but Lynn and Joe had already gone
through, and the hole between the worlds was
closed up tight.
Tears burned in her eyes at the memory. She
glanced over at Colar. He looked calm, but his
hand tapped his jeans in a nervous tattoo.
Their circumstances had reversed. Now she
was foster daughter. Her stomach tightened
nervously amid her sadness and
homesickness. She wondered when she would
stop missing her parents. The tears welled up
again, and she blinked them away, looking
around at her new home.
The house rose in front of them, a stone keep

with a high wall and narrow, slotted windows.
It was a small castle, built for defense. Fields
stretched out all around it, planted with hay.
There were plenty of haystacks dotting the
field, not the round rolls of a mechanized
field but uneven stacks that had been put in
place with human labor. Even as she watched,
a team of four heavy horses drew a hay
wagon towering with its cargo toward the
castle.
“I forgot how much I missed the haying,”
Colar said, wistfulness in his voice. She
glanced at him, startled.
“You helped?” she exclaimed, feeling foolish.
A lord’s son . . .
He grinned. “Everybody helps. We have to get
the hay in, or it will get rained on and ruined,
and then all the horses will die. You wouldn’t
want that, would you?”
She felt herself go pink at his teasing.
“And you’ll have to help, too, you know. Even
my mother and sister help, though my mother
is so busy, and my sister is so little, she mostly
gets in the way.” His voice trailed off. “She’ll
have grown, I bet.”
“I’ll help,” Kate said a little nervously. She

wasn’t afraid of hard work. She had mucked
plenty of stalls when she helped pay for
Mojo’s board. But this was different. She
knew how hard life would be here. This was
Aeritan.
I’ll be welcome here, and I’ll work hard, she
told herself. But I won’t lose sight of what I
want to become, even if it means I lose Colar.
She didn’t have his same sense of assur ance
that his parents would agree to let them
marry, let alone allow her to study to become
a doctor. And that would be down the road.
She couldn’t marry anyone, not yet, not for a
long time.
They had caught attention from the people in
the fields now, and they turned and pointed.
Kate could hear faint cries of surprise. Colar
kept their gait steady and slow, but he
reached out and held Kate’s hand. He looked
at her.
“I had it easier,” he said, and his mouth
quirked. “I was unconscious. It will be all
right. I promise. They’ll be so happy I’m
back, they won’t even notice you right away.”
He was teasing again to reassure her, and she
tried to smile, but she was too frightened. I

want to go home, she thought, then she took a
deep breath and straightened her back.
A great stream of people poured from the
house, all running toward them. Kate saw
three kids in front, two boys and a girl. His
brothers and sister, running as fast as their
legs would carry them, the girl almost keeping
up with her brothers. She scanned the crowd
and halted Allegra as the nervous horse
snorted and tried to backpedal from the
onrush. The voices came clearer now, the
high-pitched voices of the kids rising above
all.
“Colar! Colar! He’s home!”
Allegra rose on her hind legs, and Kate rode
it as if the mare stood still, crouching on her
back till the horse came down. She drew back,
giving them distance, as the people of Terrick
swarmed around Colar. Hotshot took it better
than Allegra did, but even he crouched
slightly and his eyes rolled wildly.
There was Colar’s mother. She had on a red
dress and an apron over it, her dark blue
kerchief hiding all of her hair. Her face was
tan and freckled, as if she spent a lot of time
outside, and her eyes were brown and bright.

Colar looked like her; it was there in his
mouth and nose and the shape of his face. She
scanned the crowd from her perch on
Allegra’s back. There was Lord Terrick,
looking more gray and sour than she
remembered. He waded through the crowd to
his son, and he and his wife reached out to the
boy. Colar dismounted and knelt before
them; they knelt as well and took him into
their arms. The brothers and sister waited in
a circle around them, bright-faced and
solemn.
The crowd fell silent and drew back a little. A
few people looked over at Kate, and she
busied herself by dismounting and running
up her stirrups, tucking them neatly against
the saddle flaps. This was Colar’s moment.
All she wanted to do was disappear. Nervous
butterflies quivered in her stomach.
First Lord Terrick and then Lady Terrick
rose and tried to raise up their son, but he
stayed and put out his arms to his brothers
and sister. They practically jumped on him,
and Kate laughed and cried both, putting her
hand over her mouth.
The crowd let out a huge “Huzzah!” and

Allegra freaked again, so that she had to get
her under control, walking her in circles to
calm her down, the mare’s long-legged walk
carrying her smoothly. When she had her
settled, Kate turned.
Lord Terrick was looking at her, his
expression unreadable. She steeled herself
and walked over to him. She held her hand
out, and to her surprise, he took it.
“Mr. Terrick,” she said, as her parents had
taught her. “I’m glad to see you again, sir.”
He regarded her silently for a moment, and
then he smiled. It made him look years
younger, and she smiled back.
“I am also glad to see you, child,” he said, his
voice still peremptory as ever, but kind at the
same time. “My thanks. My thanks from all
of my heart that you have returned my son to
me.”
Lady Terrick came over now, and Kate felt
her butterflies increase. She knew nothing
about this woman. For all she knew, she could
have been told terrible things about Kate.
Like that I was the general’s whore, she
thought. She raised her chin.
“Mrs. Terrick.” She tried, as bravely as she

could, but her voice faltered.
“Kate Mossland, is it?” Lady Terrick said,
her voice sure and strong. She cocked her
head, looking Kate over. “I have heard a
great deal about you from my husband.”
Oh shit, thought Kate.
“I was sad indeed that I never got a chance to
meet you before now, but my husband
assured me that our son was in good hands.
Are your parents well?”
Kate burst into tears.
It turned out it was the best thing that she
could have done. Someone took Allegra from
her while she covered her face and tried to get
her composure, and Colar came over and
stood by her, putting his arm around her and
holding her close.
“Everyone, away, away,” Lord Terrick said
testily. “Give the girl room.”
“Why isn’t she happy? Doesn’t she like us?”
Colar’s little sister stage-whispered, and again
Kate laughed and cried. She wiped her face
with the back of her hands and dried them on
her jeans.
“I’m Kate Mossland,” she said to the girl,
who looked to be about ten. “What’s your

name?”
“Erinya,” the little girl said, wide-eyed. Colar
gestured to his brothers, making a get along
movement. One after another the boys
stepped forward.
“I am called Yare,” said one, and bowed.
“I am Aevin,” said the other.
“I am very pleased to meet you,” Kate said.
She looked back at Colar’s parents. “Really, I
am. It’s just, a lot has happened.”
“And you will tell us all about it,” Lady
Terrick said firmly. She took Kate by the
arm. “Kate Mossland, the House of Terrick
gives you guesting. Now come, both of you, to
wash up and eat.”
Colar sipped his vesh and felt unfamiliar
warmth course through him. He lifted his
eyes in surprise. His father had spiked it with
some of the regional brandy. Lord Terrick
gave him a look that was half smile, half
grimace.
“You looked as if you needed that,” he said,
his voice a growl.
“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”
His father grunted and sipped his own vesh.

They sat in front of the fireplace in his
father’s writing room, where he handled
Terrick’s accounts. The hearth was bare, the
fire unlit. It was high summer after all,
though in Terrick the summers could be gray
and cloudy and not much warmer than the
winter months. It was no colder, at any rate,
than the Mosslands’ air-conditioned house.
Colar stretched his legs out, then hesitated.
He wore jeans, not good trousers. He saw his
father give his strange clothes a look.
“So you led a dozen men in pursuit of
Marthen,” his father said, and there was a
glint of approval in his eye.
“Yes, sir.”
“I’m surprised Lord Tharp handed them over
to you.”
“Lady Sarita made him.”
His father gave a crusty laugh. “Well. It was a
good deed and a necessary one, though what a
waste. The general wasn’t always mad. Once
he was the greatest strategist in Aeritan.” He
shook his head.
“It wasn’t her fault,” Colar said quickly, and
his father shot him a look.
Colar almost quailed, but his father said only,

“Looks as if you’ve grown a hand since you’ve
been away.”
Colar had. He towered over his father now. It
had both pleased and saddened him. His
father’s hair had thinned over the last year,
and his beard had come in gray. He was
younger than Mr. Mossland, but Kate’s
father used something on his hair to keep it
growing, and he still played games. He was
the one who had nudged Colar into lacrosse
and basketball. Colar thought that maybe he
had wanted a son, and he felt a pang. He
hoped the man was all right. He had been
good to Colar, as had Mrs. Mossland.
As if he knew what his son was thinking, Lord
Terrick said, “Were you a good foster son?”
He thought so, right up to the end, when he
promised his foster mother that he would
rescue Kate, and disobeyed his foster father.
Colar sipped his brandy and vesh. His lips
had gone slightly numb. This wasn’t the first
time he had sampled Terrick’s famed brandy,
but it was the first time he had taken so
much. “Yes, sir,” he said at length. He had
done what he promised, after all. Kate was
safe, and she would be a part of Terrick now.

“Were they good foster parents?”
Colar looked up and blinked. His father’s
voice was un-characteristically uncertain.
“Yes,” he said firmly. “Father, they treated
me well. They treated me like a son.”
Lord Terrick looked down at his cup. “I never
thought we would see you again. I thought
you would die. I never thought—” His voice
broke. “I thought I had lost you.”
Colar looked away. The old man never cried,
not even when Colar’s littlest sister had died
of a fever when he was ten. He cries, he
corrected himself. Just not in front of anyone.
He cast about for a way to change the subject
and let his father recover.
“I should show you my scars,” he said. He set
down his vesh and stripped off his jacket and
shirt. It was dim, the only light from the
windows overlooking the Terrick lands, but
there was enough light to see. Colar was
skinny, and the scars were clear, the long,
fading red lines where his wounds had been
stitched up etched across his stomach and
back. His father caught his breath. Surgeons
in Aeritan would have been hard-pressed to
repair the damage. “They saved my life,”

Colar said awkwardly. He was getting cold,
but he let his father take a long look. “So it
was the right decision.”
His father nodded. “Put your shirt on, boy,”
he growled. Colar hastened to comply. His
father changed the subject abruptly. “Now,
what of the girl?”
Kate was upstairs in Erinya’s room. The two
girls would share a chamber. She had asked
for a bath after dinner in a quiet voice, and
his mother had ordered the householders to
prepare one. He hoped she would know that it
wasn’t like showers back home. Baths were a
lot of work here. He hoped she would adjust
to her new life. He wanted to make her happy.
Better bring it up now; it wouldn’t get any
easier. “We wish to marry,” he said. “Much
later, when we’re older, as people do in her
world. Only Kate has set a condition, that she
be allowed to study medicine, in Brythern if
need be. She feels that she can do much good
here, as she did in camp, by using her
knowledge from home along with Talios’s
teachings. And father, I think she is right. The
learning they have there, it far outstripped
anything here and anything in Brythern even.

The things I learned, the things I could do . .
.”
He trailed off. There was no way he could
explain it to his father, and Lord Terrick’s
expression had grown pained. He didn’t want
to know. He didn’t want to hear that his son
had left something of value behind. Colar’s
Annapolis brochure was still folded and
stuffed into his back pocket. It was probably
in tatters. Soon he wouldn’t be able to read it,
and the photos of the jets and the aircraft
carriers would fade, and his sojourn on the
other side of the gordath would fade as well.
“Well,” his father said. “You will be her
husband. Can you live with that?”
I’ll have the greatest lady in all of Aeritan. He
nodded solemnly, his heart pounding. He
hoped Kate didn’t want to wait too long. The
custom of late marriage would have to give
way to Aeritan, after all. “I can, sir.”
Of all the responses his father could give, he
didn’t think he could be any more surprised.
“Well, I had thought as much, with the two of
you.” At Colar’s expression, his father shook
his head. “Just don’t tell your mother yet. Let
her have you back for a little while.”

“Yes, sir.”
Lord Terrick hauled himself heavily to his
feet. “And here I’ve monopolized you far
longer than I should have. Your mother wants
you, and your brothers and sister, and I am
sure your new lady as well. You have returned
to us, son. Maybe one day you will understand
what that means.”
When he was a father himself. Colar followed
his father down the stairs where his family
waited to welcome him home.
The afternoon sunlight streamed across the
lawn at the farmhouse at the newly renamed
Red Bird Stables. A rented white pavilion
gleamed in the rich, lowering sun, and
wedding guests gathered in clusters on the
neatly mown grass, their heels sinking into the
damp earth. People laughed and chattered,
holding glasses of champagne. From his
vantage point on the front porch of the
elegant old house, Joe looked out over the
view. It was like Mrs. Hunt’s gala, except that
the old Hunter’s Chase Stables took its
formality and cold beauty from its owner.
Red Bird Stables was comfortable and worn,

like a pair of favorite boots. Weeds had
sprung up alongside the gravel drive, but they
were Queen Anne’s lace and caught the gleam
of sunlight with an ethereal air. The barns
were comfortable and slightly worn, the
fences tight and safe but no longer bright
white. The horses browsed in the fields, a few
watching the proceedings at the house with a
quiet curiosity.
Across the cross-country jump course massed
the trees of Gordath Wood, and his senses
quivered. The gordath hadn’t yet been
completely quieted but was merely quiescent.
I reckon I can handle it from here, Joe thought,
along with the old folks that Lynn had
introduced him to. They called themselves a
fancy word, perambulators, but it turned out
they were guardians just like him.
And with Arrim on the other side, well, that
was the best they could do. He looked over at
Lynn, talking with elderly relatives on the
lawn. She looked lovely in her wedding dress,
a long, slim, white sheath that set off her dark
hair and fine figure in a way that made him
go weak at the knees.
They might even have started on the next

generation of guardians already. They neither
of them considered birth control when they
got home. Lynn just put him to bed and
joined him there when he was rested from the
ass kicking Hare had given him. She gave him
a glance just then and a smile over her flute
of champagne, and he gave an answering
smile back.
She looked happy, he couldn’t help but note,
and he damned himself again for a fool. She
told him what was between her and that
captain or lord or whatever he was, and he
knew better than to let it get to him. Still, it
was hard, seeing the way they had looked at
each other. Careful, he thought. You’ll end up
like Lord Tharp. Best just let it go and make
damn sure the gordath stays closed.
Something cold and wet nudged his hand. It
was the dog. They had named her Cissy, and
she answered to it eagerly. She panted and
wagged, her eager brown eyes looking up at
him. She was shiny and clean and had filled
out, and took her job as guardian of the
stables as seriously as he took his. He rubbed
the dog’s soft ears. Women might need
horses, but a man needed a dog sometimes,

especially when he was lost in the woods. He
wasn’t lost anymore, though. He had Lynn
and the farm and the gordath to keep quiet.
He didn’t need to run anymore.
With Cissy at his side, he came down the
porch steps, accepting the handshakes and
congratulations from the wedding guests. The
grass was soft under his dress shoes, and he
could feel the cool seeping up into the soles.
Felt strange not to be wearing boots, but his
old boots hardly went with fine clothes.
“Joe!” His mother came up, wearing a
lavender dress that didn’t suit her except for
the beaming happiness that she wore with it.
She gave him a kiss, and he held her. “What
are you doing, leaving your wife alone on your
wedding day?” she scolded lightly. She was a
little tipsy.
“Just going to get her now,” he promised.
Isabella became serious now. “She’s a good
girl. You treat her right.” The unspoken
context, Not the way your father treated me,
bounced between them. He gave her another
kiss on the cheek.
“Always, Ma.”
At that moment Abel Felz stumped up to

them. Joe had gotten his father’s height,
which was to say, not so much, but Abel had
thickened, his neck and jowls sagging and his
belly straining at his old blue suit.
“So this is where you’ll be. I guess we’ll never
see much of you.” His words were a bitter
accusation.
Joe didn’t say anything. His dad was in one of
his moods, and nothing he said could appease
the old man. He and his mother exchanged a
quick glance and then he caught movement
out of the corner of his eye. Lynn. He was
about to wave her off, but she came up to
them, the deepening twilight making her
almost glow in her gown.
“Mr. Felz, I didn’t get a chance to talk with
you before,” she said, taking her
father-in-law’s hand. “I’m really happy you
could make it up for our wedding.”
“Big waste of time,” the old man snapped.
“You don’t know anything about farming,
and Joe should know better. Farmers can’t
leave their land. Now who knows what’s
happening back home. And Isabella gone all
these weeks. People can’t just leave. It all goes
to hell. People coming back and forth,

crossing over. By the time I get home, it’ll be
hell to put to right and quiet everything back
down.” He glared at Joe and Lynn. “What are
you looking at me like that for?”
Isabella took her husband’s arm. “That’s
enough, Abel. Leave these poor children
alone. You’re like to give me a heart attack
with that rant. Let them be on their wedding
day.”
She led him off, Abel still growling, and they
stared at each other, dumbstruck.
“Well,” Lynn said at last. “I think that was a
piece of the puzzle.”
Joe nodded. “He’s a bitter old bastard, and he
made my life miserable. But he is a
guardian.”
She folded her hand in his, and he pulled her
to him and kissed her. It was a real kiss, a
bedroom kiss, and they could hear the cheers
and laughter of the guests as people turned to
look. They both blushed and laughed and
broke apart, but he kept hold of her hand.
Joe thought that it was nice to finally stop
moving. It was good to be home.

THE BERKLEY PUBLISHING GROUP
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York
10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton
Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario
M4P 2Y3, Canada
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand, London
WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Group Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s
Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of
Penguin Books Ltd.)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell
Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty.
Ltd.)
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11
Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New
Delhi—110 017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive,
Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand
(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty.) Ltd., 24
Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg

2196,
South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Offices: 80
Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters,
places, and incidents either are the product of
the author’s imagination or are used
fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual
persons, living or dead, business
establishments, events, or locales is entirely
coincidental. The publisher does not have any
control over and does not assume any
responsibility for author or third-party
websites or their content.
RED GOLD BRIDGE
An Ace Book / published by arrangement
with the author
PRINTING HISTORY
Ace mass-market edition / July 2009
Copyright © 2009 by Patrice Sarath.

All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced,
scanned, or distributed in any printed or
electronic form without permission. Please do
not participate in or encourage piracy of
copyrighted materials in violation of the
author’s rights. Purchase only authorized
editions. For information, address: The
Berkley Publishing Group, a division of
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson
Street, New York, New York 10014.
eISBN : 978-1-101-06051-3
ACE
Ace Books are published by The Berkley
Publishing Group,
a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.,
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York
10014.
ACE and the “A” design are trademarks of
Penguin Group (USA) Inc.

http://us.penguingroup.com

