Praise for books by Nobel Peace Prize finalist

R. J. Rummel
"26th in a Random House poll on the best nonfiction book of the 20th Century"
Random House (Modern Library)
“. . . the most important . . . in the history of international relations.”
John Norton Moore Professor of Law and
Director, Center for National Security Law, former
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the U. S. Institute of Peace
“. . . among the most exciting . . . in years.”
Jim Powell
“. . . most comprehensive . . . I have ever encountered . . . illuminating . . . .”
Storm Russell
“One more home run . . . .”
Bruce Russett, Professor of International Relations
“. . . has profoundly affected my political and social views.”
Lurner B Williams
“. . . truly brilliant . . . ought to be mandatory reading.”
Robert F. Turner, Professor of Law, former President of U.S. Institute of Peace
". . . highly recommend . . . ."
Cutting Edge
“We all walk a little taller by climbing on the shoulders of Rummel’s work.”
Irving Louis Horowitz, Professor Of Sociology.
". . . everyone in leadership should read and understand . . . ."
DivinePrinciple.com
“. . .exciting . . . pushes aside all the theories, propaganda, and wishful thinking . . . .”
www.alphane.com
“. . . world's foremost authority on the phenomenon of ‘democide.’”
American Opinion Publishing
“. . . excellent . . . .”
Brian Carnell
“. . . bound to be become a standard work . . . .”
James Lee Ray, Professor of Political Science

“. . . major intellectual accomplishment . . .will be cited far into the next century”
Jack Vincent, Professor of Political Science.”
“. . . most important . . . required reading . . . .”
thewizardofuz (Amazon.com)
“. . . valuable perspective . . . .”
R.W. Rasband
“ . . . offers a desperately needed perspective . . . .”
Andrew Johnstone
“. . . eloquent . . . very important . . . .”
Doug Vaughn
“. . . should be required reading . . .shocking and sobering . . . .”
Sugi Sorensen

NEVER AGAIN Book 4

Red Terror

NEVER AGAIN
R.J. RUMMEL

Llumina Press

Copyright © 2004 Rudy Rummel
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording,
or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from
both the copyright owner and the publisher.
Requests for permission to make copies of any part of this work should be mailed to
Permissions Department, Llumina Press, PO Box 772246, Coral Springs, FL 330772246
ISBN: 1-59526-209-1
Printed in the United States of America by Llumina Press
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rummel, R. J. (Rudolph J.), 1932Red terror : never again / R.J. Rummel.
p. cm.
ISBN 1-59526-209-1 (alk. paper) -- ISBN 1-59526-208-3 (pbk. : alk.
paper)
1. Genocide--Fiction. I. Title.
PS3568.U447R43 2004
813'.6--dc22
2004017435

Relevant books by R.J. Rummel

Understanding Conflict and War (five volumes)
Lethal Politics:
Soviet Genocide and Mass Murder since 1917
China’s Bloody Century:
Genocide and Mass Murder since 1900
Democide: Nazi Genocide and Mass Murder
Death By Government
Power Kills: Democracy as a Method of Nonviolence
Saving Lives, Enriching Life:
Freedom as a Right and a Moral Good (online book)
Never Again Series (Alternative History)
War and Democide Never Again
Nuclear Holocaust Never Again
Reset Never Again
Red Terror Never Again
Genocide Never Again (forthcoming)
Ending War, Democide, & Famine:
The Solution That Is Democratic Freedom
(forthcoming nonfiction supplement to the Never Again Series)

“Tell me, what do you think of
Marxism?”
“It’s evil!”
“Evil? When so many noted
Western intellectuals believe in it;
when it is so widely and favorably
taught in American classrooms?
“Yes, what else do you call an
ideology whose followers have murdered 110,000,000 people, over three
times more than have died in combat
in all the domestic and foreign wars
of the 20th Century, and starved to
death tens of millions more? It is a
death machine.”
“Then why so many believers?”
“Ignorance, self-righteousness,
an absolutist mind set, but mainly the
lust for power.”

Acknowledgements
Again, I owe many thanks to the thorough evaluation, many helpful
suggestions, and careful editing of Marg Gilks. I continue to be indebted
to the many visitors to my website at www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/ who
commented on or questioned the material there. They often had an impact on this series.
And foremost, always, is my wife Grace. She made this series and
this novel possible. Without her, I could not have written it. Another
kiss, sweetheart.
To be sure, this is a book of fiction. Although some characters may
in name and position bear a striking resemblance to historical figures,
they are fictional. Nonetheless, I must say again that whatever errors of
fictional facts exist are mine, and wholly mine.

Chapter 1
October 25, 1903
Novaya Uda village, near Irkutsk, Siberia

H

e knew the rats would start eating at his face soon. The darkness almost hid them, but he could see their black bodies
circling, their eyes reflecting what little light there was. They
were sniffing the air, ready to brave the human smell mixed with that of
the pork fat smeared on his face.
He hung from a rafter by a rope tied to his feet, his hands tied behind
him, and his head hovering an inch from the straw-covered dirt floor of the
stable. He could only wait in a shivering cold sweat, his heart thudding
violently, his stomach knotted in anticipation of what would soon come: a
rat would move in, the rest of the rats would follow, the excruciating pain
would start, and he would take too long to die.
Again and again, he had swung his body and shook his head to
scare the rats away. But he had been doing that for hours, and now he
was so exhausted that he could only squirm and nod his head. The rats
moved closer.
He tried to scream, but the greasy rag tied into his mouth by a rope
looped around his head turned it into a muffled screech. Nobody would
hear him. Nobody would pass by the stable. Not at this time of night.
Everything had gone so well. He had been exiled here by the Okhrana, the feared Czarist secret police, but only to mislead his fellow
revolutionaries. He was an Okhrana agent provocateur, but he also secretly worked for the revolutionary overthrow of the Czar, was a
member of a criminal gang involved in armed robberies, and conspired
to murder associates. His principles were simple: what profited him
was right.
He heard the rats shuffling closer over the straw.
Frantically, his mind tried to deny what his ears and bulging eyes
told him. This could not be. When he had arrived at Novaya Uda under
guard, a telegram from the Kutais Okhrana had soon arrived at Irkutsk,
supporting him: I.V. Dzhugashvili plans to leave. Do not stop him. Render assistance. A telegram bearing a description of him had soon
followed: Iosif Vissarionov Dzhugashvili. Age: 23. Appearance: ordinary. Height: 5 feet, 4 inches. Build: medium. Hair: dark brown. Beard

2

Rudy Rummel

and mustache: brown. Nose: straight and long. Forehead: straight and
low. Face: long, swarthy, and pockmarked. Second and third toes on
left foot fused together. Nickname: Riaboy.
A rat the size of a cat, its eyes like reflective marbles, sniffed at his
nose. He jerked his head toward it and it backed off. Fear triggered his
bladder to empty again; he felt his urine soaking into the crotch and
waist of his long underwear.
Yesterday the local Okhrana had given him a document identifying
him as an Okhrana agent so that he could return to Batum, the Black
Sea port near Turkey from which he had been exiled. Last night, as
he’d been returning from celebrating with the Okhrana Captain Ivan
Rykov, a man stopped him on the road. and said, “A local social democrat wants to have a secret talk with you before you leave.”
The man was dressed as a peasant, looked weathered and wrinkled
like a peasant, and spoke Russian with a terrible accent, like a foreigner
who had been exiled here some time ago. He led Riaboy here, but there
was no one waiting.
Hooy na ya—no fucking way. Riaboy’s thoughts raced, incoherent,
as panic encroached from the fringes of his mind. I could have killed
him with one hand. Pizdoon—fucking liar. How could the zasranee do
this to me? How could the svolock— He’d fought. But the man was too
strong.
“Why? What did I do?” Riaboy had yelled.
The stranger’s green eyes regarded him. “Chto poseesh’, to i
pozhniosh’. Chto poseesh’,” he’d grunted. “As you sow, so shall you
reap.” Then he moved off to watch from at a distance.
The big rat was back, along with a companion.
Riaboy could barely move his head. Terror gripped him. He felt
slippery wetness in the crack of his ass—he’d crapped in his underwear. His mind finally collapsed into hysteria, and frothy saliva blew
out of his nose. Only one thought remained: WHY? Why? Why? wh . . .
The man who in later years would have been known as Joseph Stalin gurgled and moaned. His whole body seemed to jitter in
anticipation. The large rat hesitated, then bit at his cheek. The stab of
hot pain tore through him, convulsing his muscles, triggering a strangled howl. The other rats moved in; another stab of pain was followed
by another, and another, for the rest of his life.

Chapter 2
January 25, 2002
Silicon Valley headquarters, Survivors’ Benevolent Society
John Banks

J

ohn’s upper right arm still pained him, but so did his hip and left
leg, although only with an aching throb. He massaged the arm
while listening to another revision of the plan for his and Joy’s
intervention sometime in the early years of the twentieth century. Their
mission: to prevent the century’s vast, killing wars and even more murderous democides, and to foster democratic peace.
There was really nothing new in the presentation, and his mind
wandered back to his latest injuries and bruises from the morning’s
training session. Damn, he thought, Joy is getting rough. She won’t be
happy until she breaks one of my bones. Joy, the gorgeous young
woman sitting next to him, was not only his partner in this mission, but
his sensei in karate and judo.
During that morning’s session, she’d been teaching him the
twisting hip throw of an attacker, illustrated, of course, by throwing him a million times. In one of them, he had twisted awkwardly
in the air and wrenched his arm as he landed. In spite of the pain,
he remembered with some pride that he still had rolled up and into
the appropriate ready stance. Then he had yelled at her, “You
won’t be satisfied until you injure me, and then I’ll have to forget
I’m a gentleman.”
He recalled her response and what followed with a mental smile.
She had tilted her head, crossed her arms, and instructed, “In martial
arts, John, no pain, no gain.”
“Yeah,” he had responded, “but, a gain, and a gain? I thought our
mission was to change history so it would never happen a gain.”
She frowned, then grinned, but only a second before launching a
swing kick at his right side, which he had to block with his bad arm. He
had gritted his teeth, hardened his face against the pain, and shouted,
“You did that on purpose.”
She nodded, but then put her hands on her hips and regarded him
with eyes that reflected her deep concern for him, almost worry. “Of

4

Rudy Rummel

course. And so will your enemy. During our mission, you may have to
fight assassins or ordinary thugs out to kill you. They will show you no
mercy. If you are injured, you not only protect your injury, you use it.
You know what your enemy is going to do next. He is going to attack
the weakness in your defense caused by that injury. So, use that information to block and counterattack or, better yet, no matter the pain, fire
off a series of attacks, ending in the death blow.”
No sooner had she finished than she launched another swinging kick
to his right side, but this time he jerked back a step, made a left arm
swing block to her kick that forced her leg past his body, and then kicked
inside the knee of her supporting leg. As she went down, she grabbed his
uwagi—karate shirt—and used his weight to twist him around and under
her so she could land on top when they both hit the mat. He knew she
had a million ways to kill him at that point, but he was so happy to have
finally bested one move of hers that it made this day.
And, unbelievably, drill sergeant Joy had complimented his growing skill: “Good, quick response, John.” But then she continued with,
“Now, this is how you should have followed that up,” and she proceeded to show him. More bruises.
When his name was mentioned, John refocused on what one of the
Society’s historians, Laline Fernández García, was saying. “. . . you are
also a historian, and this period is your specialty. So I’m putting this
more as a question. In this latest version, we think that 1902 would be
the best year downtime for you to arrive. I’m particularly concerned
with preventing Trotsky’s abortive Russian Revolution in 1905. It led
to the successful coup in 1917 by the Lenin-led Bolsheviks, and the
seventy-five years of communist rule that caused so many wars and
cost so many lives. Preventing the 1917 takeover is one of your prime
objectives, right up there with preventing World Wars I and II. What do
you think, John?”
John let go of his arm and rubbed the back of his neck. He appreciated Laline’s intelligence and grasp of history, and had engaged in
several long conversations with her about Castro’s tyrannical communist rule over Cuba, a regime she had escaped. Both her parents had
been pro-democracy dissidents who were arrested and tortured when
she was a teenager. They’d died in prison—or were killed—within a
year.
She had been hidden by her apolitical “boyfriend” for favors. She
had discovered other dissidents, and soon after learned that they were

Red Terror Never Again

5

planning to flee to the United States in a homemade sailboat. She
pleaded to be included. For more favors, she was. The weather favored
them, Cuban reconnaissance fighter planes never spotted them, the
American Coast Guard missed them, and they reached Florida safely.
The anti-Castro community adopted her, and eventually she learned
English, completed high school, went on to Princeton University, and
worked her way through graduate school. Throughout, she was dedicated to one mission: to rid the world of such tyrants as Castro and to
promote democracy in Cuba and elsewhere. She majored in history, for
she saw an understanding of history as the means to realistically promoting democracy. She reveled in her freedom of expression, and
became well known through her pro-democracy activism on campus,
and her commentaries that appeared in the local press.
When Laline became known to Joy’s adoptive mother Tor
through university contacts, Tor invited her to join the Society. And
here she was.
John scrunched up his face and complained, “I’m finding it hard to
think through the incredible pain that Joy inflicted on me today, as she
does everyday, but I’ll try. She hates men, you know. Jealous of their
natural male abilities.”
Joy jerked around in her seat to stare at him with raised eyebrows,
and then must have seen the dimples forming at the edges of his mouth.
She grinned, and waved at him while looking at Laline. “Poor thing.”
Laline smiled in return, then looked back at John. “No pain, no gain.”
John was about to open his mouth when Joy stole his response.
“Yes, even though our mission is . . . never a gain.” She sat back with a
smirk.
Everyone around the table chuckled. John glowered at her for a
moment, shook his finger at her in the way she hated, and then finally
turned to the question. “Well, I know the 1905 attempted Russian revolution is of great political significance to historians. Many believe it
provided the lessons and created the conditions for the successful 1917
Bolshevik coup. The Bolsheviks certainly did learn much from their
having been so close to victory then. But, I think 1905 also taught the
monarchists and conservatives a lesson, and their move away from absolute rule, their granting of more power to a Duma, and their
acceptance of elections, although limited, will make it easier for us to
prevent the 1917 coup and promote Russian democracy.
“Second.” He held up two fingers. Martial arts was Joy’s thing;
these minilectures were his, and he hid a smile as he dropped into his

6

Rudy Rummel

lecture tone. “If we somehow prevent the major events that led to the
abortive 1905 Revolution, that surely will change the history of Russia
and perhaps Europe. That means the chronology we will take back in
time with us will be voided. We will be flying in the dark when trying
to prevent World War I and the 1917 coup. It may even make our mission deadlier than it is already.
“Third, arriving in 1903 would not give us enough preparation time
to set up contacts and our new export and import company offices in
Russia, Poland, and Germany, the three most relevant locales. We
would need at least five years, but if we arrive in 1900, for example, we
would be getting pretty old to prevent World War II in 1939, or even
the Japanese invasion of China in 1937.
“Fourth.” John waved four fingers at Joy—one finger was bad
enough, four fingers was a capital offense. The others looked on in
amusement. They were well accustomed to the banter between the two,
especially since the Society’s engineers had mistakenly left their tap on
Joy and John’s subcutaneous intercommunication devices, and the
overheard intimate conversations and joking exchanges became hot
gossip at the water cooler.
When Tor had gently hinted to them that their bedroom chatter was
being overheard, John told Joy later, “Oh, I can’t stand it that all the
women here must so envy you my . . . ah, attention.” A long sigh.
“Very distracting. From our mission and training, you know.”
Joy had thrown a pillow at him. “Can’t stand it, eh? Keep that up,
mister, and the next time it stands I’ll whack it with a karate chop. Then
you won’t be able to stand it. Ever.”
“Jeez, baby, I can’t believe you would so deprive yourself of my
Society-renowned . . . attention.”
She pushed him off the bed with her foot.
Tor later consulted two of the Society’s psychologists about their
banter and personal jokes. Some in the Society thought it showed that
they unconsciously hated each other—not good for the mission. But the
psychologists thought this behavior was a healthy bridge between their
disparate backgrounds, skills, and cultures—Joy was a SinoVietnamese orphan raised by Tor, a Cambodian refugee, and a warrior
trained to kill since the age of four. John was a typical lower middle
class, Midwestern Euro-American, a near pacifist, and a first year professor of history when, he claimed, Joy had vamped him into
volunteering for the mission.

Red Terror Never Again

7

Moreover, once sent back in time, they could never return. Although no one ever mentioned it to Joy or John, or to Joy’s mother Tor,
most in the Society thought their chances of survival into middle age
was less than 10 percent. They would be fighting against powerful dictators who controlled vast armies and secret police, using modern
weapons, billions of dollars in funds, and an ability to forecast events
through the precise chronology they would take with them. They would
have tremendous power, and their humor, especially the banter, would
enable them to put their power in perspective, and help relieve the unhealthy tension and stress that they must now live with, perhaps for the
rest of their lives.
“Fourth,” John repeated, in case his four fingers were not enough,
“since we’ve settled on San Francisco as our operating base where you
will send our supplies—”
One of the Society members interrupted. “We’re just about to
do that. Just in case an emergency necessitates a sudden escape
downtime."
John nodded, then resumed. “If we arrive in 1903, we will be endangered by the great earthquake and fire of April, 1906. Although we
will know it’s coming, we cannot know all the details and danger spots,
and we might well be injured or killed. Finally—”
Joy looked up at the ceiling and muttered, “Thank God.”
“—I’m sorry to say that, while in 1906 the great feminine revolution in dress is just beginning, dress in 1903 is still adamantly
Victorian.” He hesitated for effect, and shot a quick glance at Joy. Her
eyes were wide and her lips were slightly parted as she listened. He had
her. He dropped the bomb. “Joy would have to wear a corset. Only
whores would be seen without one.”
Joy didn’t even take a breath. “Never. I would be boiled in oil
first.”
Laline held up her hand toward Joy to stop whatever more was on
her lips, and looked at John with a little grin. “Very persuasive, especially point five.” She held up five fingers. “I think we all will agree
that 1906, after the destruction from the fire and earthquake has settled,
will be the best time for you to start your mission.”
“Ah shucks,” John said, “I wanted to see Joy in a corset and bustle.”
With a huge smile so no one would misunderstand, Joy yelled, “I
wanna new partner!”

Chapter 3
November 13, 1906
San Francisco
Captain Khoo Jy-ying

T

he jackhammer of sound blasted her mind and Jy-ying put her
hands over her ears and moaned from the pain. She thought she
was dying.
In an instant, the sound ended, Jy-ying had a sudden falling sensation, and was jolted to her knees.
She couldn’t think. Maybe she was dying.
As her senses returned, she checked herself all over to be sure she
was okay. She finally murmured, “Allah akbar—God is great. Thank
you. I’m in one piece and apparently healthy. But, did I make it?”
She looked up at the digital reading: 3:22:04 p.m. November 13,
1906. “Success!” she exclaimed. “The month is a little off, but that
should not make any difference. Time to see the old world.”
She took out her Taiyang .38 caliber semi-automatic, clicked the
safety off and, holding it at the ready, she opened the door a crack. She
opened it wider and wider, then suddenly furrowed her brows. How
strange. Feels as though I have gone through this before. She shook
her head at that impossibility.
She saw nothing dangerous outside the door, no more than the
empty factory she was supposed to land in, and her equipment capsule resting near one wall. She stepped quickly out and swung
around, holding her gun before her with two hands, just in case, as
she scanned the factory floor. She was alone. With a relieved sigh,
she reentered the time machine and reholstered her gun in her
purse.
The checked gingham jumper she wore didn’t provide enough
warmth against the chilly, damp air. She opened her suitcase of clothes
and essentials and donned a fur-lined cape for warmth and a relatively
flat hat with Japanese satin braid and fancy cloth drapery—the only hat
that the project scientists showed her for her first day wear that she did
not wave away with a laugh. The suitcase would get her by until she
found a place to stay, then she could get whatever she needed from her

10

Rudy Rummel

equipment capsule or buy it with the wealth of gold, counterfeit money,
and jewels that the supply capsule contained. If she couldn’t get to the
capsule, there was a fortune in the double bottom of the case.
Picking up the purse and suitcase, she stepped out of the machine
and walked toward the exit.
Peking
2001, New Universe
Imam Ch’en Hsu
The message from Imam Abdul-Raouf, the chief advisor to the
mayor of San Francisco, said they found what Imam Ch’en Hsu was
looking for in the archives of the San Francisco Fire Department. It had
been evidence in the arson investigation of an apartment house partially
destroyed by fire in 1938.
He scanned the Chinese translation with increasing excitement.
There were many gaps where pages of the original were scorched
and charred, and an unknown number of final pages were burned
away, but nevertheless, he could not believe the information it contained. He went back through it, underlining the important details:
The time travelers were the Americans John Banks and ethnic SinoVietnamese Joy Phim. They landed in San Francisco on November
14, 1906, and created the successful Tor Import and Export Company. Ch’en also noted the dates for their travel to Mexico, China,
Japan, and Europe for their interventions in the wars and democides
in those countries.
The document even mentioned that John Banks had set up the Joy
Phim Democratic Peace Institute, of which the Institute in Santa Barbara had been an affiliate. The members of the godless affiliate had
blown it up after sending a message back in time to Banks and Phim
about Abul Sabah—God’s Prophet, and the Islamic ruler of Middle
Asia and China—and the nuclear destruction of the democracies perpetrated by his son, but attributed to him. The result was a world victory
for Sabah’s version of Islam.
Now we got them. For sure, Banks and Phim are the time travelers
who received the message. And the message they received could only
say one thing: kill the Prophet Sabah as a child, well before he begins
his glorious, God-directed rise in power.

Red Terror Never Again

11

Ch’en put through an urgent call to Shu Kuo. When Shu answered,
Ch’en asked without preamble, “Can we contact Khoo Jy-ying right
away?”
Shu Kuo hesitated, and when he finally responded, he sounded surprised that the Imam would ask this after he had seen her time machine
disappear on its way to 1906. “No. She is still on her way, or has arrived in the past.”
“I want to send a document to her immediately.”
“I do not understand.”
“This document will contain new information that will make it easy
for her to find the American time travelers and execute them before
they assassinate Sabah. I want you and Chief Scientist Liu to prepare a
time capsule to carry back this document to Khoo. I do not care how
you do it; I do not care about the expense; you need not hurry. But I
want to make sure she gets this message.”
After Shu Kuo assured him they would start on the assignment immediately, he hung up.
He held the original of what its author, Banks, called his Remembrance. It was overtly revolutionary, Satanic, and anti-Sabah. It was too
dangerous for anyone to read, other than a high Imam, who was armored against its lies. It exulted in a counter theology, that of infantile
freedom. Ch’en knew what he had to do.
After he personally made a copy to send to Khoo, he took the original and the translation home with him late that evening. He turned on
the floodlight on his patio, carried the documents to his little garden off
the patio, and dug a deep hole among his prized hamamelis. He slowly
tore the pages of both documents into small pieces. “I have just saved
the Sabah faith, the word of God,” he told himself as he stuffed the
pieces into the hole.
He covered the hole with soil and mulch and watered the mound.
Tianjin, China
Director Shu Kuo
Shu Kuo watched the final preparations for sending the document
to Khoo Jy-ying. They were giving the buzzer its last test. He read English and had scanned the document. It detailed where John Banks and
Joy Phim were staying in San Francisco, their major interventions in-

12

Rudy Rummel

cluding with whom they met, and other activities up to their death.
With this information, she would have no difficulty finding, ambushing, and killing them.
Liu motioned him over and said, “All the space-time coordinates
are now set, and have been triple checked. We have clearance to heavily draw on Tianjin’s electrical power. Anytime you are ready, we can
send it off.”
Shu Kuo walked over to the little red metal container, punched in
the code—which was the same as that of Jy-ying’s equipment capsule,
so she would know it—and inserted the plastic-sealed document. Hiding the open container with his body, he also put on top of the
document a personal message from him, telling her how much he
missed her and concluding with I can only hope now that we will meet
in Paradise. Have a long life, Jy-ying, and I applaud with a kiss what I
know will be your success. God surely will be with you.
He closed the capsule and returned to stand next to Liu at the large
control console. “Send it downtime,” Shu ordered.
He watched through protective windows as the massive laser beams
impacted against the red container. It seemed to shrivel, turned hazy,
became only a dusty outline, and then disappeared into its time-space
wormhole.
Jy-ying
As she left the time machine and started toward the exit, Jy-ying
noticed a loud buzzing again. When she’d first exited the machine, she
thought the buzzing came from the street. Now she realized it was
nearby, emitted by a red metal container about an inch or so away from
the rear of the machine. She walked over to it, and saw her name written in Chinese on all its visible sides.
Eyebrows raised, she stood stock still. This cannot be, she thought.
I came from 2001. This is 1906. No one knew I was coming—no one
could possibly know.
She bent over and took a closer look at the container. Ah, she realized, it must have been send to me from uptime. She put down her
suitcase and picked up the red container. It wasn’t heavy. She moved it
around in her hands, looking for an opening. She saw the lid and tried
to raise it, but it seemed locked.

Red Terror Never Again

13

She returned to the time machine, turned the light on inside,
and pulled down its little seat from the wall. Holding the container
on her lap, she could see a keypad on one side and below it in Chinese, Use capsule code. She keyed in the code and the lid loosened
with a little click.
She lifted the lid and saw a note on top of a sheaf of papers held together with a plastic clip. The note was from Kuo. She quickly put it
aside. She knew she would miss his arms, and maybe shed some tears
over the loss, but that was in the future. After all, she had just seen him
an hour or so ago, before she was sent on this one-way mission to kill
the time traveling assassin.
She lifted out the clipped document, undid the clip, and started
reading. She read about John Banks, an assistant professor of history,
escaping death in the 9/11 Twin Towers collapse; his lecturing on democide; Joy Phim attending his class to check him out and, satisfied,
inviting him to attend her mother’s party; and about the party itself, attended exclusively by members of the Survivors’ Benevolent Society,
including Joy’s mother. She had invited him so that they could ask him
to join Joy on a mission to prevent the wars and democides of history
that had killed so many, and in which they had suffered and lost loved
ones, and to promote democracy to ensure there would be no more wars
and democide.
Jy-ying paled, and read on.
She learned that Joy was so desirable and John’s hatred of war so
great that he finally decided to join her in this mission from which there
would be no return, especially since she intimated they would have to
be intimate; that once he accepted, Joy gave him intensive training in
martial arts, particularly karate and judo, and in weapons; and about his
constant arousal, and finally their lovemaking.
She gasped when she read about the FBI SWAT team attack on the
Society’s headquarters in search of a rumored time machine, and Joy’s
hasty good-bye to her loving mother before she and John departed in
the time machine; about their landing, and Joy’s tearful breakdown
over the loss of her mother, forever.
She read about their preparations for their interventions, and unconsciously put one hand over her mouth as she read about the
intervention in Mexico, where Joy murdered four boys who tried to
rape her—an event that would lead to her campaign to rid the streets
of muggers and rapists—and the fight between Joy and John over it.
She read about their intervention in China, where John saved Joy

14

Rudy Rummel

from death after a thrown knife he’d ducked lodged deep in her
thigh, and about their various interventions in Europe; about their
near breakup when John discovered Joy’s secret street campaign,
and finally, about the middle-aged Joy’s attempt to assassinate the
presidential candidate of the United States, who she claimed was a
communist, only to be thwarted at the last second by John. Believing
she had become too dangerous, he held a pillow over her face and,
with her help, suffocated her to death.
Jy-ying shook her head in disbelief. He had put their affairs in
order, she read, as he wrote this Remembrance to help him remember their years together and express his love for her, and when he
was finished, he put the Remembrance on his chest and waited in
their bed to die in the fire he had set. Judging by the condition of
the original document, as evidenced by the copy, he had been successful.
She sat still long after she finished reading. She had not imagined in
all her preparations for this trip that the time traveler would be two
people. The scientists had assured her, since they could not do it themselves, that time travel by more than one person was impossible. And
then . . . and then, for the time travelers to be lovers—lovers with such
a love for humanity and peace as they saw it that they would sacrifice
their lives to come to this godless, backward, uncivilized era . . . she
could not help but respect them. And then to die so tragically! she
thought. His killing his lover like that, and her helping him with her
own strength to smother her. A warrior—she had to be. He could never
have done it, otherwise.
She let out a long sigh. This cannot be real life. But she knew it
was. No such fiction would make it through the screening of Ch’en’s
secret service.
She stared unseeing out the machine’s door. She should be relieved,
very happy. There would be only minimal searching, no serious investigation to uncover the time travelers. She knew they would arrive at
2:51 a.m. tomorrow; she knew they would buy the warehouse in which
they landed and set up a new company, and on and on. There was absolutely no doubt she could find them and rid the world of them. And
then, free of their danger, she could assist Sabah in his world movement and the eventual victory of Sabahism, without the worldwide
nuclear holocaust his son unleashed on the democracies. Victory could
come in peaceful ways.

Red Terror Never Again

15

Yes, their lives were in her hands. Yes, she would kill even such
lovers.
She stiffened and raised her head. After all, they were heathens,
godless, a deadly threat to Sabah. If she did not kill them, they would
kill Sabah and her religion, and billions of people would be without
God, their souls forever excluded from Paradise.
I am a captain in the Sabah Security Guard. I took the Oath of Sabah when I was commissioned, and I must carry out the mission I
volunteered for, that I maneuvered for, no matter how unsavory. She
was not stupid. She realized she had just covered her disquiet with wet
paper. I will do what I must, she thought, but without her strong pretime travel conviction.
She frowned, compressed her lips tightly, and clipped the papers
back together. She shoved the document and Kuo’s note, unread,
back into the container. She removed from her purse the detailed
map of 1906 San Francisco and the list of mid-range and better hotels that had been prepared for her. These hotels would provide her
with a decent room until she was ready to play the Chinese Princess,
move to a high-class hotel, and, so she had planned before reading
the Remembrance, enter high society in search of the time traveler,
who himself must have brought a fortune with him and be circulating among the rich and powerful.
All now a thing of the past, she thought, not even smiling at the unconscious pun.
Jy-ying looked down at the list of hotels, and first singled out the
Little Palace Hotel on Leavenworth and Post Streets. She liked the
name, and checked its address against the map. No, too far away from
the factory in which she had landed, which was on De Haro Street, already marked with a red circle. She wanted a hotel within walking
distance so that she had easy access to her supply capsules until she
bought an automobile.
She looked at the other hotels listed—the All Nations Hotel, the St.
Francis Hotel Annex, The Nob Hill Hotel, and others. Her eyes came to
rest on the sixth hotel on the list. She could not explain her intuition; it
just felt as if it were the best mid-range choice. In fact, the more she
concentrated on the hotel’s name and one-sentence description, the better it seemed. She checked its address on the map. It was on 16th
Street, near the intersection with Rhode Island Street—only about two

16

Rudy Rummel

blocks away. That is where I will stay, she thought. Maybe that is
where Joy and John will spend their first days, also. She grinned at the
thought of what stupendous luck that would be.
The document had given no information about where they would
land tomorrow, so she could not . . . kill them when they emerged from
their time machine. Nor did it say where they would stay during their
first days here. Or during the year, for that matter. Of course, she would
soon find them. But if she were so lucky as to be in the same hotel, how
easy it would be to kill them. I could do so while they were asleep together—yes, I would kill them then, as I have been trained to do. It is
what my country and my religion trusted me to do when they sent me
here at great expense.
She felt a sudden chill over killing them in each other’s arms, but
squelched it again with the thought of the billions of lives that would be
saved for Paradise by Sabah, were he to live because of what she—
she—would do. She was trained as a member of the elite Sabah Security Guards, and she had been trained to kill. She knew she could do so
if the killing was just, and what was more just than to secure humanity’s soul?
She held onto that thought. It was better than wet paper. The killing
would be just. Billions would be saved.
She stood. Okay, I am ready again. Off I go to the old world.
After turning off the time machine’s light, she put the container under one arm, picked up her suitcase, and walked to the factory exit.
Before she got there she yelled back at the time machine, “It would be
just.” She did not realize that she had dropped the categorical “will be”
in favor of a conditional.
As she passed a newspaper kiosk on a corner of De Haro and 16th
Street, the violent cover on The Saturday Evening Post made her veer
closer.
Oh Sabah, it is impossible, she thought, staring aghast at the magazine wedged upright in a wire stand. That has to be fiction.
She took a quick look inside the magazine while the gray-bearded
old man in the kiosk stared at her. She had to read it as soon as possible. She opened her purse, took a quarter out of its coin pocket, and
gave it to him. “Keep the change,” she said as she thrust the magazine
under her arm next to the red container.

aaa

Red Terror Never Again

17

“We do not rent rooms to Orientals.” The hotel clerk’s voice
dripped arrogance as he regarded her from behind the reception desk.
She had not expected that. Although she knew of the great prejudice against Orientals at this time in San Francisco, she had not
considered that it might apply to her. Especially when renting a hotel
room. Well, she could go elsewhere.
She turned, about to head for one of the blue velvet easy chairs in
the lobby to study her list of hotels, when something stopped her. What
is it with me and this hotel? she wondered. With a mental shrug, she
turned back to the clerk. She straightened her body, tilted her head
back, and with haughty eyes, looked down her nose at the clerk. “You
dare, little man, to deny a room to Princess Tz’u Li Poh? In China I
would have you flayed, and when your skin was torn into ribbons, I
would tie them into braids for my pleasure.”
The clerk turned white and stepped back against the mail slots behind
him. He looked at her with flashbulb eyes, gulped, and tried to swallow.
Finally he stammered, “ Hotel . . . rule . . . . I would get . . . fired.”
“Take me to your manager,” she commanded in an imperious voice.
The clerk began to sweat—Jy-ying could smell his fear above the
stink of the hotel lobby. “He’s gone,” he wailed, waving his hands as
though she were attacking him.
She looked down a short hallway to the left of the registration desk,
and saw a door with Office painted on it. She picked up her suitcase
and made for the door.
“Hey, you can’t go there!”
Ignoring the clerk’s cry, she turned the doorknob, pushed the office
door open with her foot, and walked in. As she pushed it closed behind
her, she overheard a male guest who had risen from one of the lobby’s
Versailles chairs ask the clerk what had happened.
The clerk was shaking and still sweating. “She demanded a room,”
he croaked. “Can you believe it? The whore. She pretended she was a
princess—with those common clothes she was wearing! The boss will
kick her ass out or call the police. No worry.”
Jy-ying smiled and closed the door on the scene as he pulled a rumpled handkerchief out of his back pocket and wiped his face with it.
Twenty minutes later, Jy-ying emerged from the office with a
plump, middle-aged man in a gray suit. He strode up to the desk clerk
and announced with a wave of his thumb at Jy-ying, “She bought the
hotel. She now owns it, and I am her manager.” He stood there, seemingly at a loss for more words as he stroked his graying beard.

18

Rudy Rummel

The clerk’s eyes grew large and his jaw dropped. Nearby, the curious male guest’s face assumed the same expression.
The clerk finally cleared his throat and rasped, “She owns the hotel?”
The new manager seemed to have a hard time nodding, but finally
got his head to move up and down.
Jy-ying came around the reception desk and told the clerk, “I want
your very best room.”
The clerk looked back at the new manager, held his two palms up,
and shrugged as though asking, “What am I to do?”
The manager hissed, “She owns the hotel,” and added, “idiot.”
The clerk turned to the mail slots, took out the key to a third floor
room, and dropped it on the counter in front of Jy-ying. She picked it
up and, smiling, told her new manager, “We do not hire surly desk
clerks. Give him one week’s notice. And his replacement better be free
of this bias against Orientals, or I will hire a clerk from Chinatown.”
As the manager’s eyes widened and he paled, Jy-ying pulled the hotel register over to her, wrote the date and her former address in
Tianjin, China, and her name Khoo Jy-ying, all in Chinese. Pleased
with her calligraphy, she headed for the stairs. There seemed to be no
bellhop around.
After getting settled in her room and using the bathroom at the end
of the hall, Jy-ying reread the papers that had been sent to her, underlining crucial facts and writing marginal comments on the most important
ones. Then she placed them next to the water pitcher and bowl on the
chest of drawers. Puffing up the feather pillows on the bed, she lay
down, picked up The Saturday Evening Post, and leafed to the cover
article. She began to read.
“No, I do not believe it,” came out involuntarily five minutes later.
“This cannot be true,” soon followed.
“Ta ma de—Oh, shit! What universe am I in? Did I get sent to the
wrong one?”
After finishing the article, she sat up and leafed back to the beginning to reread its high points. Then, deep in thought, she dropped it
next to her, rested her head on both hands, and closed her eyes tightly.
For many minutes, only her rapidly beating heart revealed she was
alive. Finally she sat up and tossed the magazine at the papers on the
chest, almost knocking over the pitcher.
“Well, Shu Kuo and your brilliant scientists, where have you sent
me? Huh?” She let out a deep sigh. “Everything is changed. Everything.”

Chapter 4
January 21, 1905
St. Petersburg
Vladimir Knipovich

T

he tall priest grabbed Vladimir Knipovich by the arm and nodded
toward a quiet corner of the shop where they could not be overheard by the other printers. He led Knipovich there, then turned
his back on the shop floor, put his finger to his lips, and whispered,
“Father Gapon sent me to tell you about tomorrow’s attack on the emperor’s Winter Palace.”
Knipovich was sure he hadn’t heard right—the priest had an awful
Russian accent. He must be an outlander. Knipovich instinctively
looked down on him. He raised his chin and patted the air with his inksmeared right hand. “Attack?” He raised his voice. “You can’t mean
attack. I was told we were to demonstrate peacefully there, and back up
Father Gapon’s petition to our great emperor with holy and patriotic
signs and songs.”
He quickly looked over the priest’s shoulder and lowered his voice.
“This is only going to be a demonstration of our workers’ power. Yes?”
Knipovich was head of St. Petersburg’s police-sanctioned Zubotov
printer’s union, and a member of Gapon’s soberanie—The Assembly—as were almost all the workers here, now.
The priest leaned close to Knipovich. “No,” he whispered. “We
are getting enough rifles, pistols, and grenades for thousands, and a
captain, a secret social democrat, promised that his artillery company will come over to our side and barrage the Imperial Guards if
they interfere. More troops have promised to join when we show our
commitment. We plan to take the Winter Palace and declare that St.
Petersburg is ours and that Russia is a constitutional monarchy. We
will win.”
Knipovich stood paralyzed, gaping at the priest. “Are you sure?” he
finally asked. “When will my union be armed?”
“You must be patient,” the priest replied. “There are so many people—about two hundred thousand—that, even with all the arms we
have, not everyone, nor even every union, will get them. If we do not

20

Rudy Rummel

have enough for you, be ready to take up the arms of the troops and police we shoot down.” He gripped Knipovich’s shoulder. “I must go
now; I have many people to inform.”
Automatically Knipovich blurted what he should have suppressed:
“No, I will not do this. It is treason. I love the emperor.”
The priest nodded and tightened his grip. “I know. We all do. But
you must understand that we are saving him from the Jew social democrats and revolutionaries. They are getting ready to bring him down
and declare a socialist state. Gapon, as you know, is only interested in
reforms in working conditions, and national representation in a duly
elected Duma. If we win, the emperor will still be our Loving Father; if
we lose, if we are unwilling to be bloodied, the revolutionaries will
win, and he may lose his head on a chopping block. You must understand what is at stake. Do you?”
Now in control of his reaction, Knipovich nodded and filled his
“Yes!” with enthusiasm.
The priest released Knipovich. As he turned to go, his green eyes
flashed, and he raised his fist. “Tomorrow, victory is ours!”
Knipovich watched the priest hurry away. When he was sure that
the priest could no longer see him over his shoulder, he let the smirk
fill his face. All these years, all these risks as an agent provocateur for
the Okhrana now will pay off. They will reward me well when I tell Major Fedotov what Gapon plans.
He rushed for a different exit from the one the priest used.
Prince and General Vasil’chikov
Prince Vasil’chikov studied the details of his final disposition of the
Guards, troops, and Cossacks for the upcoming mass petition in front
of the emperor’s Winter Palace. His Highness was not about to let that
kozel priest Gapon get away with threatening the palace and himself,
even if the emperor was currently at Tzarskoje Selo. The Winter Palace
symbolized too much for the Russian people to be sullied by Gapon
and his stupid radical demands for, among other things, an eight-hour
workday and an elected constituent assembly. These radical workers
had to be shown the power of the czar in blood, if they refused to disperse when officially ordered to do so.
He was just about to add to his written orders that his troops be
given live ammunition and vodka in the evening when Grand Duke

Red Terror Never Again

21

Vladimir, commander of the St. Petersburg military district and uncle of the emperor, opened Prince Vasil’chikov’s door without
knocking. He strode across the office and around the prince’s desk,
then leaned over him with his hands on his hips. His round face was
red, and he was puffing hard. His eyes blazed as he tried to get his
words out.
“Do you know what that traitor Gapon plans for tomorrow?” he finally yelled. “He is arming his followers and they are going to attack
the Winter Palace and proclaim a republic.” Spittle flew out of his
mouth. “He was once one of our agents, but he has turned. He was supposed to lead a peaceful, patriotic demonstration.” Duke Vladimir took
a deep breath and shouted, “You must stop them.”
Prince Vasil’chikov stared, eyes wide. The normal hubbub in the
outer office cut off as though guillotined. Only the heavy breathing of
the duke broke the sudden silence.
Vasil’chikov jumped to his feet, almost hitting the duke with his
shoulder, and hurried to close his office door. He returned to stand in
front of the duke and asked, trying to keep the his voice respectful,
“Are you sure? Someone must be lying to you.”
The duke took a step back and shook his head so vigorously, his
upper body jerked with the movement. “No, no. The Okhrana has an
agent near the top. He got personal word from one of Gapon’s priests,
telling him about Gapon’s plans, and that thousands of arms are being
handed out for the attack. The sosat’ has betrayed us.”
The duke’s face turned even redder. He banged the desktop with a
huge fist and shouted, “There’s a mutiny. Blin! A mutiny. One of the
artillery companies is going over to the revolutionaries. You should
shoot them all tonight.”
“Which company?”
“I don’t know. Does it matter? You can’t have that many artillery
companies ready for action tomorrow. Shoot them all.” The duke
rubbed his fist, then pointed a finger at Vasil’chikov. “You must stop
this attack. I guarantee you, the emperor will support what you do, no
matter the cost in blood.
“The Okhrana will have agents with guns mixed among the revolutionaries. When the attack begins, they will shoot the leaders.” The
duke held up his hand. “Do not worry about them. They know they risk
being shot by your troops. They are all volunteers willing to die for the
emperor. In case they miss Gapon, I want you to assign your best
marksman to kill him.”

22

Rudy Rummel

Prince Vasil’chikov asked, “What about Police Director
Lopukhin?”
“I’m on my way to see him next.”
Duke Vladimir stared at Vasil’chikov through narrowed eyes for
several seconds, then nodded, turned abruptly, and marched to the door.
He jerked it open against its stop. Vasil’chikov listened to the duke’s
boots drumming through the still silent outer office until the duke
slammed its outer door.
He quickly closed his own office door and sat down at his desk.
Brows furrowed, he tore up the orders he had written. He unlocked his
desk drawer and took out ten sheets of sealed and embossed imperial
paper. He thought for several seconds, then began to lay out the new
troop depositions around the palace and on the approaching avenues for
the Horse, Finnish Life, Preobrazhenskii, Chevalier, Pavlovskii, and
Imperial Guards; and almost twenty-two battalions of infantry, twentythree squadrons of cavalry, and nearly nine hundred Cossacks. All told,
he had about nine thousand infantry and thirty-nine hundred cavalry at
his disposal, but even so, he worried whether they would be nearly
enough against a hundred thousand or more raging civilians, many with
weapons.
He put one sheet aside. It was to contain his secret order to arrest
the men making up his two companies of artillery. He would investigate their loyalty later. He was not going to execute them out of hand,
and he was sure that Duke Vladimir would see the wisdom of that
when he cooled down.

Chapter 5
Eight volleys from the Neva
And the Ninth
Tired, like glory
This is—
(From left and right
Already running at a trot)
This is—
(In the distance they cry:
We will yet avenge the massacre)
This is the tearing apart
Of the Joints
Of oaths
To the dynasty sworn.
– Boris Pasternak, “1905”
January 23, 1905
Geneva
Lev Davydovich Bronstein

S

team billowed around the locomotive as the snow-shrouded train
from Munich slowed to a crawl and finally hissed to a stop in
the Cornavin train station. Within seconds, passengers stepped
down from the cars and streamed toward the concessions and the vast
exit. No one knew—indeed, no one would believe—that the thin, clerkish-looking man among them, the one with goatee, wire rimmed glasses
perched high on his Jewish nose and no hat to cover his mass of unruly
black hair, would be the dictator of Russia within a year. He would lead
the Red Army in a bloody civil war and become known as the Red
Butcher.
Clad in a long black coat, Bronstein, or Lvov as he called himself,
lugged a large, beat-up suitcase in one hand and carried in the other
several books with torn paper markers sticking out of their pages. He
was exhausted. He was returning to Geneva after a hurried lecture tour,
which had included an appearance in the great hall of the Polytechnic

24

Rudy Rummel

Institute in St. Petersburg weeks before, and had spent a sleepless night
on the train. He soon had to stop to put the suitcase down and readjust
the books in his hand.
Nearby, a newsboy in knickers with a haversack of newspapers
over his shoulder held up one and waved it at the crowd. “Révolution
en Russie—Revolution in Russia,” he cried in French in a squeaky
voice, and then repeated it in German.
Heart beating fast, Lvov suddenly found the energy to lift the suitcase and hurry over to the paperboy. “Hold the paper still, will you,” he
demanded. He then saw that it was dated the day before, and the energy
went out of him like air from a pricked balloon. He bought a copy
anyway, and sat on his suitcase to read the old news.
Seven days ago, all thirteen thousand workers at the Putilov arms
works went on strike; two days later, twenty-six thousand workers
were out, and voted for radical political reforms, especially democracy; and just three days ago, 105,000 workers went on strike. What
was new was that yesterday, just before the paper was published,
111,000 workers struck, and a huge demonstration of workers, soldiers, professionals, and businessmen led by Father Georgii Gapon
was about to take place in front of the czar’s St. Petersburg Winter
Palace.
The headline exaggerated. This was the buildup to the revolution,
but there was yet no spark to set it off. He hoped the troops guarding
the palace would—had, since it already occurred—attack the demonstrators. Perhaps too much to hope for.
Tired as he was, he decided to go right to the Bolshevik center in
Geneva, which stood on the corner of the Rue de Carouge and the
Arve embankment. There, the Bolshevik Vperyod—Forward editorial and dispatch offices, the Lepeshinskys’ Bolshevik restaurant,
and the apartments of leading Russian emigrants and Bolsheviks
were concentrated.
When he reached the station exit on Rue du Mont-Blanc, there was
only one taxi left, a victoria hitched to a swaybacked hack. Bronstein
gave the driver the address; when he arrived he paid the driver, lugged
out his suitcase and, carefully so they would not fall into the sludge, he
pulled out his books. As he turned to enter the building’s portico, a
strange man suddenly appeared at his side.
“Here, let me help you with that,” the man said in barely understandable Russian. He grabbed the suitcase from Bronstein’s hand,
mounted the stairs to the building, and put the case down on the cleared

Red Terror Never Again

25

area under the portico. Then he turned to Bronstein, who had hurried
after him. His deep-set eyes were wide and shining with admiration as
he asked, “Just to be sure—you are Lev Davydovich Bronstein?”
Bronstein tilted his head. Brows furrowed, he stared at the man. Assassinations by the Okhrana were occurring with frightening regularity,
as were the assassinations of high officials by the revolutionaries. The
man towered over him; as far as he could see, the strong-jawed stranger
was heavyset, perhaps very muscular under his fur-trimmed coat. He
looked about Bronstein’s age—mid-twenties. He had carried the heavy
suitcase as though it were filled with feathers. But the devotion in his
face was obvious—hardly the look of an assassin. Anyway, Bronstein
reasoned, he was unarmed and there was nothing he could do now.
He nervously answered, “Yes.”
The man grabbed Bronstein’s left hand with both of his and shook
it. “This is the happiest moment of my life. To meet you and help you
achieve your revolutionary program has been my dream. Come, let us
go to your favorite cafe and I will tell you what happened with Gapon’s
demonstration in Saint Petersburg. It’s now called Bloody Sunday.”
When Bronstein hesitated, he added, “I am rich; I want to bankroll your
revolutionary success.”
The man picked up the suitcase and started down the stairs. Still
holding his books in one hand, Bronstein stared slack-jawed for several
seconds, his other hand hovering over his chest. Finally he shook himself and rushed down the stairs to catch up with the stranger, who was
already several yards down the concrete sidewalk.
“Who are you?” Bronstein yelled at him.
“A supporter,” he answered. “A believer.”
A block away, they entered the émigré Café Landolt, where Bolsheviks gathered almost every evening. The stranger led the way to an
empty table in the back, where the gas- and candlelight barely penetrated. It was stuffy, warm, and smoky inside the café; the man took off
his black overcoat and threw it over a chair before seating himself.
Bronstein did the same with his greatcoat and, dropping down on
the chair across from the stranger, he blurted, “What happened in St.
Petersburg?”
A round tub of a man in a leather apron approached their table
through the smoke, and Bronstein motioned for the stranger to wait until they gave their order. Once the waiter departed with their order for
Kvass—imported Russian beer—Bronstein looked at the stranger and
raised his eyebrows.

26

Rudy Rummel

“The revolution—the revolution is now!” the stranger exclaimed,
raising two fists and shaking them. Bronstein listened carefully to
what the stranger said next, ignoring the mispronunciations and filling in the broken Russian. “The czar’s troops around the Winter
Palace and on its approaches lost their heads. It was a massacre. The
demonstrators numbered about 140,000—mainly workers and their
families, with a scattering of professionals and students. They had
no weapons; they were told by Gapon’s organizers not even to carry
a knife or brass knuckles. What they did carry was church banners,
portraits of the czar, Russian flags, holy icons, signs with medals
affixed to them, peace signs, and signs asserting faith in the czar
mixed in with signs demanding a decent wage, eight-hour workday,
land, freedom, and so on. The workers dressed in their Sunday best
and made it a family affair, bringing along their wives and children.
Nothing revolutionary.”
“Yes, yes,” Bronstein commented, “we tried to organize them, but
they would not listen to us. All they want is better working conditions
and pay. They love the czar.”
The stranger nodded. “Then you will not be surprised to hear that
the workers not only refused to allow many revolutionaries to participate, they beat up some of them when they tried to pass out leaflets or
shouted revolutionary slogans in the crowd. No matter. On the roads
and bridges to the Winter Palace, troops blocked the way and opened
fire when the workers refused to turn around.”
Leaning forward on the table, unaware that his glasses had slipped
down to the edge of his nose, Bronstein asked, “What troops? Fired?
Where?”
The stranger pulled several folded sheets that looked like telegrams
from the inner pocket of his ill-fitting corduroy suit. He unfolded them
and slid the candle close so he could read them. “Let’s see,” he said.
“Oh, yes; I should point out that it was a bright, sunny, bitterly cold
day—the temperature was about 5 degrees, the air was clear, good for
shooting.”
He picked up one sheet and held it close to the flame to read it.
“When a mass of sixteen thousand demonstrators on the way to the
Winter Palace tried to cross the bridge over the Obvodnyi Canal, they
were blocked by an infantry unit and two hundred mounted Cossacks.
An officer shouted that the crowd could not cross the bridge. After the
workers refused to stop, the Cossacks attacked with whips and the flat
of their sabers and used their horses to trample them. But the Cossacks

Red Terror Never Again

27

only succeeded in creating temporary open spaces in the huge crowd,
which continued to surge forward. Many workers in the front ranks
pleaded that they were peaceful and only wanted to petition the czar.
“As the crowd pressed toward the line of infantry, their commander
gave the order to fire on them. A bugler sounded the signal, and the
troops fired a volley directly into the crowd. Many in the front ranks
collapsed, some screaming. Amidst the bodies, the crowd reformed,
some yelling to others, ‘Do not betray us.’ Some opened their coats to
bare their chests and shouted, ‘I will die for the emperor.’ They must
have thought the troops were betraying the czar’s sympathy for his
people.
“Several more volleys were fired into the crowd, and the area in
front of the bridge and the approach along Shlissel’burg embankment
was filled with still bodies, pools of blood and swaths of red in the
snow and on the ice, and crying, wailing, groaning, wounded men,
women, and children. Some tried to crawl away. Some raised their
heads or hands in pleas for help. Some yelled, ‘There is no God any
longer’ and ‘There is no czar.’”
The stranger picked up another paper, and lowered his voice to an
incredulous whisper. “Another huge mass of workers on the way to the
bridges over the Neva were blocked by soldiers. Some of the workers
waved white handkerchiefs to show their peaceful intent. Worker representatives asked the commanding officer permission to pass, but he
ordered mounted Cossacks to disperse the crowd with their whips and
sabers. When that did not break up the crowd, he ordered his troops
into firing position, but when the bugle sounded they refused to fire. So
he used the Cossacks again . . . and again. Many more bodies; even
more wounded.”
Another paper. “A large mass of workers was led by Father Gapon.
As it advanced along Peterhof Chausee, it appeared to be a celebratory
religious procession, what with the many crosses and religious icons
the crowd carried. They also held up a large banner that read, Soldiers!
Do not shoot at the people. The crowd turned toward the Narva Arch
and the bridge over the Tarakanovka River. It was blocked by a line of
infantry.
“As the tightly packed crowd of marchers approached, the infantry
parted, and a squadron of Horse Grenadier Guards attacked them with
sabers. Protected by the workers around him, Gapon yelled out, ‘Be
brave. Forward, comrades! Freedom or death.’ Singing bravely, the
crowd continued to move toward the bridge, and two companies of the

28

Rudy Rummel

Ninety-third Irkutsk Infantry Regiment. The bugle sounded ‘fire’ three
separate times, but the troops would not obey. Finally, on the next order, the troops fired into the air. Demonstrators kept coming. When the
crowd was almost upon them, the troops fired directly into the tightly
packed mass of people. Screams and yells rang out as the bullets
downed many in the front ranks.
“Again, the bugle sounded. Another volley into the crowd. And the
bugle again, and still another volley, and another and another and yet
another, until both companies had emptied their box magazines. Dead
and wounded lay everywhere, Gapon among them, with a hole in the
back of his head.”
The stranger’s hand shook as he picked up another paper, and a
corner almost caught fire as he brought it close to the candle to read.
“At the Troitskaia Square by the Peter Paul fortress, a different procession of workers was attacked by mounted ulans who ripped into the
crowd with sabers. This crowd did flee, and dispersed into side streets.
But later, another huge crowd, involving some of the same workers,
approached Troitskaia Bridge. Arm in arm, they walked toward the
three companies of Pavlovskii Guards blocking their way. When the
crowd would not halt, the commanding officer ordered his infantry to
attack them with fixed bayonets. The workers retreated and fled. More
bodies; more gravely wounded.”
Another paper. “A different crowd of workers, estimated at over
twenty thousand—the largest of them all—later approached the same
Troitskaia Square on their way to the palace. They also faced the line of
the Pavlovskii Guards, with a company of Grenadier Guards held in
reserve. A bugle sounded, and troops fired a volley into the crowd.
“Bugle again. Another volley.
“Bugle. Volley. And ulans charged into the fleeing crowd, their
deadly sabers swinging mercilessly, their horses trampling the dead and
wounded.”
Bronstein felt his stomach constrict. He leaned out of his chair and
put his hand on the pile of remaining papers before the stranger could
pick up another. The dirty lenses of his eyeglasses spread the candle’s
red flame across the telegrams like blood. His head ached. “What about
the Palace Square?” he croaked. “Did any workers get there?”
“Yes. Let me read the telegram.”
Bronstein removed his hand and hunched far back in his chair.
The stranger leafed through the papers and picked out one. He held
it up to the flame, the shaking of his hand now evidently under control.

Red Terror Never Again

29

“The square that fronted the green and white Winter Palace, the buildings of the Imperial Army General Staff, the Admiralty, and Royal
Guards’ General Staff was guarded by regiment after regiment of
Guards and other troops, as well as Cossacks. They were placed to prevent any access to the square.
“By breaking into small groups and using side streets, or walking
on the ice over the Neva to avoid the bridges, tens of thousands of the
workers finally reached the Palace Square and collected in adjoining
streets. They were peaceful; many shouted that they were there to present their petition to the czar, to see the czar, to achieve justice and
establish their rights. They waited for Gapon to arrive with the religious
procession to present their petition to the czar. They did not believe
they would be shot down in front of the palace. They were the czar’s
workers. He was their Father. He would hear their plea.
“Many were yet unaware that others on their way to the square had
been shot and killed, or cut down, by the czar’s troops, but word began
to spread from the survivors who had reached the square. Many did not
believe what they heard.
“The military commander decided to start clearing away the crowd,
beginning at the Aleksandrovskii Gardens that flanked the square. First
he sent cavalry armed with whips and the flat of their sabers. The
crowd only milled around, keeping a good distance from the horses.
This attack made credible what many had heard about the shootings.
The crowd began to shout and taunt the troops.
“Prince Vasil’chikov sent a direct order to the commander to
shoot the demonstrators. At the bugle call, the front line of Guards
dropped to one knee and aimed, then fired a lethal volley into the
crowd. Another bugle call launched another volley. The crowd scattered in waves, surging first in one direction and then another to
escape the bullets.
“The troops in front of the Admiralty building parted to reveal the
navy’s Maxim machine guns. Machine gunners opened fire, spraying
their bullets into the fleeing workers, killing men, women, children,
bystanders, tea sellers in the gardens, ice skaters on the nearby pond,
and police indiscriminately. When the firing stopped, the commander
unleashed the Cossacks, who systematically cut and slashed at those
still alive in or near the square, and steered their horses to pound with
their hooves those on the ground.”
The stranger threw down the paper, fisted one hand, and slammed
the other flat on the table, drawing the attention of those seated nearby

30

Rudy Rummel

and causing Bronstein to jump. “This will be known as Bloody Sunday,” he hissed. “No count of the dead could be made, but they must be
in the thousands.”
He shook his fist. When he continued, his voice apparently trembled with righteous anger. “The workers could not believe what
happened to them. But when it sank in that the czar’s troops had shot at
them in front of his—Russia’s—home, they were enraged. They turned
into a rampaging, riotous mob, attacking small groups of police and
soldiers on the streets and burning government buildings. They built
barricades, and the few who had weapons used them.
“Most important, comrade—” the stranger emphasized his words
with his fist “—they now are listening to what the revolutionaries have
to say. The workers want leadership. But, as yet, there is none. Gapon
is dead; most of his staff are dead. Gapon’s alliance of hundreds of
thousands of workers is now an unorganized mob willing to fight and
die. They now are a revolutionary army.”
He leaned back, relaxed his hands, and stared for a moment into
Bronstein’s eyes. Bronstein felt horror and hope rip his face in different
directions.
The stranger continued in a level voice. “The city is now locked up
in a general strike. All major unions, even the police’s counterrevolutionary Zubatov unions, have walked off the job. Trains are not
running; no one can send or receive telegrams, except those permitted
by our comrades. Telephone operators have walked out, food is not being delivered into the city, electricity has been shut off to government
districts, and it is a ghost town. In Russia’s major cities, about half a
million strikers are out. But, while small groups of soldiers and sailors
have mutinied, palace guards and other regiments have remained loyal,
and so has the navy.”
The stranger pushed the candle away and leaned on his elbows toward Bronstein. “This will change. You now have your trigger event
for the revolution. As word of this huge massacre reaches Moscow and
other Russian cities, the general strike will spread.”
It seemed the stranger had wanted to introduce an optimistic tone
into his words, but they came out guttural, like a German trying to pronounce French for the first time. Nevertheless, Bronstein clearly
understood. He finally choked out, “That is what I’ve hoped to hear for
a year, but I often thought I never would.”
Even in the semidarkness of the café, Bronstein could see that the
stranger’s face was alight with anticipation. Bronstein himself could

Red Terror Never Again

31

not keep his hands still; he picked up his beer, set it down, and slid it in
a circle on the scarred tabletop. “Yes, yes,” he exclaimed, waving
northeastward, in the direction of St. Petersburg. “This is it. I must go
to St. Petersburg immediately. But, it may be hopeless. Many more will
die; we may fail unless the soldiers mutiny. We don’t have the guns.”
The stranger seemed to have been waiting for Bronstein to say
something like that. He reached across the table and put his hand on
Bronstein’s arm, and told him, “I have the funds for you to purchase
what you need. I am rich, as I mentioned, and I am a revolutionary socialist, a Bolshevik, and your ardent supporter.”
At the word “Bolshevik,” Bronstein raised his eyebrows. In the internecine struggle among the revolutionary groups, Bronstein had only
recently joined the minority Bolsheviks and their leader Lenin.
The stranger leaned both elbows on the table and locked eyes with
Bronstein. He said in the clearest, simplest Russian, “I will give you
fifty million rubles for guns. Is this enough?”
Bronstein’s jaw dropped; he knew his eyebrows were reaching for
his fur cap. The rest of his body sat frozen in the chair. The stranger
waited, his eyes still locked on Bronstein’s. When Bronstein finally
spoke, he said apologetically, “Prastite—I’m sorry, your Russian accent is difficult to understand. How much did you say?”
The stranger gestured for Bronstein to wait a moment. He pulled
the candle close, and took out a small notebook and pencil. He tore out
a piece of paper and wrote down 50.000.000, then handed the paper to
Bronstein.
He stared at the figure in the candlelight. “You are giving us that
much?” he gasped. “It is a fortune.” He narrowed his eyes, pursed his
lips, and stroked his goatee for a moment, then looked up to stare at the
stranger, whose eyes were in deep shadow. His whole face looked satanic. Bronstein had been horrified by the massacres, then ecstatic over
the revolutionary potential now unleashed. Now he felt as though he
had been thrown down a cliff. “All that is a trick,” Bronstein threw at
the stranger, waving at the pile of papers still on the table.
Bronstein jumped up, ready to leave. “You are an agent. Who are
you working for?”
The stranger quickly leaned over the table. Holding one palm flat
out toward Bronstein, he gently pushed him back down with the other.
“Pa-ver’ mne—believe me. I will prove it to you. Just check out the
bank account that I created for you.”
Bronstein stared.

32

Rudy Rummel

The stranger tore out a page from his notebook on which he had already written something, added it to a folded sheet of paper from his
inner pocket, and held them toward Bronstein.
He slowly reached out and took them as though he was being offered a huge diamond. He held the notepaper next to the candle to read
the name of the Darier Hentsch & Cie Bank in Geneva, the numbered
account at the bank, and the account’s name and password.
Bronstein slowly put the papers down. He struggled to merely
smile. He felt like jumping up and doing a jig. And yet, this could not
be. It was too much money to be true. The doubt hung on. He asked,
“You have done this for us?”
“Yes,” the stranger answered. “You have all the information you
need to check the account at the bank. It is only a twenty minute walk
from here. Then, you can withdraw what you want at your own pace for
buying the weapons you need. I’m sure you can buy many of them secretly from Russian manufacturers such as the Putiloff munitions
factory, but with that much money, you no doubt can persuade some
arms merchants to export to you what you need.”
Bronstein shook his head. “I’m an intellectual, a writer, an organizer. I don’t know how to do this. I have never bought or carried a gun.
I know nothing about guns.”
The stranger pointed at the folded sheet of paper that Bronstein had
set aside. “On that paper are the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the Frenchman Eugène Schneider and his major competitor, the
German House of Krupp. They both have been supplying the czar, but
tend to be apolitical. I imagine you can interest them in your money,
especially if you let them secretly transport the arms into Russia for
you, and promise an exclusive arms contract when you establish your
revolutionary government. Bloody Sunday should give your revolution
credibility. Use your people in Paris and Berlin for the contacts.
“I trust you. I have studied you, going back to your birth in 1879 in
the village of Yanovka, Kherson Province, to the gymnasium you attended in Odessa, the St. Paul realschule—high school, and your
revolutionary activities and theories up to now. I know your writings. I
especially believe in your theory of permanent world revolution. I agree
that the revolution must be spread to other countries, or it will never be
secure in Russia. Moreover, you are a well-organized person, and know
well how to respond to emergencies and opportunities. You are a
leader, and I have no doubt you will effectively and efficiently use
these funds.”

Red Terror Never Again

33

Bronstein picked up his warm beer, then put it back down. He
rubbed his hand on the rough wooden tabletop. He crossed his legs and
uncrossed them. All the while, his eyes moved back and forth between
the stranger and the figure on the notepaper. He took a deep breath, and
let it out slowly. He still had his doubts. “Okay, I am sure that this is
either a practical joke or a trick. I will check with the bank. There is too
much at stake to fear looking like a fool or being arrested again.”
The noise in the café had increased to such an extent that Bronstein
leaned across the table to be sure the stranger heard him. When he nodded, Bronstein then looked around to see what was happening.
The café had filled with men and a few women, and they yelled
excitedly back and forth. Some were passing around telegrams they
must have received from St. Petersburg. Bronstein caught some of
the words: “Massacre . . . the revolution has begun . . . faith in the
czar torn apart . . . tyranny shall fall . . . the people shall rise up . . .
powerful and free . . . leaving for Moscow . . .”
Bronstein forgot about his doubts over the money. He felt fired
up about the revolution all over again. Turning back to the stranger,
he said in a voice charged with excitement, “The people from
Vperyod are here. They must be passing the word. There is Martov
and Lenin, and . . . oh, his wife Krupskaya is with him. The
Lunacharskayas are here—”
“Listen,” the stranger said.
Grim-faced people at a nearby table had begun singing the revolutionary funeral march, You Have Fallen in the Struggle, and its solemn
refrain was being picked up by others. Soon it filled the café. Bronstein
and the green-eyed stranger joined in.

Chapter 6
November 14, 1906
San Francisco
Joy Phim

T

he green-striped cab bounced over ruts and potholes as it took
John and Joy to a hotel recommended by Hands Reeves, a hotel
he and his teammates had used when he was a catcher for the San
Francisco Seals. He was one of the three squatters in the empty warehouse where their time machine had landed hours ago. John had hired
him and the other two, Sal Garcia and Dolphy Docker, as the first employees of the Tor Import & Export Company that John planned to
create as a cover for their foreign interventions.
They were all together in the horse-drawn cab. Joy, seated next
to John, was dressed in a cloth cape over a “lady’s” white satin
waist—really a shirt, with a wide collar held tight at the throat with
an imitation silk bow, the waist tucked into a blue “short lady’s”
mixed cotton and wool walking skirt with a flounced bottom. No
corset—she would go naked first. She had her hair up in a large bun
on top of her head and partly covered by a wide-brimmed hat
trimmed with folded lace, imitation flowers, and white egret feathers
sticking out at the side.
She kept looking at John out of the corner of her eye. He looked so
funny in his clothes of the age. He had on a blue diagonally-worsted
coat, all-wool gray pinstripe pants, black boots and, under his coat, a
long-sleeved white madras shirt with a separate linen collar, around
which he’d knotted a maroon bow tie. That amused her the most.
A bow tie. On my John. Doesn’t fit him. A red cowboy bandana
around his neck would better suit him.
Then there was his cocky-looking Fedora. That was different. With
its slight tilt to the side that revealed blonde curls, he did look like a
lady killer.
The three guys sat scrunched in the narrow seat across from them.
They wore the cheap work clothes—denim, cotton worsted, and twilled
sateen—of the time; Sal and Dolphy wore the popular golf cap, and
Hands had a Bismarck-styled one. Not one of them would sit next to

36

Rudy Rummel

Joy, although they would have had more room, and all three pretended
they were looking out the window. But she caught them several times
staring at her.
John had told them she was his assistant and translator, and that
they were moving their company from New York to San Francisco. He
explained her job as handling their business with Asia, and since she
was Oriental—Sino-Vietnamese, she always corrected—and spoke
Chinese and Japanese, she had a very important role to play in the
company.
Since John and she had unwittingly changed their clothes behind
the supply capsules while the guys waited for them, they would have
been stupid not to recognize an intimate relationship between the two.
So she understood why she saw more in their looks than simple attraction. It was more like appraisal.
It was early in the morning, with a light fog yet to retreat north, and
the streets were crowded with people on their way to work or late in
bringing goods in from the country for the various markets. Farm wagons, carts, carriages, horse riders, automobiles—or what some called
motor cars—and bicycles crowded the street, and added a stench of
horse manure, urine, livestock, exhaust fumes, and unwashed bodies to
the fog. A funk common in all major cities of this era.
Apparently entranced by his first glimpse of a period he had only
read about, John stared out the side window, unbothered by the stink.
Joy was. She kept twitching her nose over the awful smell of this
world, which its inhabitants seemed not to notice. “They all must have
had their noses seared at birth,” she muttered to herself.
She again swung her hand across her face, trying to bat away the
flies that had invaded the bouncing buggy, and kept landing on her
nose. She couldn’t believe that John could sit relaxed as he was, with
these flies and the reeking streets. He must have an invisible clothes pin
on his nose. With a little grin, she glanced at John. Of course, he has
that Caucasian body odor. That will keep the flies away. I’d better not
tell him that, though. He’ll use it to avoid taking a bath.
“Hey Jo—Miss Phim,” John said, and pointed to the Stanley
steamer passing them driven by a man wearing goggles, a plaid cap, a
fur-collared cape, and a blue and red scarf that circled his neck and
blew behind him. “Straight out of a period British movie.”
John missed the kiosk on a corner that was revealed as the
steamer passed on. Joy did not. She gasped, and immediately yelled,
“Stop the cab.”

Red Terror Never Again

37

In this era, such a shout from a woman was a command. Hands
stuck his head out of his window and yelled at the driver, “Stop. Stop!”
The driver reined in his two Morgan horses and pulled on his hand
brake. He ignored the cussing farmer who suddenly had to jerk his
wagon around the cab to avoid it, his equally unhappy horse almost
bolting.
John stared with raised eyebrows at Joy. She asked Hands as soon
as he sat back and looked at her, “How far is it to the hotel from here?”
Hands stuck his head out of the buggy and looked down the street.
“About a block or two.”
Suddenly remembering her female place in this era, and that John
was supposed to be her boss, she turned to him and asked, “Can we get
out here? There is something,” and she emphasized the last word, “that
I want to show you at the kiosk we passed. Then, if you like, we can
walk to the hotel from here.” After five weeks of lovemaking and her
martial arts training, she knew he understood the look she gave him.
John studied her face for a moment. With a dimple forming at the
corner of his mouth, he responded, “Well, Miss Phim, that is truly alert
of you. It justifies my hiring you as my assistant and translator. I know
that you yelled for the cab to stop because you didn’t have time to get
my permission. So, I will ignore it. Well now, shall we all depart?” He
looked at Hands, who seemed amused. “How much will the cab cost?”
Joy blurted, “Are you going to buy the cab . . . Boss?”
Hands looked at Joy, then, shaking his head, he looked at John.
John’s dimple had gotten deeper. “For the ride, Hands.”
“Maybe twenty-five cents.”
John reached into his change pocket for a fifty cent coin, and gave
it to Hands. “Tell the driver to keep the change.”
Once they were all out of the cab, John stiffened his back and
strode back to the kiosk, letting the others follow him a pace or two behind. There he saw the piles of newspapers, and picked out the San
Francisco Chronicle and Call.
Catching up to him, Joy surreptitiously stuck her satin-covered elbow in his side, and pointed to the cover of the November 10, 1906,
issue of The Saturday Evening Post. “My God! I wasn’t mistaken,” she
exclaimed.
John looked where she was pointing, froze for a moment, and then
grabbed the magazine from its upright wire holder. He hastily opened
the magazine to read the cover article. He didn’t even hear the graybearded vendor yell, “Hey, you didn’t pay me.”

38

Rudy Rummel

Joy understood John’s distraction, but she wasn’t going to miss the
opportunity to get even. She put her hand over the page he was trying
to read and said, not trying to hide the pleasure in her voice, “Hey, boss
man, you didn’t pay for the magazine and newspapers.”
John mumbled something, and asked, “How much?”
“A nickel for the magazine, two for both papers. Can’t you read the
signs?”
John reached into his pants pocket, drew out another fifty cent
piece, and absently tossed it to the man, who had to catch it before it
slid off the newspapers onto the wet ground.
Joy stepped on John’s boot, and when he looked at her, she nodded
toward the three guys, who were staring at them. As time went by, they
regarded their new boss more and more as if they were watching a circus.
John cleared his throat. Motioning to Hands, he said, “Please lead
the way to the hotel.”
He walked beside Hands to the hotel, his head buried in the article.
He must be guiding himself by radar, Joy guessed. She walked behind
them with Dolphy and Sal next to her. Soon, putting his hand up to his
mouth to hide what he was going to say from John, Sal asked in a low
voice, “Is the boss always like that?”
With “that” undefined, Joy thought of the alternatives. Preoccupied? Funny? Unbossy? Unconsciously, she shifted into her own
descriptions. Loving? Handsome? Rugged, tolerant— She stopped herself and shook her head to clear it. “What do you mean, Mr. Garcia?”
she asked quietly.
“Sal. Please call me Sal. The last woman who called me a mister
stole my wallet.”
“I’m Joy, Sal. I think your wallet is safe from me,” she said. As color
began to creep over Sal’s face, she asked, “What did you mean by ‘that?’”
Sal frowned. “What’s ‘that?’”
Joy gave him a long look. “You’re pulling my leg.”
Sal grinned, and for the first time Joy saw that tight little grin of his,
almost a subdued leer. “Can I?”
Joy burst out laughing, causing Hands to glance back at her. She
was enjoying this. Sal would probably be her favorite among the guys.
“Can you what, Sal?”
“Pull your leg?”
“You can try, but only if you let me know first where you want to
be buried. Now, Sal, what is the ‘that’ in your question, ‘Is the boss always like that?’”
“Nothing.”

Red Terror Never Again

39

“Sal!”
“Oh, okay. Does he always give away money like he did to the cab
driver and the newspaper man? ‘Keep the change,’ he says. When I get
my ten dollars for the week, I hope he gives me a C-note and says,
‘Keep the change.’”
Still smiling, she responded, “I’ve found him very generous, Sal.”
He looked slyly at her out of the corner of his eye. “You must know
him very well.”
“What are you saying, Sal? Really?”
Sal seem taken aback by Joy’s directness. He got a look of innocence on his face. “Nothing. Only that you worked for him in New
York and came here with him. So,” and he let the word linger, “you
must know him well.
“Ah . . . what does that finger mean, Joy?”
John
John scanned enough of the Post article to mentally exclaim, It is
simply impossible. Impossible. Yet this article is written as though it’s
true. I bet it’s one of those spoofs that occasionally some crackpot
writer gets published, then, when people are falling over themselves
about it, he smugly declares it’s all fiction.
When John almost ran into a pole, Hands pointed to a hotel a short
distance away and, to get his attention, said, “That’s it.”
John reluctantly lowered the Post and took a look. The hotel had
three stories, and a large marquee with the word Fairfax written on a
big vertical sign above it. When he entered the hotel with the others
behind him, he noticed that the smell in the hotel lobby was not much
better than that in the streets. No doubt the two spittoons, one of them
located by the registration desk, were making their contribution. And
the heavy odor of cigar smoke also added to what flowed in the high
front doors when they were opened. He wondered if Joy would notice
and glanced at her. She was twitching her nose. Must be itching, he
thought. Why doesn’t she scratch it?
He asked the registration clerk for adjacent rooms for two, and
waved toward Joy as the second person. The clerk wore a sour look,
and seemed to be looking past them into the lobby. John waited. The
clerk finally registered him and with a half-hidden, hostile look, the
clerk shoved the registration book to Joy. John put it down to this era’s
bias against Orientals.

40

Rudy Rummel

Joy stared at the registration book. “Look at this,” she told John.
“Beautiful Chinese calligraphy. It’s a Khoo Jy-ying in room 305. She’s
from Tianjin, China. I want to talk to her as soon as I can. What an opportunity. She may be a contact for our company in China.”
John responded absently, “I’ll leave that to you. You’ll probably
want to practice your rusty Chinese.” His mind was still full of what he
had read in the Post article, and he was in too much of a hurry to return
to it to note the three guys waiting for his instructions.
As they were turning to go to their rooms, Joy put her hand on his
arm, pointed to the registration book, and said, “You forgot something.” When he turned and looked down at the book, she whispered,
“The guys don’t have a place to sleep.”
“Oh, yes.” John turned to the guys standing about five feet away.
“You were all living in the warehouse. Well, you’re my employees
now, and I won’t have that.” He turned back to the desk clerk and told
him, “Give these good fellows each a nice room.”
As he and Joy headed for the stairs with their suitcases, he turned
back to them and said, “The cost is on the company. Please meet us in
the hotel restaurant at six. Okay?” When they nodded, looking as
though they’d won a jackpot without knowing they’d even had a ticket,
John turned back toward the stairs.
As Joy passed by Sal, he asked, “Is he always like that?”
“Enjoy it, Sal.”
John heard her and asked, “What was that about?”
Joy gave a little grin. “Just small talk between coworkers.”
His eagerness to give the Post article a careful read increased with
each step up the stairs. And he could not wait to discuss it with Joy. But
he knew Joy—she would try to get it from him to read it first. He congratulated himself when he saw out of the corner of his eye that she
was about to grab the magazine from under his arm, and folded it into
his inside suit coat pocket with a flourish and a little smirk.
He did not see the Chinese woman sunk into one of the lobby’s
plush Victorian chairs, staring back and forth between Joy and him.
Nor did he see her rise to follow them up the stairs.

Chapter 7
October 21, 1905
St. Petersburg, Russia
Count Sergei Yulyevich Witte

M

ost cities have a flimsiness about them, a crowded insecurity,
as though their tall buildings were thrown up to meet the fancy
of a passing generation, and would soon be torn down with the
next fad. Not so with St. Petersburg. It has a monumental feel, as though
its buildings, like granite mountains, were made for the ages, made to
withstand the worst of nature and humanity. Its buildings are mighty, its
streets vast, its spaces open, its canals wide and curving as through
planned as part of a gigantic park. And scattered throughout are palaces,
museums, and schools, many with impressive domes and spires that add
a graceful touch to the sold, yellow feel of the city. Yet, while the bluegreen dome of the Turquoise Mosque and the gold spires reaching for the
sky above the old Admiralty building and others are impressive, there is
also a sadness, a falseness, about the magnificence.
It is artificial; it did not follow the natural evolution of a London,
Paris, New York, or Moscow. It was built by Czar Peter Romanov, best
known as Peter the Great, a tyrant fascinated by the West (and, oh yes,
war as well). In 1703 he decided to build an impressive, Western-style
capital city on unoccupied marshland in northern Russia. It would provide Russia with an outlet to the Gulf of Finland, thence to the Baltic
Sea, and finally to the ocean. Such an outlet was his dream, since as a
boy he had been enamored of sailing ships, and even had built one with
his own hands.
With no regard for human life, he made virtual slaves of the workers, one hundred thousand of whom lost their lives in just one year
alone. He ultimately had built thirty-five thousand buildings of granite
and stone that spanned many islands, canals, and swamps. Just one, St.
Isaac’s Cathedral, used 220 pounds of gold and took forty years to
build. Peter the Great did succeed in impressing visitors. Many hundreds of thousands of lives and decades later, after St. Petersburg was
completed, no one could see the blood and bones, only the city—it became known as the Venice of the North.

42

Rudy Rummel

Nevsky Prospect was one of the most impressive streets of all cities, but now, after ten months of massive strikes and street battles, the
street was littered with the debris of revolution. On the street corners
were the remains of barricades, scattered bricks, and concrete blocks,
and the skeletons of overturned wagons, broken carts, sleds, and automobiles. In some places the street had been torn up to use the paving
stones. There were no bodies anywhere, not even those of horses. But if
one looked closely, some of the buildings’ facades were pockmarked
from bullets. Some buildings had been gutted by fire. Armed soldiers
stood at some intersections, and black-coated militia and mounted, redcoated Cossacks roamed the side streets. Some major government
buildings had wood and sandbagged redoubts in front of them, with
bayoneted rifles poking over the top.
Traffic was nil on this late afternoon. Only a few wagons, coaches,
and mounted horsemen braved the street, and few pedestrians dared
walk its icy concrete sidewalks. No travelers wanted to be caught in
another sudden outbreak of violence.
Nonetheless, two white horses pulled Count Sergei Yulyevich
Witte in his caleche down Nevsky Prospect. Witte was the former
finance minister and chairman of the Committee of Ministers. Now
the emperor was seriously considering appointing him premier. But,
Witte had promised himself, he would not accept the appointment
unless the emperor permitted him to handle the revolutionary unrest
his way.
Witte was scheduled for a meeting with the emperor the next day to
detail his program, and had been consulting with influential high officials about it beforehand. One more to go, he thought, but I think I
almost know word for word what his responses will be. Still, it is important to seem to consult and listen.
He believed the measures being taken against the surviving demonstrators, known social democrats, and strikers were too harsh. Torture,
beatings, and summary executions in some cases were just increasing
the opposition to the government, encouraging strike leaders and the
revolutionaries, and alienating those liberals who still strongly supported the monarchy, but also wanted a Western-style representative
government.
This had been a horrible month for the monarchy. Witte did not
think it would survive the mass upheaval unless the government’s response was deep reform. He shook his head and rubbed the back of his
neck, sighing. The vast majority of the people have gone mad.

Red Terror Never Again

43

There had been a great wave of strikes and demonstrations in St.
Petersburg and Moscow, including a total shutdown of publishers. And
Witte found it hard to believe, but the evidence lying along the street
was undeniable: there were frequent violent clashes with armed squads
of revolutionaries. Shocking, the number of weapons the strikers had.
In St. Petersburg alone, they had killed over three hundred Cossacks;
over a hundred Cossacks in Moscow.
Witte shook his head. This was going on everywhere. In Revel,
2,300 killed; more thousands in Tomsk. And then IvanovoVoznesensk, Kharkov, Revel, Smolensk, Lodz, Minsk, Petersburg,
Vilna, Kazan, Tiflis. Peasant uprisings. Another mutiny of sailors in
Odessa that was a more dangerous repeat of the Potemkin mutiny in
June.
Do pizdy—it’s a fucked up situation.
He ran his hand over his receding hairline and then down his long
thin face, stopping to stroke his black beard. Now, a national railroad
strike had hit here, and in Moscow, Nizhnii-Novgorod, Ryazan, Yaroslavl, Kursk, and the Urals; the Okhrana reported that tomorrow it
would reach Kiev and Voronezh, and strikers had shut down telephone
and telegraph service throughout central Russia. Well over two million
strikers. I cannot believe it, but that is what the Okhrana just told the
emperor.
What to do? What to do? That stupid reactionary Trepov is urging
the most drastic, bloody measures to end these strikes and unrest. Witte
had warned the emperor not to appoint him assistant interior minister,
but he had wanted a clampdown on “All these treasonous revolutionaries.” When General Trepov asked him what to do with the twenty-three
arrested after a shootout at the railroad station, he’d said, “Shoot them.”
Ebanashka—stupid.
Witte’s coachman steered the caleche into the wide inner courtyard
of Piotr Arkadevich Stolypin’s St. Petersburg home. He was governor
of Saratov Province on the Volga River, had the ear of the emperor,
who thought highly of him, and it was clear to Witte that at some time
he would be appointed premier. He was in St. Petersburg at the request
of the emperor to advise him on what to do about the serious unrest.
Witte was sure that the emperor would not look happily on Witte ignoring Stolypin.
Witte’s caleche pulled up to the large, pillared portico. He had
made an appointment with Stolypin to consult with him here so that
they would not be seen talking together by the court sycophants. The

44

Rudy Rummel

emperor was much concerned about conspiracies and had told that nu
vse Trepov to be on guard, what with his full control of the police—he
was really the city’s unofficial dictator. Witte wanted the emperor to
find out he had consulted with Stolypin only when he told him, and not
through the whispered warnings of some prince or count.
As Witte walked up the steps to the massive front doors with their
large bronze handles, a footman in a red and green swallow-tail coat,
knee britches, and a tasseled red Havelock cap who had been on watch
for him bowed and said, “My master has been waiting for you in the
study. Please follow me and I will announce your presence.”
Witte followed the footman through the front doors, into a reception hall with statues in niches, up a winding, carpeted staircase, and
down a long, stuffy hallway lit only by a few gas lamps. Both walls
were lined with oil portraits, beginning with one of Emperor Nicholas
II, leading on to Stolypin’s father and mother; presumably the rest were
ancestors. All wore expressions so solemn that they looked as though
they were at a funeral. The footman stopped at a large, carved oak door,
knocked, opened the door, and announced Witte’s presence.
Witte walked in, waved a greeting at Stolypin, and said, “Piotr
Arkadevich, thank you for meeting with me.”
Stolypin rose from behind his hand carved desk and shook hands
with Witte. “This appointment is a surprise, Count Sergei Yulyevich.
Please sit down.” He waved his hand at a leather sofa. He turned back
to his desk to turn over something he had been writing, then sat down
in an oak and leather armchair near the desk and sofa. He looked at his
valet, who was standing by the door, and commanded, “Bring us tea.”
Stolypin looked back at Witte and asked, “Sugar?”
Witte shook his head, and Stolypin nodded at his valet. He clasped
his hands over the vest pulled tight across his stomach, and plucked at
his gold watch chain with one thumb while he silently regarded Witte
for a few seconds.
Witte occupied himself unbuttoning his long coat. The room was
stuffy and overheated from the fireplace, and the one large window had
been doubled for the winter. Witte looked around at the rich study. He
had not been in this room before, although he had attended a soiree
Stolypin’s wife held in the drawing room.
Stolypin had narrow, deep-set eyes in an unbalanced face—he was
nearly bald on top, with thin sideburns, but he had a black handlebar
moustache that was almost as wide as his head. It was the talk of the
countesses at court. They appeared barely resist the urge to pull on it.

Red Terror Never Again

45

Below the mustache was a black beard with a splash of gray under his
lip. Few subordinates could contemplate the balding pate and the rich
mustache and beard below when his attention was devoted to them. All
he had to do was stare at them, and they would shake under the lifetime
of stern command and authority his steel-gray eyes hurled at them.
Witte was never intimated by Stolypin’s eyes. Nor was he distracted by the dark hairs that grew in profusion out of Stolypin’s ears
and nose, adding another clump of dark hairs to the top of his moustache. They had known each other for years, and had often given the
emperor opposite advice. But they were not enemies. They sometimes
sought each other’s advice, and at one social gathering or another, they
would gossip about court officials and share their love of Russian literature and music.
Stolypin smiled, finally. “I have not seen you since you returned
from the United States. Congratulations on negotiating the Portsmouth
Treaty with Japan. Due to your ability, we got out of that Moodozvon—
wacko war cheaply. I think the emperor was right to make you a prince
as a reward.”
“Thank you. But most of the credit really belongs to the American
President Roosevelt. He leaned on the Japanese to make only reasonable demands, in spite of their victory over our Second and Third
Manchurian Armies at Mukden, and the incredible, almost absolute destruction of our fleet in the Tsushima Strait. Anyway, thanks for seeing
me on such short notice.”
“Yes; well, what is this about?”
Witte put one hand on his knee and leaned forward, gesturing with
the other. “Bulygin, Durnova, Trepov, Kuropatkin, and the whole
bunch of ministers and advisors around the emperor are crazy. What
they want to do about the strikers and revolutionaries will further alienate workers, professionals, and especially liberals, who are already
pulling away from us. Revolution is in the air and on the streets, and if
these officials have their way, it is sure to be successful.”
Stolypin’s face reddened slightly and he vigorously shook his head.
“Sergei, you are hopeless. It’s your liberal views that got us where we
are at now. If we had clamped down hard years ago and executed the
leaders of the social democrats and other revolutionaries, there would
never have been a Bloody Sunday. It is treason, and we should treat it
as such.”
Witte clenched his knee with his hand and frowned. “The current
harsh and brutal response to the revolutionaries is dead wrong.”

46

Rudy Rummel

Stolypin waved the thought away.
Witte continued. “The people want a parliament, elections, reform
of working conditions—such as an eight-hour workday—and land.
Many still love the emperor, and if we respond to their just desires, we
will have peace and the monarchy will survive, although not as an autocracy. Is it so hard to see how successful the British monarchy has
been at this?”
Stolypin narrowed his eyes. “To use your words, is it so hard to see
what happened to the French monarchy? The great terror, all those
heads of the aristocrats guillotined. King Louis XVI was too soft, and
he lost his head as a result.”
Witte stared a long moment at him. Forgetting how irritating and
undiplomatic it would be, Witte waved his finger at him and said, “It is
obvious you will be as bullheaded as usual on this. The result will be
all our heads, eventually.” Realizing what he was doing, he dropped his
hand and clasped both of them on his lap. “I know you hate me for doing this, but after all, I am Chairman of the Committee of Ministers. In
that capacity, I’m going to see the emperor.”
Witte hesitated, and then decided to leave unmentioned what he had
heard about the emperor offering him the premiership. “I will recommend to him—and he is frightened enough that I think he will follow
my advice—that he grant such fundamental civil freedoms to the people as freedom of conscience, speech, assembly, and association. These
freedoms must be backed up by a universal franchise for voting representatives to a national Duma. Most important, no law should come
into effect without approval by the Duma’s representatives.”
Stolypin gaped at him.
Witte held up his hand toward Stolypin to avoid interruption. “Be
assured that I agree with what I know you will argue. We must still repress direct outbreaks of disorder and violence, protect people who
only want to go about their daily business in peace, and punish treason
and revolutionary violence. Of course. But also, as in the time of Alexander II, the state must again take into its own hands the initiative of
transformation. The goal has been set by society; its significance is
great and wholly invincible, because there is truth in that goal—
freedom, representation, laws beholden to the people. The emperor
should therefore adopt it.”
“But—”
Witte shook his head to forestall Stolypin’s interruption, and continued. “Let ‘Freedom’ become the slogan of government actions.

Red Terror Never Again

47

There is no other way the present autocratic state can be saved. The
course of historical progress is unstoppable. There is no choice: either
assume leadership of the movement that has gripped the country, or
abandon it to be torn apart by elemental forces. Executions and rivers
of blood will only hasten the explosion. This is what—”
Stolypin abruptly stood and reached across his desk. He took two
Turkish cigars from his humidor and offered one to Witte, who shook
his head. Holding one of the cigars over the crystal-cut glass ashtray on
his desk, Stolypin lifted a German scissor cutter resting next to the humidor and cut off the end of the cigar. He picked up a box of diamond
matches and made a big show of lighting the cigar and taking his first,
huge puff. Finally he sat down.
Witte was amused— this typical stall had given Stolypin time to
think of an answer to assertions he found just too hard to swallow.
Stolypin sighed; he had evidently discarded a nuanced or diplomatic reply. Holding the cigar between his fingers and waving it in the
air, he responded, “You are wrong in this. Your policies would mark a
dangerous turning point in the political history of our motherland. Although our great monarchy would legally remain in power, it would be
castrated. Not only would the emperor lose his unlimited power and the
whole aristocracy be subverted but, most important, the emperor would
lose his accountability. There would be no one person responsible, no
one person to point a finger at for errors committed, no one person to
advise and guide us on the right course. Only a gaggle of quarreling,
sniffling, cowardly politicians, not one of whom would have the courage to admit error.”
Stolypin inhaled deeply on his cigar and shook his head. “Hooy na
ny—no fucking way! If I did not know you better, Sergei Yulyevich, I
would say you were one of those opezdo revolutionaries. These are
hard people. They have been assassinating our people. They murdered
Minister of the Interior Plehve with a bomb; they killed the governor of
Ufa, and,” he pounded his fist into his left hand and raised his voice,
“Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich.”
Witte’s finger came up again of its own accord. “Yes, and the
government has instigated hundreds of pogroms against the Jews
and has been assassinating social revolutionaries like Nikolai
Bauman, and the heads of strike committees and soviets.” Witte
stared into the other man’s eyes. “An eye for an eye is no way to
avoid revolution.”

48

Rudy Rummel

Stolypin shot back, “You and I may already be targeted. All these
traitors understand is harsh force, and the emperor should order it given
to them.”
Witte sat back and took a sip of his tea. It was cold; it had been sitting forgotten on the sofa’s side table. He ignored the little dishes of
cookies and raisins there and watched Stolypin. Stolypin was one of the
smartest men around the emperor and Witte had to consider his arguments with the utmost seriousness.
Stolypin puffed on his cigar, never taking his eyes from Witte.
Witte crossed his arms and thought about what had been said. Neither
he nor Stolypin was afraid of silence, and it stretched out.
Finally Witte uncrossed his arms, pinched together several raisins,
and chewed on them. Then he leaned forward. “Okay, you have a point.
It would be persuasive if we were dealing with the hardened social
revolutionaries alone. We are not. The thirst for political liberalization,
if not revolution, has spread across the country; the idea of popular representation is heard everywhere. It is heard at the political banquets of
the liberal intelligentsia. It is heard in the revolutionary strike committees. It is heard in such loyal newspapers as the Sankt-Peterburgskiye
Vedemosti, Novoye Vremy, and Svet. It is even heard in the conservative Russian Assembly with the call for the return of the seventeenth
century zemsky sobor—general assembly—as a kind of national representation.”
Stolypin was about to say something, but Witte would not let him.
“You and the others around the Emperor that still support autocratic
power are isolated,” he said forcefully.
Stolypin leaned forward. “You—”
Witte held up his hand. “Let me finish. Especially, we must consider the soldiers and sailors tempted by the fine slogans of the
revolutionaries to support their cause; the factory workers who are fired
up—not as Bolsheviks or Mensheviks, but as workers—over promises
of an eight-hour day and more pay; and the peasants to whom the slogan ‘land to the peasant’ is like meat to a hungry dog. There is nothing
we can do about the core revolutionaries except kill them. It is the mass
of excitable and ignorant workers and peasants that I am worried
about.”
“Ah, on peasants we agree.” Stolypin sat back and tipped his head
to twirl one of the handlebars of his mustache with the same fingers
holding the cigar. “We must do something about the peasants. They
must be free to own and sell land, not forced to live in communes,

Red Terror Never Again

49

never able to pass on to their sons land of their own. But as to the
workers and revolutionaries, this proposal of yours for freedom and a
Duma . . . .” He slapped the top of his left leg in unison with his next
words. “No, you do not understand human nature. Be tough with them
all, and they will shrink back into their shell as they always have. Make
them fear the power of the emperor.”
The last words he coughed out with cigar smoke, and his face
reddened. He placed the cigar on the edge of the ashtray, and half
rose to pick up a snuff box on the corner of his desk. Witte glimpsed
the carving of Emperor Nicholas II embossed on the ivory lid as
Stolypin opened it. He brought it to his nose, sniffed, closed it, and
twirled it in his fingers as he looked back at Witte with his eyebrows
raised. “I know the emperor better than you do. He will stick to his
convictions as he expressed them in December 1904, on the eve of
all this revolutionary unrest. Do you remember? He said, ‘The workers and revolutionaries will not understand a constitution, but will
understand only one thing: that his hands have been tied, and they
are free to overthrow the government. They will see me as ti sleepoy—impotent.’”
Witte knew that nothing more was to be gained by pushing his
points. He would only antagonize Stolypin. But he had achieved what
he was after—he now had confirmed what advice Stolypin would give
the emperor, and Witte could try to counter his arguments directly. He
waved one hand in a circle and grinned. “Enough. We are not going to
change each other’s minds. You will do your duty as you see it, and I
will do mine when I see the emperor.” He shifted to a lighter topic. “By
the way, did you hear that Prince Cyril Speranski has left Princess Olga
for good?”
Stolypin’s face brightened and he shook his head.
Witte frowned to show moral disapproval of the prince. “He really
believed the gossip about her having been bedded by his good friend
Georgi Aleksandrovich. So, he gave her his estates near Borodino, and
moved out of their home. She was too beautiful for him anyway . . . .”

aaa
Witte’s caleche was waiting for him at the portico, with his
coachman hunched down into the wolf fur collar of his big leather
coat and his Shopkas—fur hat—pulled down over his ears. It was
below freezing, and the horses were stomping and shivering.

50

Rudy Rummel

Stolypin’s liveryman had to shake the coachman awake. Witte
climbed up into the caleche, pulled a fur carriage blanket over his
legs, and made himself comfortable.
As the caleche pulled out, he reviewed the details of what he would
recommend to the emperor, trying to choose the words that would soften him up for the proposal. The emperor respects me, otherwise he
would not have made me a prince. But in terms of training, ancestry,
and circumstance, he is more inclined to accept Stolypin’s argument
than mine. I do have good old Grand Duke Romanov on my side. Witte
smiled. Romanov had told him that he would threaten to shoot himself
if the emperor did not follow Witte’s advice. Crazy stuff. But, the duke
is still powerful support.
Witte stared unseeing out the caleche, barely noticing a group of
passing Cossacks in their gold and black uniforms, the earrings and silver chains around their necks glinting. They sat their Akhal-tek horses
as though horse and man were one.
Much depends on how I put this proposal to the emperor, as shaken
and nervous as he is. There is hope—since the revolutionary Kaliayev’s
murder of Grand Duke Alexandrovich, the emperor has begun to make
concessions. Alexandrovich had been one of the most implacable advocates of a hard line autocracy. Yes, he even signed on to establish an
elected consultative chamber like the State Council of years past.
Surely this is not the representation the people want. When the resulting draft law for a State Duma was published in August, nobody had
been happy with it. Still, it was a significant inroad on the emperor’s
power, although nothing much came of it. Nevertheless, I will use this
as a precedent.
Witte imagined he was in the Gold Room of the Winter Palace, facing the emperor. On both sides of the emperor, at a respectable
distance, stood his suite of generals, dukes, and princes, all trying to
hear what Witte had to say, some already formulating their counterarguments. The emperor stood straight, with a glass of Hungarian wine
in one hand, and the other behind his back. His lips were drawn and his
brows slightly furrowed as he waited for Witte to speak, since Witte
had asked for this audience—
Witte’s attention was suddenly diverted. The street was ill repaired,
what with all the demonstrations, and the caleche’s springs tossed
Witte to one side. He mechanically tried to resettle himself and ended
up looking out of the other side of the caleche. Again sinking deep into

Red Terror Never Again

51

thought, he gazed absently at a man standing outside a big hotel, waiting to help the wealthy guests arriving in their caleches and carriages.
He wore a scarlet sash, and a peacock feather adorned his pillbox cap.
Let’s see, Witte thought, how will I start out? Hmm. “Your Highness, you can preempt the revolutionaries by carrying out your own
apparent revolution”—I should raise my voice on “own” and “revolution.” Then I’ll point out the window to Nevsky Prospect across from
the square and say, “Concede much of what the strikers and liberals
are demanding, but retain your control. And if—
Blinding white light, a crushing blast of sound, burning heat.
Oblivion.

aaa
A huge explosion ripped the caleche apart, and hurtling the coachman over the heads of the two horses.
The man in the white ushanka hat had followed the caleche at a safe
distance. When it burst asunder, he clumsily reined in his black Orlov,
dismounted, hitched the horse to a light pole, and walked toward the
smoking and already settling ruin.
One horse was down, bleeding profusely from its hindquarters,
and uttering an extended cry; the other horse had disappeared with
what remained of his harness; the coachman lay in a heap, unmoving. A man hurried toward the coachman, while another in a railroad
coat fanned the smoke away from what remained of the caleche,
looking for survivors.
“Holy Mother!” the man said, suddenly jerking sideways. He
crossed himself and turned to leave, almost stepping on the fur boots of
the white-hatted man as he approached. His face sagging, the would-be
rescuer glanced at the man and then back into the ruins. “Pizda,” he
lamented. “Nothing we can do . . . only bloody pieces.”
The white-hatted man leaned over to stare into the ruins himself,
then straightened and nodded at the other. As he turned to walk back to
his horse, his green eyes glittered in the newly lit streetlamps.

Chapter 8
November 14, 1906
San Francisco
Jy-ying

F

or some reason she could not define, Jy-ying had felt like coming
down to the lobby very early this morning. She guessed it was a
whimsical urge to study the guests. She was still fascinated by
the way people dressed in this age, particularly the women, and how
they walked and talked. She could not get used to how the women
looked in their bustles—as if they had congenital deformation of the
spine. She never would wear one. She had a slim figure, exercised
every day, and felt that her healthy, well-formed figure did not need
enhancing. But she quickly thought, As a captain in the Sabah Security
Guards, such a triviality does not matter to me anyway.
Of course, she knew that John and Joy had arrived around ten minutes to two that morning, and would be looking for a hotel room
sometime during the day, most likely in the morning. Surely they would
not come here, however. She laughed at herself when she thought of it.
Let’s see, how many hotels in San Francisco would be acceptable to
them? she wondered. Like this one or better. Say fifty. Since she did not
know where they’d landed, any of the fifty were a possibility. She calculated the probability of them finding a hotel other than this one as
.98. Ha! If that were the probability for a horse to win a race, I would
bet all I own on it.
She’d brought The Saturday Evening Post with her, intending to
again carefully read the article that had attracted her attention, but she
decided that she could not give it the careful read necessary and still
pay attention to what was going on in the lobby. She turned to page 20
and the “Thanksgiving” article by Edmund Vance Cooke. Might as
well learn more about this country and its customs. As she browsed
through it, she kept an eye on the comings and goings through the hotel
doors. Out of curiosity, of course.
So, she did not miss the group that entered the hotel led by a tall,
handsome man with yellow hair curling out from beneath his jaunty
Fedora. Following him was— She sucked in her breath sharply and her

54

Rudy Rummel

eyebrows shot up. A beautiful young Chinese woman followed the
man. A woman who looked like her. Yes, it could be John and Joy.
Then she saw the three young men behind them. Sabah be blessed, they
could be the three guys John wrote about.
She watched the man and woman intently, noting their clothes, their
movements. The woman pointed to the register and said something to
the man, who then got keys for the three men. She was almost positive
now that God had come to her aid.
When the two mounted the stairs, she followed them to the second
floor. In the hallway, she pretended she was looking in her purse for her
room key as she watched them from under the brim of her hat.
She was now convinced that the woman had to be Joy. CaucasianAsian couples were probably rare in this age here, and then for the couple to appear in the hotel to ask for rooms with three young men—yes,
they were John and Joy. And she could not believe how much like her
Joy looked. Well, people have doubles, and she had finally run into
hers. But soon there will be a double no more.
The woman had stopped at her room and unlocked the door while
the man did the same one room down the hallway. Then he opened the
door a crack and yelled to the woman, “Don’t go into your room yet.
Just shove your suitcase in, and close the door.” He then strode down
the hallway to her, and she turned to him, her whole body a question
mark. He picked her up, tucked her into his arms, and carried her to his
room. She put her arms around his neck and kissed him. He thrust his
door open with his boot, and disappeared with her inside. The door
slammed.
Almost shaking with excitement at her incredible luck, Jy-ying
quickly descended the stairs to the lobby and rushed to the registration
desk. She looked at the register and saw John Banks and Joy Phim below her name, and their room numbers. Her head swam; she wanted to
dance. Instead she looked at the clerk, who was backed up against the
mail slots, as far from her as possible. “Is room 207 vacant?”
“Yes.”
“Give me the key. I will be changing my room to that one.”
She hurried back to the stairs and up to her third floor room two
steps at a time. She grabbed the items she’d left on the dresser and put
them back in her case, picked it and the red container up, and hurried
back down the stairs to her new room next to John’s.
She entered, shut the door, and leaned her back against it. She was
hardly puffing; rather, she was trying to shut out her emotions. Her

Red Terror Never Again

55

eyes misted at what she had seen in the hallway, now that she had time
to dwell on it, and memories of Shu Kuo suddenly flooded her mind.
She dropped her case and put the container on the bed. She sat next to
it, opened it, and took out the note Kuo had enclosed for her. Less than
two days ago, she had said good-bye to him forever.
I did not know. I really did not know how much I would miss him,
not until I saw John and Joy’s love for each other.
She wiped at her eyes and took out the document that told her all
she needed to know about John and Joy to assassinate them. Such a
nice long, antiseptic word in English. Why not say what it is? Their . . .
sha—murder. I would have no difficulty if there were only one time
traveler, a man who was himself trained to kill. Yes, no problem then.
But lovers? And particularly a historian professor and an Asian woman
trained as a warrior. I cannot just shoot them, especially a warrior like
her. It is against the warrior code; it is . . . wrong.
She tried to read the Remembrance again, but in a minute or so she
heard Joy’s orgasmic screech through the wall, and threw the document
hard against the carpeted floor. The clip fell off, and the sheets spread
in a jumble on the floor.
She took two deep breaths and focused on relaxing all her muscles.
When she had calmed down, she got down on her knees, straightened
out the papers, sorted them, and clipped them as they’d been before.
I’ll wait until they are decent, she thought. No hurry.
She picked up the Post, leafed to the article that she had read already, and read it again. She looked now for something that would
suggest it was a joke. Then she heard the door to John’s room open and
close, so she risked looking out to see if they both were leaving. Obviously, wrapped in towels as they were, they were headed to the
bathroom at the end of the hall to take a bath.
She allowed herself a little grin, her first since arriving in this age
yesterday. I would have done it before. Then she remembered her and
Shu Kuo’s last, spontaneous lovemaking in his office. Almost always
before.
She returned to the Post article and just stared at its title, eyes wide.
She licked her lips. As she reread the article once more, slowly translating it into Chinese, she kept exclaiming, God almighty. I cannot believe
this. It cannot be true. She tried to pick out the parts that were most
significant to her mission, and to Sabah. Several times she gasped.
When she finished she let the Post drop to the floor and sat slouched in
her chair with her arms hanging over the sides, thinking.

56

Rudy Rummel

She heard John’s door shut, muffled noises, and then much squealing and boisterous laughter. They are certainly having a good time.
She took her Taiyang .38 out of her holster purse and sat back in
the armchair with the gun on her lap. She put one arm across her stomach, rested her elbow on it, and held her cheek in the palm of her hand
as she stared down at the weapon. So easy to kill them, to kill their love,
to destroy their mission. Their room is like my room, and I know how to
read its open spaces and furniture clutter. Once I opened their door to
shoot them, there would be no escape. They would not be wearing their
armor, their weapons would not be near, and Joy would have no time
or space to use her karate or judo. Oh, she would react fast. She will
have automatically surveyed the room as a battleground when she entered it. As I fling the door open she will instantly head for the best
defensive spot, and will try to spring at me when she sees the gun. But I
will be prepared for it and nothing she can do will stop the bullets.
She rubbed one finger along the blued barrel and then down the textured and contoured polymer grip. There is their mission. And now
there is that Post article.
Her eyes were still on the gun, but it no longer registered in her
consciousness. She was putting together the two greatest surprises of
her short life here—what she’d read about the two in the next room,
and the Post article. She put her left elbow on her knee and thrust her
face into her left hand. She didn’t notice how much time passed.
She didn’t know why she waited. She didn’t have to. To allow them
some dignity, I suppose. She grinned for the second time in this world.
She thought about how she had come to this universe-busting moment. She’d been taken under the care of a sympathetic officer in the
Sabah Security Guards after the murder of her Sabahist parents by prodemocracy rebels. Continuing her training in Shaolin Wing Chun Kung
Fu during her schooling, she’d been accepted into the Security Guards,
where she rose rapidly through the ranks.
She’d been so proud when she’d been assigned to secure the time
machine project instigated to send a time traveler back to 1906 to save
Sabah’s life. But she wanted more. She wanted to be the one to save
Sabah, and she knew she was better prepared because of her years in
Pasadena at the California Institute of Technology, and the results of
her tests after volunteering for the mission. But she was a woman, and
the National Council of Clerics refused to allow a woman to replace a
man. So she had maneuvered her lover, Kuo, the director of the project,
to place her as second alternate. When one of the men ahead of her had

Red Terror Never Again

57

a heart attack, and the other an accident—she felt bad about that, but
she was the better prepared and the more dedicated to Sabah—she was
the one sent.
She listened for a moment to her breathing, and focused on the Taiyang .38. It all comes down to you and that, she thought, staring at the
Post on the floor.
Time, she breathed. No more delay.
She took the Taiyang in hand. Her body felt heavy when she lifted
herself from the chair, and she stood for a moment, feeling almost
dizzy. For, with a mental click, her two surprises and her mission fell
into logical alignment, and in an instant she made her final decision.
She nodded her head vigorously. Yes, yes, I must.
She began her preparations, first making sure her Taiyang was
ready for what she would do. She took her dark blue Security Guard
uniform out of her suitcase and put it on, wrinkles and all; next she put
on her mirror-finished porometic Security Guard shoes. She would
have preferred her boots, but there’d not been room for them in her
case. She had brought her uniform to wear for her assassination of the
time traveler, to make it official. This was very important to her, since
otherwise it would have been plain murder. She knew it was a subterfuge, but it mattered. She puffed out her captain’s cap with her hand,
admiring its two little gold leaf clusters and the mirror-like blue-black
brim that shone in the room’s light, and put it square on her head. She
felt good in these clothes. As a woman in a man’s Islamic world, she
had more than earned them. And they gave her a feeling of authority
and control for what she must now do.
Hiding her gun behind her, she opened her door and checked the
hallway. Then, head high, back straight, she strode quickly to John’s
door. She tested it to make sure it was unlocked, quickly turned the
knob, flung the door open with a bang, and stood in the doorway, gun
in hand.

Chapter 9
November 10, 1905
Geneva, Switzerland

T

he short, stocky man said it again: “The time could not be better.
The revolution has matured, and needs only the final push.” His
goatee quivered with his excitement at finally returning to Russia
to lead the revolution. His pretty wife, close advisor, and fellow revolutionary never tired of hearing such exclamations, for she agreed, and
had advised him of the timing. They had waited for the right moment,
and now they had the urgent, coded telegram from Bronstein affirming
this:
Now is the time. With Witte assassinated, the czar
has appointed Stolypin premier. Stolypin has offered no
concessions to striker’s just demands, immediately meting out summary executions—Stolypin’s neckties—to
mutineers and strikers, and to demonstrators caught
with weapons. The czar has declared martial law
throughout Russia; many troops, sailors, liberals, and
Mensheviks are joining us. Your arrival is prepared;
you will be guarded on the way to the St. Petersburg
Soviet.
“I never thought that telegram would come,” she sighed. “I was
right about waiting. Too early, and, with the Okhrana on the lookout,
you would have been arrested at the Baltic Station when you arrived.
Too late, and you would be blamed if the revolution failed and sidelined if it were successful.” She put her hand on his arm. As the
telegram said, “Now is the time.”
Bundled up in their Russian fur coats, the two waited in the cold
Cornavin Station for the train that would take them from Geneva to St.
Petersburg via Berlin. Since they traveled frequently, they traveled
light; their three heavy suitcases, one loaded with books and papers,
rested beside them. The Lunacharskys, both husband and wife, dedicated Marxists and Bolsheviks, were going with them, as were their
comrades Plekhanov, Kamsky, and Orlovsky.

60

Rudy Rummel

They didn’t realize anyone had approached them from behind until
they heard in French, “Excuse me, are you Vladimir Ilyich Lenin?”
The man with a goatee turned and looked without recognition at the
beardless stranger. He wore a long black coat and a narrow brimmed
green hat with an orange feather in its band. On either side of him stood
alert policemen with their peaked hats square on their heads.
Lenin drew his “Oui?” out as a question.
The man then looked at Lenin’s wife and asked, “Are you Nadezhda Krupskaya?”
She hesitated for a moment, looked at Lenin and then back at the
man, and finally responded, “Oui.”
The two policemen moved closer. The man stood stiffly and said,
“In accordance with Article 34 of the Cantonal Department of Justice,
and by order of the Geneva Chief of Police, I am informing you that
you are under arrest for embezzlement and fraud.”
The policemen split up, one gripping Lenin tightly under the arm
and the other Krupskaya. The rest of their party immediately protested,
and at first Lenin resisted, bumping his sable hat off in the attempt.
Plekhanov picked it up and handed it to Lenin. With his free hand,
Lenin jerked it down on his balding head. Then he shouted to his comrades in Russian, “Go. We will settle this ridiculous accusation and
catch the next train.”

aaa
Lenin and Krupskaya sat at a square table in the interrogation
room on the second floor of police headquarters. The man across from
them had a full, graying beard, a protruding brow that almost hid his
deep-set eyes, and a sloping forehead. His intimidating appearance
was softened by a pink-tinted bow tie and his cleric-style corduroy
suit. He kept a half-smoked Cuban cigar in one side of his mouth, tilting his head to keep the smoke out of his eyes as he scanned several
documents before him. So far he had not said a word, even though
Lenin had sat on the edge of his uncomfortable straight-backed chair
and protested the arrest.
Finally Lenin pulled his pocket watch out of his vest pocket by its
gold chain, and looked at it. “Blin,” he swore in Russian. His face reddened, and he hissed to Krupskaya, “This is taking too damn long.”
Jutting his goatee at the man on the other side of the table, Lenin
speared the other man with his small eyes and pounded the table as he

Red Terror Never Again

61

barked in badly accented French, “This is all a mistake. Ridiculous. We
have done nothing. This is political. You are doing this on behalf of the
enemies of Russia.”
He puffed himself up. “Vlip—you’re in deep shit,” he said in Russian before reverting to French. “I demand that you release us
immediately, or I will protest to your chief of police.”
The man looked up at Lenin, and then at Krupskaya. He raised his
eyebrow at Lenin, and in an oddly feminine, almost old woman voice,
he said in French, “I am Inspector Rulf of the Geneva Cantonal Special
Investigations Department. We have evidence that you committed a
serious crime. Be still or I will have you handcuffed and gagged.” He
stared at Lenin until he subsided in his chair, and then went back to his
reading.
Lenin raged inside. He was sure this was political. The timing
was just too good. Someone was trying to prevent him from returning to Russia. But who? The Okhrana? Unlikely, since they had little
influence in Switzerland, and the czar was generally despised. Who,
then? I bet it is the Mensheviks. They will never let us win. They
must have combined with the liberals for a soft revolution, and have
pulled strings with supporters in Geneva. Or maybe it’s Bronstein. If
I do not return, he has the revolution to himself. No, although he has
wavered between the Mensheviks and us, he has become a loyal supporter. Hmm. Still, the prospect of power will derange men. When I
get back to Russia and the revolution is successful—which it will be,
with or without me—I am going to launch a thorough investigation
of this . . . stupid frame-up.
Lenin was sweating in the overheated room. Ruff looked up quickly
and watched him with narrowed eyes as he took off his overcoat and
shoved it to the back of his seat. He could feel the cast iron radiator
against the wall nearby heating his face.
Rulf returned to his reading.
Lenin scratched his sweaty crotch.
Finally Rulf picked up a document, leaned toward Lenin, and
pointed to the signature at the bottom. “Is this yours?”
Brows knitted, wide mouth a thin line compressed tightly enough to
make his mustache quiver, Lenin stared at the illegible, flowing signature. “Absolutely not!” he shouted. He waved his fist across the
document.
Rulf pointed to a stilted signature below the flowing one, and
looked at Krupskaya. “This is your signature?”

62

Rudy Rummel

She narrowed her eyes, enhancing the oriental look created by her
tightly pulled back hair. She waved her palm toward him. In good
French, she responded, “No. I would be embarrassed to have such an
ugly signature.”
Rulf sat back and put the document down. “Your names match
those on these documents. You are foreigners and may flee the country
at any time. So, I’m going to keep you both in our hospitable cell while
I investigate this.”
Lenin leaped to his feet, his nostrils flaring. “How dare you. I have
very important business in Russia. It cannot be delayed. This is all a
mistake.” He waved his fist at Rulf and yelled at him in Russian, “Shob
tebe deti v sup srali— I hope your children shit in your soup.”
The inspector pressed a button on his side of the table and two policemen immediately came in to stand behind Lenin. Rulf pushed his
chair back and shook his finger at Lenin, who now had both fists on the
table and was leaning toward Rulf, his goatee threatening to stab Rulf
in the heart. “You likely have committed a most serious crime. You
both have defrauded the Geneva Bank.” He pronounced the name in a
reverend tone. “You borrowed fifty thousand franks from the bank with
false collateral and false documentation about your Swiss citizenship,
and with counterfeit seals on your false documentation. Each of these is
a serious crime here. And through a tip, we caught you at the train station trying to flee prosecution.”
He looked at Krupskaya. “You are equally guilty, since you cosigned the fraudulent loan.”
She stared at him open mouthed. Lenin began stuttering in Russian.

Chapter 10
November 14, 1905
St. Petersburg

T

he tall man wearing the Cossack hat consulted his map again to
be sure of the location of Rastrelli 2 Square. Crossing the Alexandrovsk Bridge over the Neva River, he walked toward it, his
boots crackling on the icy snow. Fortunately, it was on the eastern edge
of St. Petersburg, at the edge of the river and distant from the major
streets around the Winter Palace, Admiralty, and associated government buildings where large demonstrations and violent clashes took
place.
Entering the square and standing at its edge, he studied the Smolny
ensemble of buildings, including the century-old Smolny Institute. Its
facade formed a straight line for hundreds of feet, and an ell at each end
formed an elongated court.
Until the summer, the Institute had been a school for young ladies of noble birth from all over Russia, but the Institute had now
been taken over by the St. Petersburg Soviet, with a sufficient bribe
to the proper officials, and an exorbitant rent. The students had been
crowded into the Smolny Convent snuggled into the north ell. For a
few minutes, the man admired the convent’s dull blue dome with its
silver stars.
The square was busy with the coming and going of wagons, carts,
coaches, horse-drawn sleds, mounted men, some Hussars and Cossacks, and a few smoking automobiles. The front entrance to the
Institute was protected with a well built fortification manned by soldiers with rifles and fixed bayonets on their shoulders. They guarded a
narrow passage that allowed a constant stream of people to enter and
leave.
Carefully watching the traffic, the man in the Cossack hat walked
across the square and passed through the fortification and the high
doors of the Institute.
Inside, the tumult of excited activity stirred up the man, and he decided to walk around the building to observe a revolution in action. He
had just enough spare time. He looked down one vast, stuffy hallway
after another. Sparse electric lighting barely subdued the darkness, and

64

Rudy Rummel

the formerly white polished floors were now muddied by the heavy felt
boots of soldiers, sailors, revolutionaries, factory workers, and peasants, the shiny black leather boots of professionals and government
officials, and the soft cloth boots of the heads of strike committees and
deputies from the soviets in Moscow, Riga, Samara, Tula, Kazan, and
elsewhere. Everyone seemed to have hurried business here.
Here and there were stacks of literature, including Iskra—the Spark,
Nachalo—The Beginning, and the Soviet organ Izvestia—The News.
These were snatched up by passersby and could be found on tables and
benches everywhere.
Bone-weary soldiers and revolutionaries slept where they could,
some on benches and chairs in the rooms, others against the walls in the
hallways. The man knew some had been on their feet for more than
twenty-four hours.
He came to a large, columned cafeteria, and walked in. A long line
of people, each holding a bowl in one hand and a large wooden spoon
in the other, waited for a slice of black bread and a ladle full of steamy
cabbage soup. Some, disheveled and wearing ragged clothing, were
obviously very poor. The Institute was clearly open to the hungry of St.
Petersburg. Around the hall were long, rough wooden tables and
wooden benches at which people sat to eat. No one looked gloomy or
unhappy. Serious expressions dominated, but he saw occasional smiles
and scattered laughter. At a few tables, groups of men and a few
women appeared to be engaged in heated discussions.
The place reeked with the acidic smell of too many unwashed bodies mixed with the oily, steamy odor of food. He quickly turned around
and returned to the hallway before he retched. At least here there was
only the stench of bodies.
Off another hallway near the entrance was a large, white room
with marble columns, a central crystal chandelier loaded with candles, and silver candelabra scattered about—a former ballroom. Now
it was the central meeting place for speeches and meetings of delegates from the soviets all over Russia. As the man in the Cossack hat
looked in, he saw a crowd of people listening to an emaciated, haggard, and unkempt peasant standing on a rostrum at one end of the
room. The peasant was nearly hysterical, his voice shrill. The man
suspected this was his first speech ever. A peasant cap covered dirty,
straw-colored hair that hung halfway to his shoulders, and his beard
stuck out in all directions.
The man moved closer to the rostrum so he could hear the peasant.

Red Terror Never Again

65

“I tell you the truth. We are still starving to death by the thousands,
and the newly dead are being sold for food by scavengers. I saw it with
my own eyes. I tell the truth. We are slaves to landowners. We are
slaves to the rich. I tell you, we have had enough of this. We want food.
We want land; we will die for it. We want freedom. I tell you the truth.
We will not wait any longer. Tavarishi—friends. We join you. We will
fight.”
He bent over coughing into his hand, and it came away with blood
on it. Someone stepped onto the podium and helped the peasant to a
seat. After a loud murmur of voices, a worker mounted the rostrum.
Waving his arms, he began to speak so rapidly, his words ran into each
other.
“I work at a Putiloff factory and I, with all my comrades, took it
over and tried to run the factory, but the owners and managers and
foreman all sabotaged the machines so that we could do nothing, and
they have shut down the mills so we will starve or submit to them and
again be beaten and whipped and work twelve hours a day for less than
one ruble, and my wife and children are dying for I cannot buy enough
food, and we live with three families in one room. We all have met, and
we will fight them . . . .”
The man in the Cossack hat left the room and climbed the wide
stairs to the second floor. He looked into one classroom after another.
In all of them, people were busy at or around tables, with the rare wall
telephone ringing or being used. In some, men and women clacked
away on Russian converted Underwood typewriters, slapping the carriages back when little bells signaled that the carriages had reached
their stop. Men ranging in dress from formal suits and vests to loose
peasant shirts tied at the waist with a sash constantly came and went
with papers in their arms, some with sheaves of telegrams. Armed soldiers and a few civilians with rifles stood guard at the doors of the more
important rooms.
On the top floor, the man found a variety of offices. Apparently
every significant group involved in the strikes or the revolution had an
office here, as did many middle and a few upper officials of government. Even more guards stood by on this floor. The man thought it
strange that he had been able to go from one floor to another, and even
look into classrooms and offices, without anyone stopping him.
Here also was Bronstein’s Military Revolutionary Committee, in
Room 27. It was responsible for everything from dispersing weapons
and organizing takeovers of government buildings to dealing with cap-

66

Rudy Rummel

tured officials and soldiers who remained loyal to the monarchy. It
seemed to be the busiest room in the building, what with the constant
flow of prisoners and suspects, petitioners, couriers, soldiers, and government officials. A genius must have been keeping everything in
order.
In Room 24, a large room where tea was served night and day,
Bronstein operated the strategic and tactical center for all of the St. Petersburg Soviet’s activities. The man in the Cossack hat handed a note
with 50.000.000 written on it to one of the two guards at the door and
asked him to give it to Bronstein.
The guard came back and let him in.
The room was dim, except where Bronstein stood hunched over a
pile of telegrams laid out on a conference table, writing replies and instructions on a large pink pad. Two green-shaded lightbulbs hung high
above the table, and a wooden telephone box was on the wall directly
behind Bronstein, with a young boy standing there to answer or make
calls. All communication workers were on strike, except for Bolshevik
party members at the telephone and telegraph offices, who would only
forward calls or send telegrams to and from Smolny. Two young couriers waited by the table.
A small group that included Bronstein’s second wife Natalia Sedova stood before a map of St. Petersburg hanging on the wall,
arguing.
The man waited by the door, not wanting to disturb Bronstein,
whose face looked fatigued and pale; his eyes were bloodshot, from
lack of sleep and overwork, Cossack Hat guessed. He could not help
noticing that the room stank of too many cigarettes and cigars and what
now seemed an imbedded characteristic of the Institute, too many bodies left unwashed for too many weeks. The window, not yet doubled for
winter, was open a crack at the bottom, but it didn’t help. Cossack Hat
wrinkled his nose and stifled the desire to cover it with his handkerchief. Trying to ignore the smell, he watched the activity, looking from
one part of the room to another.
Finally, apparently just remembering the note the guard had
brought him, Bronstein looked up and squinted in Cossack Hat’s direction, trying to see him in the dimness. “Privet—hello, comrade,” he
called, his voice hoarse. “What a good time for you to come. I hope you
are satisfied with what your incredible help has done. The revolution is
coming to a conclusion.” He smiled wanly. “I haven’t left this spot for
weeks. I eat and sleep here.”

Red Terror Never Again

67

He suddenly grew excited. “Look,” he exclaimed, picking up a
telegram from one side of the table. “Moscow is ours. Its military governor has surrendered to the Moscow Soviet.” He picked up another
telegram and waved it. “Rather than follow the czar’s orders and attack
the peasant army approaching the city, the Kollontai Regiment has
joined them. And most important,” he reached for a message on paper
that was wrinkled and almost torn from being passed through many excited hands, “the 9th Imperial Guards have joined us and blockaded the
road from Tzarskoje Selo. The czar is at Alexander Palace and cannot
return, although it is only sixteen miles away. Because of the strike, he
cannot even take the Imperial train here. He might as well be a thousand miles away. This means—”
“Lvov, Lvov,” a breathless courier yelled as he ran into the room,
hands wildly gesturing. “He has abdicated in favor of his brother. The
emperor, Czar Nicholas II, has abdicated. I have his full announcement
here.”
A cheer went up, followed by yelling, but Bronstein took the message and held it directly under the light to read it. He read no more than
a few words before he banged the table and, holding up the telegram,
shouted for quiet. “I have the czar’s Decree of Abdication.”
Bronstein
As Bronstein began to read aloud the telegram, his hoarse voice
wavered at first, but grew stronger as he read:
Decree of Abdication: In this aftermath of the war against
the Japanese and their continued ambition against our fatherland
in the Far East, the Lord God has been pleased to send down on
Russia a new heavy trial.
Internal popular disturbances threaten to have a disastrous
effect on our future ability to defend ourselves and will only encourage Japan in the East and those in the West who intend to
break up Russia. The destiny of Russia, the honor of our heroic
army, the welfare of the people, and the whole future of our
dear fatherland demand that these disturbances be settled peacefully.
In agreement with the Committee of Ministers and the Holy
Synod, We have thought it well to renounce the Throne of the

68

Rudy Rummel
Russian Empire and to lay down the supreme power. As We do
not wish to part from Our beloved son, We transmit the succession to Our brother, the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich,
and give him Our blessing to mount the Throne of the Russian
Empire.
We direct Our brother to conduct the affairs of state in full
and inviolable union with the representatives of the people in
the legislative bodies on those principles which will be established by them, and on which he will take an inviolable oath.
In the name of Our dearly beloved homeland, We call on
Our faithful sons of the fatherland to fulfill their sacred duty to
the fatherland, to obey the czar in the heavy moment of national
trials, and to help him, together with the representatives of the
people, to guide the Russian Empire on the road to peace, welfare, and glory.
May the Lord God help Russia! Signed, Nicholas II;
counter-signed, Minister of the Imperial Court. Dated November 17, 1905.

There was a moment of silence and then the loud cheers broke out
again. Bronstein sat down heavily in a nearby chair, and started writing
furiously on his pad while mumbling to himself. When he finished, he
tore off the sheet of paper and handed it to the courier. “Under a white
flag, take this to Grand Duke Romanov at the Winter Palace. Him and
no other.”
The courier looked at the message, touched the brim of his military
cap, and ran out of the room.
Bronstein’s whole body fell into unaccustomed relaxation. He felt
the muscles in his face fighting to display a mixture of fatigue, acceptance, triumph, and happiness. Not so those who had been in front of
the map and now circled the table. Even in the dim light, their eyes
shone with victory, and they looked as if they could barely keep from
jumping up and down.
Finally Bronstein stood and lifted his cup of cold Kazak tea. A solemn quiet settled over the room. Bronstein waited while each of the
others grabbed what they could—a tumbler of water, a ration of vodka
or rum, or tea. He saw Cossack Hat retreat into a dim corner to watch.
Strange man.
Bronstein straightened his back and stood tall. “My dear wife Natalia and my comrades, Anatoly, Leonid, Julius, and Lev. It is almost

Red Terror Never Again

69

over; the end of the Romanov Dynasty is assured. With the abdication
of the czar, I have just sent a message to Grand Duke Alexandrovich. If
he accepts the crown from Nicholas, I have threatened that the cruiser
Aurora, which our sailors now control with sympathetic officers, will
break through the ice to reach the Winter Palace and bombard it. They
no longer have the loyal forces to oppose us, especially with the abdication of the czar. I am sure that when we next hear from Grand Duke
Alexandrovich, he will be announcing the government’s resignation.
Comrades, to the revolution!”
They lifted their glasses high and shouted, “The revolution,” swallowed what remained in their glasses and cups, and then threw them
down to shatter on the floor, yelling, “Hurrah!” Two of them started
dancing; they looked like fat bears being stung by bees.
“Now.” Bronstein’s voice took on a new seriousness. He clapped
his hands to quiet the others again and draw their attention. “We have a
national government to organize, power to consolidate, and a fight
against counterrevolutionaries and monarchists we will have to carry to
every square inch of the empire.” Bronstein’s seriousness spread
swiftly to the others in the room. “We must think in these new terms
immediately. To work, comrades. We have no time to waste.”
In the thoughtful quiet that resulted, Cossack Hat walked up to
Bronstein and shook his hand. “Congratulations. This is a monumental
victory for you, a victory for the people of Russia, and a victory for
humanity. I have never been so happy.”
Bronstein tried to smile and could not. There were not enough muscles in his face to handle all the emotions he felt, and the thoughts that
weighed on his mind. This victory was the easier part. What came next
would be the hardest; already ideas, strategies, and tactics for this new
world fought for attention in his mind. More than anything else, he
needed time to be alone for thought.
“Stay, and let us talk later about the future,” Bronstein said, gazing
into those eerie green eyes, now misty with tears.
The man shook his head and, enunciating carefully in his odd accent, he demurred. “No, I have work to do, but I am very happy to be
present at this great, truly historic victory. Centuries from now, historians will still be writing about this moment.” He took Bronstein’s two
hands in his own. “I wish you the very best, and if I do not see you
again, good luck.”
When the man opened the door to leave, Bronstein heard people in
the hallway cheering and dancing at the news that had just reached

70

Rudy Rummel

them. He was tempted to join them and give a triumphal speech, but he
shook his head and turned back to his table. He had much work to do,
and too little time.

Chapter 11
November 14
San Francisco
Joy

T

he door flew with a bang against the wall. Joy, instantly awake,
ripped herself out of John’s arms and jerked the comforter up
enough to roll from under it onto the carpeted floor. Then an
oddly familiar voice with a Chinese lilt stopped her.
“Do not be silly, Joy. It would never work.”
Joy jerked her eyes toward the door. She immediately saw the gun.
The sight instantly kicked in a lifetime of training and an explosion of
silent and invisible action: her warrior’s subconscious self-two invoked
from memory the dangers and opportunities in the room, relative distances, and the ways this woman could shoot and attack from the
doorway. That occurred in a second; in another, a battle-calm settled
over her, and she focused on the woman as though her life hung over a
chasm by a thread. What Joy would do depended on what she saw in
the woman’s eyes, and the smallest movement of the woman’s hands,
feet, and center of gravity. Joy slowly tried to position her legs so she
could launch herself at the woman, and knew that John would do something from his angle to distract her.
John yelled, “Who the hell—” and tried to roll out of the bed on his
side to attack her, but his legs were twisted around in the comforter.
“You would not make it either, John,” the woman told him.
Joy’s battle-poised self-two conceded a small space to her mind, and
she looked at the woman beyond her weapons and stance. And gasped
mentally. You’re dreaming. Everything today is too crazy. That can’t be
me standing there in that stupid uniform with a gun in my hand.
Then Joy realized that the woman was real, an Asian woman who
closely resembled her. No matter. She had to be disarmed or killed. In
her peripheral vision she saw John’s legs sliding free of the comforter.
One more instant, Joy gauged. She focused all her energy—
“Before you two try to take this gun from me, you can have it.” The
woman let the gun twist around her trigger finger, and tossed it grip
first onto the bed.

72

Rudy Rummel

Joy took a second to look at the gun. It was a strange weapon that
she had not seen before; it looked as if it belonged outside of this time.
She hoped she’d have a chance to take it apart. Then she realized that
she had taken her attention from the intruder. She looked back at her
just as the woman held her hands palm out in front of her. She bowed
to Joy, and then to John.
“May I close the door?” she asked.
“Please do,” John said in a husky voice. “Nice of you to drop by.
Are you selling something?”
She pushed the door shut behind her with one foot, and looked at
John with the hint of a smile. “Yes, John—myself.” Then she added,
totally mystifying Joy, “You do not disappoint me.”
“My god,” John exclaimed, “you look like Joy.” He waved his hand
in Joy’s direction.
She bowed again to both of them. “I am Captain Khoo Jy-ying of
the Sabah Security Guards in China,” she said. “I was sent by my government from the year 2001 to . . . assassinate you both.”
The words “assassinate you” again triggered Joy’s body for combat.
No matter that she was on the floor; she could fight from any position—and movement would be easier, being naked.
The woman seemed to know this and remained stone still, her
hands in front of her. Only her lips moved. “My uniform will attest to
my official purpose, and you have my gun on the bed. All you need to
do, Joy, is look at it and I am sure you will recognize that it is from the
far future. As is obvious, I no longer intend to kill you. I could have
done that easily. I want to join with you. What we both want the future
to be is now threatened by that Post article you have on the table. Let
us talk. John can pick up my gun and keep me covered, Joy, if that will
assure you of my good intentions.”
As what the woman said sank in, what most surprised Joy at first
was the woman’s familiarity with their names. She spoke as though she
knew them intimately. And then, that she was from the future . . . .
Without taking her eyes from the woman, Joy skidded on her bottom over to the bed and reached over the top for Khoo’s gun. It was
unusually light. She felt for the safety without taking her eyes from the
woman, but there was none she could find with her finger. She settled
back and held the gun pointing just over the woman’s head as her selftwo released her body and mind and went into alert semi-readiness.
“Okay Khoo, come join us. The chair is yours.” Joy’s first words to
the woman sounded flat, almost mechanical. “I hope you don’t mind if
we get dressed. Oh, apparently you know my partner, John Banks.”

Red Terror Never Again

73

Still seated in the bed, John began to put his hand out, then jerked it
back. Eyes wide, he cleared his throat, and his words fell out in a jumble. “Um, glad to meetcha, Miss Khoo.”
Joy sat on the edge of the bed with the gun still pointed above
Khoo’s head as she moved further into the room. She stopped near the
chest of drawers, took off her cap and dropped it upside down on the
chest, took the pins out of her hair, and let it fall with a shake of her
head. Then she sat in the chair. She crossed her ankles and rested her
hands palm up on her lap.
John let out a “Jesus!” and Joy stared, her jaw hanging. Khoo bore
more than a resemblance to her; she looked like her twin. If it weren’t
for that scar on Khoo’s cheek, people would have a hard time telling us
apart.
Joy took a deep breath, handed the gun to John, and told him,
“Keep her covered, but be careful. There is no safety.” Then she skittered off the bed behind him so as not to block his view of Khoo. The
moist, chilly air finally got to her and, with one eye on Khoo, she was
happy to take out of her suitcase her white cotton panties, gray sweatshirt, and Levis—clothes she could not wear outside of the room—and
put them on before she started shivering. She didn’t want Khoo to misinterpret that.
She picked up the jockey shorts, pants, and shirt strewn on the floor
and tossed them onto the bed next to John. Then she took the gun from
him and sat on the edge of the bed facing Khoo while he got dressed
under the comforter. When he finished, he got out of the bed and came
around to sit next to Joy. Eyebrows raised, they both stared wordlessly
at Khoo.
Khoo glanced from one to the other with little grin. “Call me Jyying, please. Now that we have gone through our introductions and
small talk, on to the serious stuff.”
Out of the corner of her eye, Joy saw John return a bigger grin. She
did not.
“I know about the message you received this morning about Sabah, the
nuclear destruction of the democracies, and the world victory of his son.”
That’s new, Joy thought immediately. The message said it was his
father Abul Sabah’s victory.
“I know about your successful interventions. I know that, but for
those nuclear attacks late in the century, you did prevent World Wars I
and II and many other wars, and you saved millions from murder by
one dictator after another.”

74

Rudy Rummel

“So we found out from the message,” John said. He glanced at Joy
and asked the most natural question, without thinking about whether
they wanted to hear the answer. “What happened to us, ultimately?”
Jy-ying
Jy-ying realized she had handled this badly. She had not planned
ahead of time what she would reveal, and now realized too late that she
had been asked a question she could not answer, for their sakes. Yet if
she was to have their trust, she could not appear to be hiding something
vital. She leaned forward and reached for Joy’s hand, and raised an
eyebrow. “I think you can put that gun down; do you not think so?”
After a moment, Joy nodded and put the gun behind her. She held out
her hand to Jy-ying with a caution that only another warrior would see.
Jy-ying held out her other hand toward John. Lips pursed, he took
her hand and held it loosely.
Looking from one to the other, Jy-ying said softly, “You two created a miracle. You two alone saved billions and billions of lives. I say
this, even as I must add that you have deprived billions and billions of
souls of God and Paradise.”
She tightened her grip on their hands. She had to be careful. There
was no purpose to disclosing their tragic end, to revealing that John had
killed Joy to stop her from committing more murders, and that he’d
committed suicide to join her. Now for a little white lie that won’t
change anything, she thought. “After you achieved almost all you
could, you were killed together by a terrorist bomb in the late 1930s.”
“Oh, no!” John exclaimed, jerking his hand from Jy-ying’s. He sat
with his eyes tightly shut and every line of his face suddenly downcast,
before opening them enough to reach for Joy’s hand.
Jy-ying kept her eyes on Joy. She could see that Joy believed her.
Joy turned to John, saw the pain in his eyes, and told him calmly,
“We had to die sometime.” Her voice fell to a soothing whisper.
“We died together, dearest, together. And we died after accomplishing our mission. I cannot imagine a better way for us to go.” Then
her calm disappeared and she choked up. “That makes me the happiest of all.” Eyes wet, she leaned over and hugged John to her. He put
his arms around her.
Of all the things that could have happened when she invaded their
room, Jy-ying felt this was the best of all. She had thought that their

Red Terror Never Again

75

cooperation would be that of enemies uniting against a common foe—
“an enemy of my enemy is my friend” kind of thing—but now she was
not so sure if they really were enemies. She had immeasurable respect
for their bravery and accomplishments, but that was the respect one
warrior feels for another, even as they fight to the death. What she felt
now was a strange closeness to Joy, as though this enemy and destroyer
of her religion were her sister. She didn’t understand it. It did not make
sense. Not for the tough and hardened security guard she thought she
was. Perhaps it was Joy’s instant warrior reaction when she’d burst into
the room. Perhaps it was what she had read about them through John’s
eyes, and having all those words turned into living, breathing human
beings before her—she had a real taste of John’s humor already. Perhaps it was that she was beginning to like and react as a woman toward
John. Perhaps it was the moving moment she’d seen between the pair
just now.
Strange, she thought. I have never been so suddenly affected by
other people this way.
Also, with the danger of her sudden appearance in the room now
past, she again realized how remarkably like her Joy looked. Incredible.
We almost could be twins.
With his arms still around Joy and his eyes bright, John asked, “Why
are you telling us all this? I don’t understand what you’re doing.”
Joy pulled herself from John’s arms and wiped her eyes with her
hands. “Okay, Jy-ying,” she said, “time for background.”
Jy-ying nodded. “This is the easiest part.”
She told them that, after the nuclear destruction of New York and
the Joy Phim Democratic Peace Institute, and after Sabah’s son
Turghun had taken over the United States along with other democracies, the head of Sabah Security in California discovered that the
Institute’s Santa Barbara affiliate had sent a message back to a time
traveler in San Francisco. This was the message Joy and John had received when they arrived that morning. Security had to assume that the
message was about Sabah’s takeover, with the instructions to assassinate Abul Sabah as a child.
“The message mentioned nothing about assassinating Sabah,” John
said. “They left what to do up to us.”
Jy-ying asked, “Did you plan to assassinate him?”
Joy nodded. “Yes.”
Jy-ying then told them about the effort by the Sabah government
of China, really now the ruling world government, to develop a time

76

Rudy Rummel

machine to send someone back in time to kill the recipient of the message. Since they could not develop a machine to send back more than
one person, they assumed that only one time traveler had received the
message.
“You should know me as I am,” she told Joy and John, and described how she had maneuvered to be on the list of alternates to be
sent, then contrived to move up to be first on the list, in spite of objections from the Muslim ruling Council of Clerics. “I was proud to be the
one to go. I am a strong believer in Sabah as the Holy Prophet, and I
would have assassinated you two to save Him.” She hesitated, then
added, “But for that.” She pointed to the Post on the bed’s side table.
Joy asked softly, “How did you find out about us? We are here. You
were in the future, and only arrived recently—what, two days ago?”
“Yes, I arrived then, and as with you, there was a document waiting
for me. It was from those who sent me here, and it included everything
I needed to know to locate and kill the time traveler who would assassinate Sabah—you two.”
Joy’s brows knotted together. In an exasperated tone she said, “I
don’t understand how they knew all this about us. Was there a traitor
among us?” Her voice rose. “Was it one of the three guys John hired?”
“We hired,” John was quick to say.
Jy-ying shook her head. “First, you have to understand what universes we now are in—have already created.” Looking at the Post, she
corrected herself. “Or, what universe has been created for us.
“I will call the universe you came from, whose major twentieth century wars and democides you tried to eliminate, the First Universe. You
succeeded, and thus created a Second Universe in which those killings
never occurred, and in which democracies made up most of the world,
and were united. But there was for democracies a fatal flaw, an advantage for us Sabahists. They grew confident and lax about their defenses
in a world they thought they totally dominated.
“Sabah seized power in Uighuristan, controlled Middle Asia, and
finally engineered a coup in China.” She was careful to keep the triumph out of her voice. “Sabah was an old man by then, and his son
took over most of his power. He used China’s nuclear energy plants to
build many nuclear bombs, and eventually used them in a successful
attack on the democracies. You know all this from your message. And,
as you now know, that message is why I am here—to save Sabah, the
Prophet of God, from you. And, God be praised, to save the world he
and his son created.

Red Terror Never Again

77

“So, we are now in a Third Universe, one involving the message to
you, my arriving here, and the message I received from uptime. Were it
not for that article in the Post, all this should be obvious. But that article clearly shows that the Third Universe you and I and our messages
created has become, or is becoming, a Fourth Universe. What this
means is—”
“Jy-ying!” John gave the finger crossing sign for a time out. “Tell
us. How did those who sent you the message know about us?”
“Oh, easy.” She looked at John. “You wrote a remembrance of your
and Joys’ successes in creating the Second Universe. Very detailed, but
partly burned in a fire. There had been rumors about it. Our security
searched for it, and finally discovered it in the files of the San Francisco Fire Department.”
“I did?” John exclaimed. “How stupid. I must have been addled
with age. I’m totally against ever divulging our time travel. The existence of time travel is all evil rulers need to . . . .” John stopped and his
face reddened, but he continued to look Jy-ying in the eye.
Joy glowered at him. “I can’t believe you did that, John. You warn
me all the time never to keep a diary or preserve documents that would
reveal the possibility of time travel, and yet you—how could you be so
. . . mindless?”
John looked sheepish, and asked Jy-ying, “Why did I?”
Jy-ying looked at John and then at Joy. Again she was touched by
the real reason, and tried hard to keep her voice level and her face noncommittal as she looked back at John. She shrugged. “The
Remembrance did not say.”
“Can we see it?” John asked.
“No,” Joy insisted. “I don’t want to. It would change our behavior.
Who can act naturally—spontaneously—when they know their future?
And it could be dangerous. Because of your dumb Remembrance, we
might deny our good sense and prepare for an attack from X when we
should realize it will come from Y.”
John became interested in a callus on his palm, and started picking
at it. “Joy’s damn training—ruined my hands,” he muttered.
Head tilted, Joy stared at him for a couple of seconds. Then she
brushed her straight, jet black hair away from her face and looked back
at Jy-ying. She opened her palm and gave a little wave of her hand,
nodding as though sharing a secret about men.
Jy-ying gave her a look of understanding, then firmed her voice and
said, “Now, really—time to get serious. I want to talk about the Post
article.”

Chapter 12
November 14
San Francisco
John

J

y-ying looked at John, tilted her head, and asked him, “Did you
read the article in the Post?”
My God, John thought, she could be Joy asking me, “Did you
read what I gave you on Judo?” The same tilt of the head, the same
look, the same hair, almost the same voice, except for the accent.
Joy tapped him on the leg. “Are you awake?”
“Oh, sorry, I’m still digesting what Jy-ying told us. Ah, yes, I’ve
read the article, and planned to study it later. Joy hasn’t been able to
get it away from me, but I summarized it for her . . . ah, when we . . .
arrived.”
John noticed Jy-ying’s odd grin when he said that, but it disappeared when she asked, “What do you think of it? You are a historian,
so your Remembrance told me, and I am not.”
Joy muttered, “Oh no, a John lecture,” and looked up at the ceiling
for a moment. Jy-ying looked at her with raised eyebrows.
John pointed at Joy and told Jy-ying, “She’s jealous that I know so
much more than she does not only about weapons and martial arts, but
also about history.”
Then the seriousness of the question sank in and, feeling foolish,
he told both of them in an apologetic tone, “I’m sorry. This is too
serious to be taken lightly. Joy knows me, Jy-ying, but you don’t
yet. Humor is like a scotch on the rocks to me, if you know what I
mean. It carries me over the rough spots of life, and explains what an
utterly calm, balanced—”
“John, get on with it,” Joy urged.
“Okay, the article.” John picked up the Saturday Evening Post, rapidly flipped to the article, and noted solemnly, “This article has been
compiled by the Post from telegrams received from their Russian reporter . . . . ” John looked at the article for the name. “By Vasilii
Kubikov. He was a hero. He risked his life to reveal the truth to the

80

Rudy Rummel

world and was executed as a spy by the Cheka—Trotsky’s secret police. Kubikov’s wife and three children subsequently escaped to Berlin
with the help of anticommunists.”
John stopped and bowed his head for a moment. It was more than
out of respect for the reporter; it was a sudden realization of the risk
that Joy and he would be running once they started their planned intervention to change the course of history. The risk of death might even be
greater than Kubikov’s.
Joy misunderstood his silence. “Every revolution has their heroes.
At least his bravery is recognized, and his family got away.”
John jerked his attention back to the article. “Ah . . . I have yet to
fully absorb this incredible departure from our history—”
“My universe—” Jy-ying tried to interject, her brow knitted.
He could not be stopped, neither by Jy-ying nor the roof caving in.
“Unbelievable, but it is true that now Trotsky is President of Russia and
Chairman of the Communist Party that controls much of the country.
And Lenin is Interior Minister and Minister of Justice, while his wife
Nadezhda Krupskaya is Minister of Education. Aside from these portfolios, it is true to what Lenin did in 1917 with the Communist
revolution in our universe. Trotsky’s victory proclamation is almost
identical to Lenin’s of that time, and . . . here, I’ll read Trotsky’s from
the article:
The abolition of landlords’ property rights, and workers’
control of production, is now assured. We have arrested all
ministers of the czar’s government and the heads of the police and Okhrana, and the Okhrana has been declared an
illegal organization. All landlords’ property rights are henceforth abolished. We will begin immediately the expropriation
of landed, crown, and church property, the imposition of
workers’ control of industry, and the complete democratization of the army and navy.
John shook his head. “Wow. How better to assure the Red Terror
and the civil war that is now chewing up the lives of millions of poor
Russians.”
He stopped to take a long breath, and Jy-ying saw her chance.
Flashing her hand back and froth in front of him to get his attention,
she pointed out, “My universe began splitting from yours with your
arrival in this time. So, up to then, your bloody, violent, brutal uni-

Red Terror Never Again

81

verse was mine also. I do not remember much of the European part
of history, but was there not a bloody Russian revolution in 1904 or
1905?”
Joy’s face shifted from hopeful to resigned. “That’s a yes or no answer, John.”
“Well,” John replied, shifting his position on the bed to make himself more comfortable and darting a “you must be kidding” look at Joy,
“there was a Bloody Sunday, and that is in fact what it was called; the
czar’s troops did fire on the workers; the Cossacks did use their sabers.
The toll was something like a thousand or less killed. Workers who had
formerly refused to be led by the revolutionaries were outraged at the
killing of peaceful, patriotic workers, and this gave the revolutionaries
their chance. General strikes occurred all over the nation, and soviets
were formed in many cities and towns. But the czar’s troops remained
largely loyal and the clever, so-called October Manifesto of Witte’s that
the czar announced over his name helped calm things down. And as a
newly appointed prime minister, Witte appeared to satisfy the less radical demands of workers and liberals, which tended to reduce the
hostility and anger of peasants and workers.
“Oh, there were plenty of strikes still, and a mutiny or so, and there
was a civil war in Moscow in which a good part of the city was shot up
by artillery and burned down, but the soviets there and in St. Petersburg
could not overcome the general loyalty of the army. In November the
whole St. Petersburg Soviet was surrounded by the czar’s troops and
police, and realizing they could not fight them, Trotsky surrendered the
soviet. All there were arrested, and Trotsky was tried and exiled to Siberia in 1906. In that year Witte also resigned as prime minister over
the czar’s repressive policies, and was replaced by a nonentity, who
himself was replaced by Stolypin in July 1906. His subsequent harsh
crackdown broke the back of the revolution.”
“Thank yo—” Jy-ying began, but John was relentless.
“By March of 1917, the losses and hardship of Russian participation in World War I had soured many soldiers and workers on the czar.
This brought about his downfall and the end of the Romanov monarchy. A provisional government under Prime Minister Prince Lvov was
appointed by the Duma, and in July a new provisional government was
set up under the democratic socialist Kerensky. Not widely known, it
seems, is that the Bolsheviks came to power by a coup in October,
1917, against an inept, disorganized, provisional government, and not
the monarchy.”

82

Rudy Rummel

While gathering his breath for another discourse, John took a quick
glance at Joy. She was playing with a thread protruding from the sleeve
of her sweatshirt. He looked back at Jy-ying, whose eyes were wide
with interest. Encouraged, John sat up straighter and went on, his sonorous lecture drone now fully matured. “The Red Terror, the famine, the
concentration camps, the destruction of agriculture due to Soviet policies and requisitions, and the civil war all happened, but between 1919
and 1923, not in 1906. Not as the Post article describes the terrible
bloodletting now underway. Also, Trotsky led the Red Army from
1918 on, while Lenin headed the Soviet government. Trotsky has been
credited with the rapid buildup and organization of the Red Army and
its eventual success against the White—the anticommunist—Armies.”
John picked up the Post, swung it into the air as though displaying
an exhibit in a courtroom, and exclaimed, “As for the bloodbath now
underway, it looks like it could exceed the rivers of blood of the Russian Revolution of 1917 to 1922. Then—or now, if the Post article is at
all reliable—Russians will die from so many causes or be murdered by
the communists or their opponents for so many reasons, it will seem as
if the devil had the country in his hand.
“There was the communist Red Terror in which clergy, businessmen, landowners, the rich, royalists, critics, and resisters, among
others, were shot both en masse and one by one—some five hundred
thousand people were murdered. There were the peasant uprisings,
literally a Bread War, due to the forced requisition of peasant livestock and food. Another five hundred thousand died. In addition to
the murder and deportation of ‘rich’ landlords, the nationalization of
estates, and the ravages of the civil war, this Bread War caused a
famine that starved to death or killed by associated diseases about
seven million people. Then there were the thousands killed in rebellions in cities and towns when people came to recognize the full
meaning of the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ and the extent of the
Red Terror.
“More people were killed in forced deportations. New concentration camps killed—I remember this detail for how small it was in
contrast to the Stalin years—thirty-four thousand. Finally, there was the
civil war itself, which killed over a million people.”
“How many overall?” Jy-ying slipped in.
John drew in a long breath. “The Russian Revolution of 1917 to
1922 killed about nine and a half million people, over three million of
them murdered. This total is larger than the World War I dead of our

Red Terror Never Again

83

universe. Incredible. We must not, we cannot, let this happen again.
This is why we’re here. We must stop what Trotsky and Lenin are doing to Russia. Russians deserve better.”
John hesitated, mentally shifting to another section of lecture notes.
“Consider that—”
Jy-ying clapped loudly twice, breaking John’s concentration.
“John,” she said, “thank you. That was . . . helpful.” She looked with a
little grin at Joy, who now was winding the thread around one finger.
Joy looked up, and cupped her hand to hide her mouth from John.
“See?” she whispered.
Still grinning, which John interpreted as appreciation, Jy-ying
turned back to him. “That is what I thought. This defeats both our missions, mine to save Sabah and his victory—although without the
nuclear attacks—and yours to end major war and democides, and foster
Godle . . . ah, democracy.
“You see, you were successful in preventing the Russian Revolution of 1917, and Russia eventually became democratic. Many of its
imperial possessions were given their independence. China also became
a democracy, thanks to you, and Uighuristan declared independence. It
was never again invaded and taken over by China or Russia. However,
if the 1905 communist revolution in Russia reported in the Post article
is fully successful, China is unlikely to become a democracy, regardless
of what you do. And democracy was the condition which made it easy
for Sabah to take power over China in a coup. Russia or China now
will probably seize small Uighuristan, even though the Uighurs will
fight them. I doubt that Sabah’s parents would survive the bloodbath to
bear Sabah, and if they do, whether the boy himself would live long.
Even were he to do so, he would not be able to seize power there, and
be the father of . . . my religion.” She swallowed and stared down at her
clenched hands.
“It’s clear,” Joy said, “that our mission is changed also. We can still
intervene in Mexico to prevent the Mexican Revolution, but interventions in China and Europe are questionable because of the many
political changes that will now occur there. We might as well flush
down the toilet our First Universe early twentieth century history of
these countries. And as to preventing the Russian Revolution, one of
the most important interventions of our mission, our hope of preventing
all those murders by Lenin and Stalin is now a ha-ha. The revolution
has happened. The murders are happening.”

84

Rudy Rummel

John was pleased that Joy had really been listening carefully to him.
He had to say what was now obvious. “We are in a new universe not of
our making—one created in Russia or even elsewhere before 1905.
This 1905 revolution may only be the result of prior historical changes
rippling through time. Maybe a meteor hit Russia a century or so ago,
and caused enough destruction to change political events there with the
consequences we now see. You know, so much of our world is the result of the smallest random events having large consequences. The
slightest change in the motion of a trout may cause a millimeter movement of a stone at the bottom of a stream, and as a result a horse steps
on it enough offside to slip and throw its rider, a general, who hits his
head on the rocks. And a battle is lost, and thus so is a nation’s independence. This is a counterpart of the idea that when a butterfly flaps
its wings in a tropical forest it may be the cause of a huge storm—”
Joy grinned again at Jy-ying. “We get the idea.”
John was too well along on this stream of thought, and ignored her.
“The question is whether the revolution in Russia is the culmination of
past changes, or a change introduced in or just before 1905. To help
determine this, we can look at current political events elsewhere. If this
Russian Revolution is only the consequence of historical change occurring well beforehand, then those changes also should appear in Europe,
Asia, and the United States in some way. If the Russian Revolution is
the first change in our universe, then there should be no or little change
from our chronology of events.”
“Let’s do this right away,” Joy suggested. “Jy-ying, I imagine you
are well trained in the chronology of late 1906, especially for the
United States. Have you a newspaper?”
She shook her head.
Joy got up and retrieved the two newspapers John had bought from
the chest of drawers. She gave one to Jy-ying, gave John the back sections of the other paper, and took the front section herself.
“Hey,” John complained, “I should get the front section.”
“No,” Joy replied, “your incredible grasp of even the smallest historical details, like the name of the Japanese admiral who defeated the
Russian navy in the 1905 battle of something strait—”
“Admiral Togo led the Japanese fleet that destroyed the Russian
navy in the Battle of Tsushima Strait,” John said smugly. “It was a disastrous defeat for the Russians. Of the forty-five ships in the Russian
fleet, only two destroyers and the light cruiser Almaz reached the Russian port of Vlad—”

Red Terror Never Again

85

Joy raised her voice. “—means that you are best suited to the small
details of the back sections.”
John grinned; Jy-ying chuckled. He suggested that, if they came
across a suspicious news item, they should mention it to see if it didn’t
ring true for the others, too. “We should keep going until someone
says, ‘That’s not right,’ or something like that.”
Jy-ying and Joy nodded, and they all began to scan the newspapers.
In minutes John read aloud, “Karl Nessler demonstrated the first
permanent wave for hair, in London.”
The old wooden hotel creaked.
Jy-ying rustled her newspaper and said, “The SOS has been adopted
as a warning signal by the First Conference on Wireless Telegraphy.”
John glanced at Joy. Seeing that she was about to speak, he blurted,
“You know, last month Henry Mathewson of the New York Giants
walked fourteen men. Wow.”
The voices of hotel guests came through the door as they passed
down the hallway.
Joy put her finger on an item and noted, “Ethiopia was declared independent in a tripartite pact, and divided into British, French, and
Italian spheres of influence.”
Newspapers rustled as Joy and Jy-ying turned to the next page.
John sighed, “How sad, Bill Rufus Shafter died. He was terribly
overweight, you know.” He glanced back and forth between Jy-ying
and Joy. They had their eyes focused on their papers. He went on.
Louder. “He died at his daughter’s home from pneumonia. He was buried next to his loving wife at the Presidio. Only a few of us historians
know of this great man. In March of 1863 he spent several months in a
Confederate prison, you know.”
Joy and Jy-ying seemed not to hear him. Have they been trained in
the same female academy? he wondered.
He raised his voice even more. “Afterward, Bill became part of the
regular army and was an officer in the Seventeenth United States Colored Infantry. He fought in the battle of Nashville in December, 1864.
He was commissioned a lieutenant colonel after the war, you know, and
went to Louisiana—”
Jy-ying raised her voice even higher than John’s. “This month is
Sun Yat-sen’s birthday—he was born in 1866, and was very influential
in China’s democra—”
John spoke still louder. “Hey, Princeton is the NCAA Champion at
9-0-1.”

86

Rudy Rummel

Joy yelled, “President Teddy Roosevelt is on his way to visit Puerto
Rica and Panama. He will be the first president to visit a foreign
coun—
John was breaking up as he tried to raise his voice even higher.
He tried to suppress his laughter. “The Dow average for the last
month was 94.”
Joy grabbed the newspaper out of his hands. She bunched the pages
together and tossed them at his head. He ducked and finally let the
laughter out. Jy-ying and Joy joined him.
“I think we’re all agreed,” he said, chuckling, “that this was not a
good idea. We don’t have our chronologies, and the news items we’re
seeing don’t seem odd or displaced in time. We will have to do this at
the library with our chronologies, and work from the events listed there
for a particular date, comparing them to the news in the newspapers for
the days following.”
Jy-ying leaned over and removed a sheet of crumpled newsprint
that was draped over John’s head—John saw Joy’s sudden look at
her—and noted, “It was fun. Anyway, I found some interesting items.
There is a woman here operating a mission for Chinese girls, especially
those who were enslaved in . . . oarhouses, I think you call them.”
“Whorehouses,” John corrected.
Jy-ying continued. “She breaks into them with helpers and takes
away the young girls that have been forced to be sex slaves. She cares
for them until they can handle their own lives.”
“Cut out that item,” Joy said. “Maybe we can help the woman out.
Oh, I found something also.” She picked up the page she had been
looking at, and read, “‘Grand Jury begins investigation of the houses of
assignation known as French Restaurants. These included Marchand’s,
Delmonico’s, The New Poodle Dog, The Bay State, and The Pup, all of
which featured supper-bedrooms. Mayor Ruef had acted as attorney for
French Restaurants during liquor license renewal in 1905.’ Well,” Joy
added, “this tells us what places to avoid.”
John blurted, “Yes, keep that item also, so we know what evil
places to . . . ah, avoid.”
Joy looked askance at him, one eyebrow raised, but John ignored
her and clapped his hands once. “Okay, girls, we’re off topic. We will
have to go to the library tomorrow. I think we are all too tired today. In
the meantime, we have to plan what to do about this, assuming that the
changes in this universe began with the 1905 Russian Revolution—
unless the library research proves otherwise.

Red Terror Never Again

87

“Joy and I had planned to take a long nap before your surprise visit,
Jy-ying. We are scheduled to meet our first hires, three guys we met
when we landed here, and if you will join us, I’ll introduce them to
you. Then afterward, I want to discuss tentatively what we should do.
Where are you staying, Jy-ying?”
Jy-ying pointed to the wall that separated her room from John’s.
“The next room,” she said.
“You were there for a while before you . . . surprised us?”
“Yes.”
Joy reddened slightly, and John thought, Now she does know everything. He quickly asked, “I imagine that you have all the funds you
need for your mission, as you know we do. But you will be working
closely with us on our new mission, and you’ll need a cover for our
working as one.” Oops, not well put, John realized with a quick glance
at Joy, whose face was clouding up. Working with Joy and Jy-ying together is going to be complex.
John softened his voice, tilted his head at Joy, and rested his finger
on her arm. “Joy, what kind of cover can we give Jy-ying?”
Joy hesitated, put her hand over John’s, and then looked directly at
Jy-ying. She said in Mandarin Chinese, “I’m sure you speak this language Do you speak others?”
Jy-ying answered, “Yes; I understand Hakka and Cantonese,
among others. As a security guard, I had to learn all the major Chinese languages.”
“Good.” Joy turned to look at John with the hint of a smile. “She
can work under me as my assistant and, for show, my translator.”
“Perfect,” John replied. Just what I wanted.
He leaned over and started picking up the papers on the floor.
“We’re going to take a nap,” he told Jy-ying. “Please meet us at the hotel restaurant at six.”
“Oh, one more thing, Jy-ying,” Joy said. “I saw your beautiful calligraphy in the registration book, and the room you listed was on the
third floor. You changed rooms?”
“Yes, as soon as I saw what rooms you two had. But then, I was going to assassinate you.” Jy-ying stood, hesitated, and then stepped over
to Joy and shook her hand. She did the same to John. “To our mission,”
she said.
Joy lifted Jy-ying’s gun from the bed, took a quick look at it, and
handed it to Jy-ying. “Nice gun, but too light. I’d like to take it apart
sometime.”

88

Rudy Rummel

Jy-ying turned at the door and grinned at Joy. “It’s light because it’s
not loaded,” she said, and left.

Chapter 13
November 14, 1906
Berlin
Rosa Luxemburg

R

osa was alone in her two room apartment, writing at her oak table by the light of an electric lamp with a gray lace lampshade
and a grotesque gargoyle base that sat in the middle of the table
surrounded by scattered notes, newspapers, and telegrams. Magazines
and books, some lying open, were strewn amidst the papers. This was
how Rosa worked. It appalled visitors, but she always seemed to find
what she was looking for in seconds. Her mind was organized; what lay
on the table was its debris.
The apartment itself was chaotic. A ceramic gas stove stood in
the corner on a stone base, its flue rising straight up to disappear
through the blackened ceiling. Partly eaten food lay on the counter
in the small kitchen; unwashed dishes waited in the sink for days
until she had nothing to eat on, and washed them; clothes were
draped across a davenport, now converted to a bed; and next to a
smelly armchair against one wall, clothes spilled from two open
suitcases.
And she took a bath maybe once a month. She did not have time.
She was used to temporary lodgings, and would be leaving this one
in twenty-four hours to travel by train to Warsaw. She wanted to help
and be with her lover Leo Jogiches, who planned to launch a Polish
revolution modeled on Trotsky’s in a month.
Although Trotsky had promised the independence of Poland, the
czar’s Russian governor-general of Poland was still in control and
seemed very reluctant to relinquish power. Leo’s sympathetic contacts
in the governor-general’s headquarters were sure he was on the verge
of making himself the president of Poland, declaring Poland free of
Russia, and fighting the Red Army if it tried to take back the country.
So far, the Russian-Polish Army was still loyal to him. But Rosa had
the telegram from Trotsky’s German lieutenant: the new Soviet government of Russia was just too busy, too shaky, too threatened by the
White Armies to bother at this time with Poland, but if a successful

90

Rudy Rummel

communist revolution seized control from the governor and his lackeys,
then Trotsky would welcome Poland’s independence and collaboration
in the international war on capitalism and bourgeoisie society.
Rosa and Leo had declared themselves Bolsheviks in February, but
to conform with the name change in St. Petersburg, they now called
themselves communists. Her lover now headed the Polish Communist
Party in Warsaw that he’d founded.
They were still short of arms, but the Warsaw Grenadier Corps
would come to their side. In one month the revolution would be
launched with massive general strikes. Most helpful was the announcement in today’s telegram that comrades had assassinated two
Russian and one Polish general, all major bulwarks of traditional Russian control.
She was bone tired. Although only thirty-six and in good health,
she had not slept for a full day. She had to get this article finished for
the German social democratic newspaper Vorwòrts. And she still had to
attend the meeting with Karl Liebknecht about setting up a German
Communist Party in Berlin out of the unhappy left wing of the Reichstag’s social democrats. Events were moving so fast it was hard for any
of them to keep up—all seemed out of control, as though they were
leaves in the wind of a magnificent global communist revolution.
There was a knock at the door. She ignored it.
The knock came again, heavier.
“Gówno—shit!” she exclaimed in Polish. She rose heavily and
cocked the door open. “Yes?” she said to the tall, solid-looking man
standing on the other side.
The man wore a white Cossack hat with the flaps up; his open
greatcoat revealed a brown corduroy suit and a collarless gray shirt. He
had a heavy wool scarf tossed over one shoulder. “Are you Rosa?”
Rosa edged to the back of the door, ready to slam and lock it. She
had been warned about German Freikorps assassins ready to work their
way down a list of prominent revolutionaries. She had a suitcase of her
essentials ready and had prepared an escape route out the apartment’s
rear window and down an alley. He could not be German, however, not
the way he dressed and mangled the language.
An American?
The man held out a folded piece of paper. “This is from Leo and introduces me to you. I just left him this morning in Warsaw. The code
word is Spartacus.”
“Excuse me?” she answered, shaking her head.

Red Terror Never Again

91

“S.P.A.R.T.A.C.U.S,” he spelled out, but his pronunciation of the
letters was hardly easier to understand.
Nevertheless, she understood. “Ah, Spartacus.” She opened the
door and waved him in, holding out her other hand for the message.
While he closed the door behind him, she took the message over to the
lamp and read it.
She stared at him, and then plopped into her chair, quickly expelling air through her teeth. “You did this for us?” She ran her hand
through her hair. “All that money.”
She reread the message, looked back up at him, and almost shouted,
“Welcome, comrade, to the revolution! Come, sit down.” She got up
and dragged a chair around the table to a spot next to hers. “I don’t
have any schnapps or beer to drink. Could I make you tea?”
“Nein,” the man said, and tried to pronounce his next words carefully. “I cannot stay long. I have too much to do, and so do you. I came
here only to give you this.” He handed her an envelope. “It’s the number of a bank account at Dresdner Bank, and it’s in the name of
Katharina Schluter. You will also see in the envelope the ID and false
birth certificate that will enable you to pass as that person.”
“How much is in the account?”
“Fifty million marks.”
She gasped and jerked back in her chair, eyes wide. “What am I to
do with all this money?”
“Use it wisely to promote a Bolshevik-communist revolution in
Germany. It will take time and much organization, but I know you are
at the center of the revolutionaries here. I’m also sure that after Trotsky
consolidates his power in Russia, he will help you. Two more things.”
Rosa strained forward to understand him, her eyes still large and
her mouth hanging open in shock.
“I know that your Polish revolution will be launched in a month.
One week before that, a revolutionary will assassinate the governorgeneral of Poland. Since he has monopolized power, this will leave his
government not only leaderless, but powerless. The army and police
will not know what to do. You and Leo can prepare for it.”
“How can you be sure?”
“You can count on it. But, even if you prepare for it and I am
wrong, you lose nothing if he lives. Second, the workers here do not
understand or support revolution. The whole union movement is oriented toward peaceful reform and social democracy—evolutionary
social democracy. Move slowly and organize and be prepared. For

92

Rudy Rummel

there will be a war with Serbia, France, and England. Soviet Russia
will remain neutral at first. When that war occurs, and it will be bloody,
the workers will be yours, as well as mutinous soldiers and sailors. I
cannot be sure of when this will happen. Maybe in a decade or less.”
She stared at him again, this time as though he were an alien being.
“A war?”
“Yes. It will be a bloody one, and one destabilizing Germany to
your advantage.”
“But what can cause such a big war?”
“An assassination, an ultimatum, the fear of being at a disadvantage
when other powers mobilize, and what everyone thought would be a
small war will escalate into a war involving all of Europe, and ultimately may even involve the United States.”
“The United States? Now I know you are joking. Why should
Americans stop chasing Indians to send their cowboys way over here to
make war on . . . who? Will they be on Germany’s side?”
“No, they will fight with the English and French against Germany,
Austro-Hungary, and Turkey, and a few East European nations. I think
Trotsky will declare war on Germany after he sees the opportunity for
communism here, and will help destroy the Kaiser. It will give you
your greatest opportunity for revolution.”
Rosa cleared her throat. “You sure have an imagination.” She
pinched the bridge of her nose before continuing. “I do not want to insult you, and I respect your great help, but you should leave the politics
and predictions to us Poles and Germans, who have lived in this political culture our whole life. Anyway, I know great changes and
opportunities are coming. It is in the air. It is in the streets. It is in the
union halls. It is in the Reichstag. And we will be ready.”
“That is all I digest,” the man said, mixing up the German “suggest” with “digest,” but Rosa understood.
He stood and headed for the door.
Rosa got up to follow him. Her knees felt weak as she remembered the fortune he’d given her. At the door, she asked, “What is
your name?”
“No matter,” he said, meeting her gaze with green eyes filled with
respect. “Just think of me as a rich comrade.”

Chapter 14
November 14, 1906
San Francisco
Joy

A

s soon as the door closed behind Jy-ying, Joy said, “We have to
trust her. The ultimate proof is that she could have burst into
your room with a loaded gun and shot us dead, and didn’t; since
her gun was unloaded, she also risked being killed by me—”
“Us,” John interrupted.
“—and she knew it.” Joy paused, then suggested, “Let’s go to my room.
I’m uncomfortable knowing that she is on the other side of that wall.”
John smiled. “Even in your room, baby, my lovemaking would
make your screech loud enough for her to hear. Even if she were walking down the street. Or, possibly on the ferry to Oakland.”
“I see. Well, so much for lovemaking.” Ha-ha, I got him with that.
Feeling smug, Joy picked up her suitcase and headed for her room.
John followed her, muttering, “Stupid, stupid.”
Once they were settled on Joy’s bed for a nap, Joy asked, “What do
you think about our new partner?”
John stretched and put his hands behind his head. “I see no reason
to doubt her. She told us about her mission to kill us, she was frank
about her religion and her desire that Sabah be saved somehow, and she
knew about the message we received from her future—which means
she knew, as did those who sent her, that we had to be planning to kill
him.” His voice trailed off at the end. He turned on his side and put one
arm over her. “I’m sleepy, baby.”
“She could be me,” Joy said.
“No woman could be like you.”
“She looks like me. She acts like me.”
John whispered, “You are unique.”
“If she were naked, you might think she was me.” She turned her
head to look at him. His eyes were closed, and he was breathing lightly.
She sighed. So much at stake. So many lives to save. Such a responsibility. And now, Jy-ying.

94

Rudy Rummel

She caressed the locket she wore containing her mother’s photograph. She felt again her terrible loss—she would never see her loving
mother again. She let the quiet tears flow. Then she thought, But I have
my dearest. She leaned over and kissed John on the cheek.
In minutes, she was asleep.
She did not see John open one eye, make sure she was asleep and,
with a dimple forming at the corner of his mouth, fall asleep himself.
Jy-ying
Jy-ying waited at the entrance to the hotel restaurant. She wore the
checked gingham jumper that fit her tight at the waist and hips, but no
hat. The day was too serious for anything but her usual braided circlet
of hair on the back of her head. And no makeup, of course.
Three fellows walking past her suddenly stopped and stared at her.
Then they seemed to notice something about her that made them relax,
and the tallest of them said, “I’m sorry for staring at you, miss. I
thought you were somebody we knew.”
“I am. Almost,” Jy-ying responded with a little bow, looking at
each of them. “I am waiting for John Banks and Joy Phim. You must be
the three gentlemen we are joining for dinner.” She knew all about
them, since they played such a prominent role in John’s Remembrance.
The three stood straighter. That may have been the first time in
their life they were called gentlemen. The tall one doffed his hat. “I’m
Hands Reeves,” he said, and introduced the other two. “We work for
Mr. Banks and his assistant Miss Phim. You’re right; we’re supposed
to meet them here for supper.”
Nice looking man, Jy-ying observed. She smiled. “Ah, yes, John . . .
Mr. Banks invited me to join you. I am happy to meet you. I am Khoo
Jy-ying.” Without thinking, she added, “I am Joy’s sister. I will also be
working for the company, with Joy.”
“Hey, that explains why you look so much like her,” the man
named Sal said. “I thought there could be only one beauty like her in
the world.” Then he added, his eyes shining, “Are there more?”
Ah yes, she thought, Sal. The funny, oversexed, brazen, disrespectful one. How come we do not have anyone like him in the China of my
time? Jy-ying grinned at him. “Thank you, Mr. Garcia, for the compliment. No, I have no other sisters.”

Red Terror Never Again

95

“You and Joy . . . ah, Miss Phim, sure sucked up all the beauty.
Nothing left for other women but plain or ugly.”
What do Americans call this? Ah, yes, a line. Jy-ying raised her
eyebrow at him.
The one named Dolphy Docker punched him in the shoulder.
“You must excuse my friend,” he told her. “He’s just wowed by you
and Joy.”
“And I’ll hit him myself if he doesn’t mind his manners,” Reeves
said, glaring at Garcia.
Jy-ying chuckled, feeling good about these men. “He is a nice man,
Mr. Reeves. I have never been so complimented.”
Garcia beamed and hit Docker back on the shoulder. Reeves smiled
at Jy-ying and told her, “I’m Hands. You can call us all by our first
names, Khoo, since we are coworkers.”
“Khoo is my last name. For Chinese, last names come first. Call me
Jy-ying.”
Then she saw John and Joy coming down the lobby stairs. She tried
not to stare at John, but in his well-fitted diagonally worsted coat and
pinstripe pants, with his wild blond curls framing a square, rugged face,
he was a handsome and graceful man. But, she thought, if she had anything to do with it, he would not wear that maroon bow tie. Even so,
she flushed, and her heart fluttered.
No good, she told herself, and jerked her gaze to Joy. Even at a distance she could see that Joy had been watching her stare at John.
Especially, no good.
John
John joined them with a smile. “Hello, everybody. I see you’ve met
the guys, Jy-ying.” Turning to them, he asked, “Have you introduced
yourselves?”
They nodded.
“Fine, let’s eat.”
There were no empty tables for six, so John picked one table and
dragged over another. He sat at the head of the two tables, with Jy-ying
on his right side. Joy walked around to the other side and sat on his left.
John was speechless for a moment, wondering how that happened. He
glanced at Joy. She was looking at Jy-ying—was that the hint of a
glower?

96

Rudy Rummel

He cleared his throat. Looking at the three guys, he asked, “Did
Miss Khoo tell you that she is your coworker? She will be Miss Phim’s
assistant and translator—”
Joy kicked him under the table. She told the guys, “I can’t stand
this. I’m Joy. Boss-man is John.” She pointed to John, then pointed to
each of the others in turn and gave their first names.
“Thank you, Joy,” John replied with a grin. “You see, she is my assistant and translator.” He emphasized the last word.
Sal had been staring back and forth between Joy and Jy-ying with
his mouth open. He finally told Jy-ying, “If you hadn’t told me you and
Joy were sisters, I would have guessed it. Are you twins?”
John was taken aback for a moment. Sisters? Then he realized what
a good idea that was. It was a convenient answer when people wondered about the two women’s resemblance.
“No, we—” Joy started to answer, but John interrupted.
“No, not as you mean it, but they’re fraternal twins. Jy-ying just
joined us from New York. Her room is next to mine.”
Dolphy asked, “What’s a fraternal twin?”
“Ah,” John tried to answer, “they come from different ovum . . . ah,
female reproductive cells. Eggs.”
Dolphy colored slightly and saw something interesting to look at on
the wall. Hands seemed engrossed in the tabletop. Sal looked from Joy
to Jy-ying and grinned. “Yeah, I thought so.”
They spent several minutes studying their menus. “Everybody
ready to order?” John asked. When they nodded, John looked for the
waiter and realized that he had been ignoring them. He glanced at
Joy and Jy-ying, recalling the prejudices of this period. Time for a
little speech to remind everyone that we’re all immigrants, he
thought.
Before he could rise and call for attention, Jy-ying stood and
walked over to the waiter, oblivious to the gazes of several male customers. She tapped the waiter on the shoulder, put her hand on his arm,
leaned toward him with a smile, and said something. The waiter took a
step back, his face aghast, and then immediately came to their table to
take their order. Jy-ying followed him, and sat back down without a
word.
Almost obsequious, the waiter responded to their orders with, “Yes
sir. Yes ma’am. Is there anything I can get you? Coffee or tea?”
When the waiter left, everyone looked at Jy-ying. Finally Hands
asked, “What did you say?”

Red Terror Never Again

97

“Oh, simple. I said that if we did not get waited on in five seconds,
I was going to put my arms around him and give him a big kiss in front
of everybody, and say loudly, ‘Thanks for the fun night.’”
The three guys clapped; John grinned. Joy’s face was stony. John
suspected she was still unhappy that Jy-ying had not asked her before
claiming they were sisters.
Sal asked Jy-ying, “If I don’t pass you the salt and pepper, will you
give me five seconds also?”
Everyone laughed; Joy released a little smile.
Joy
Joy felt foolish, and couldn’t help chiding herself during the rest of
the meal. What’s the matter with me? Jy-ying is doing nothing more
than what I would do. She’s just admiring a good-looking man, but
she’s no competition for his heart. We now have a terribly important
mission to do together, and this stupid, trivial jealousy cannot interfere.
It’s that she looks so much like me. Any other woman, and I would not
have given it a thought. The “it” needed no reference. Okay, goddam it.
Enough.
She used her warrior skills to relax herself, and when she felt she
could look at Jy-ying calmly and without a tendril of jealousy reaching
out from her heart, she smiled at Jy-ying and asked during a break in
the conversation, “How ya doing, Sis?”
Jy-ying responded with a smile of her own. “Great. So nice to be
with you again.”
Joy heard John let out a long breath. Under the table, he lifted up
her dress with the toe of his boot and gently rubbed the side of her leg.
After the meal, John warned the fellows that he would knock on
their doors around eight the next morning to start working them “like
slaves.”
“Oh,” Hands responded. “Like peasants.”
When Dolphy appeared to take John seriously, Joy laughed. “Joke,
joke,” she told them. “Remember, I’m the translator.”
Jy-ying nodded, and Dolphy gave her an embarrassed grin.
They said good night to the guys. On the way to John’s room, Joy
stopped at her own to get the laptop computer she had packed in her
suitcase. John also picked up the room’s lone chair and carried it into
his room for additional seating, and the trio settled in John’s room.

98

Rudy Rummel

Before John could began, Joy, seated on the edge of the bed with
the laptop next to her, looked at Jy-ying. “Calling us sisters was clever.
Now if people comment on how identical we look, we can simply say,
‘We’re sisters,’ and they will move on.”
Jy-ying replied, “Except for men like Sal, who will find it a good
opening . . . line, is that what you call it?”
“Yes,” John said, “and I would have used it myself, on Joy.”
When Joy and Jy-ying raised their eyebrows, he hastened on. “As I
mentioned, tomorrow we will do research in the library, seeking any
changes that have taken place in current events. But since we did go
through the newspaper—or tried to, until Joy lost her usual admirable
control,” he added with a laugh, “we can assume that a new universe
began in Russia in 1904 or 1905 with the events that led up to the successful revolution of November, 1905.”
Joy frowned over that. “It’s not right. If a new universe were created in 1905, how could we land in this new universe in 1906?
Remember, John, our scientists were unable to find a way to cross universes, which is why we could never return to 2001—our arrival here
would create a new universe.”
“You have to be right, Joy,” Jy-ying said. She looked pensive, and
then raised a finger. “How about this? It cannot be possible that a
change in one tiny part of the world, like our little part of San Francisco, would be instantly transmitted all over the world. It must be that
such changes introduced into the time stream radiate out like ripples
from a pebble tossed onto the still surface of a pond. Those time-ripples
from the revolution in Russia have yet to change this tiny and remote
part of the world. So, when we landed here, we were still in the universe to which we’d been sent.”
“More like a boulder rolling off a cliff into a still pond,” Joy said.
“In any case,” John replied, “a theory of incrementally changing
universes. I’ll buy that. In history, one can always find cases where—”
Joy sensed a lecture and hastened to respond. “I agree. Now
that we have that behind us, what do we do about the changes that
have occurred, and will eventually reach us here?” She looked at
Jy-ying. “You want to save Sabah and your religion. We want to
prevent the major twentieth century wars and democides by intervening at historical turning points, and globalizing democracy to
end the possibility of these catastrophes. Maybe there is a way to
achieve both our missions, without the nuclear holocausts of Abul
Sabah’s son.”

Red Terror Never Again

99

John pushed his hand through his wild hair. “We should leave that
until a later time. Regardless of how we deal with our divergent missions—except for killing us, of course,” he gave Jy-ying a little grin,
“the more important thing is what to do about the vast political changes
now taking place.”
Joy faked a somber look. “Yes, after giving it some thought, I agree
with John. Killing us is out. And, right—we have to do something
about the changes. But isn’t it more important to find out what’s causing these changes first?”
“Let’s deal with that in a moment,” John said. “I can’t exaggerate how important the Russian revolution of 1905 is, particularly
because Trotsky led it. He is now the most powerful man in Russia,
more powerful than Lenin. This gives Trotsky the chance to pursue
his idea of permanent revolution. He believes that, for a communist
revolution in Russia to be secure, the revolution must be spread to
other countries. He will not wait for a powerful, industrial Soviet
state to be created first, as Stalin would have done—this was the major conflict between Trotsky and Stalin. As soon as the revolution is
consolidated, that is, the White Armies are defeated and his control
is extended over all Russia, he will try to use all means to create
communist revolutions in other countries. He’ll do this first among
his neighbors, and then their neighbors, and so on. I’m convinced
Germany, which has a strong social democratic, union movement,
will follow Poland.”
Jy-ying looked at Joy. “Did he sneak in a lecture?”
She nodded, trying to look mournful.
John ignored them. “I suggest, Joy, that we temporarily put aside all
our plans to intervene in Mexico, Japan, and China. All that we do now
should be concentrated on Eastern Europe, Poland, and Germany.”
Jy-ying interjected, “No, China cannot be forgotten. It is very important to prevent communism in China, regardless of whether or not
the fall of the Manchu dynasty creates a democracy.”
Joy leaned forward, put her elbow on her knee, and rested her chin
in her hand. “With what is happening in Russia, I can’t imagine still
going ahead with the other parts of our mission. Yes, Mexico and Japan
have to be out, for a while. But I would stick with our China mission.
Trying to prevent communism and the rise of a fascist Nationalist Party
in China is what underlies our intervention to promote democracy
there.” She looked at John, eyebrows raised. “Your moment is up.”
Frowning, John looked back at her. “My moment is up?”

100

Rudy Rummel

“Yes. You said, ‘Let’s deal with what caused these changes in the
Russian time path in a moment.’ The moment is up. Maybe we would
have a better idea of what to do if we knew what was causing these
changes.”
Before John could answer, Jy-ying pointed out, “It cannot be a meteor, volcanic eruption, earthquake, or another natural catastrophe. All
such would be fixed in time and place regardless of the changes in our
universe or the one that the 1905 revolution created—is creating.”
John looked thoughtful. “It has to be a man.” Joy scowled, and he
hastily corrected himself. “Rather, a person; a he or she; someone.”
Good man, she thought, and added out loud, “I agree. Some person
is behind this. What I don’t understand is how they were able to remove
themselves from the historical flow of this universe to affect such an
incredible revolution, and I mean that in both the political and physical
senses.”
Jy-ying shook her head. “No person, he or she, or someone could.
Neither could an alien of whatever sex, or lack thereof, since . . . it . . .
is part of the same universe.”
Joy was amused; she saw the mischief in Jy-ying’s eyes. She was
beginning to like her.
She was even more amused when John looked from Jy-ying to her
and said, “You two have been putting me on. You are really sisters,
aren’t you.”
He held his hand up before she could reply. “It’s obvious, once the
idea has been mentioned, that one or more time travelers, probably with
resources similar to ours or better, have intervened in Russia. They are
trying to do for communism what we want to do for democracy.”
“And Sabahism, John. Do not forget my mission,” Jy-ying added
softly.
“As long as it doesn’t include our deaths,” John replied.
Jy-ying’s expression turned grim. She got up, knelt before John and
Joy, and put out her hands for theirs. When she had their hands, she
said in a firm voice, “You have mentioned that twice John, and Joy did
once. I do not blame you for your worry. I do not blame you if you do
not trust me. I want you both to know I could no longer kill either of
you, even if I thought it would save Sabah. How do you say it? That is
off the table? Forever.” She gave Joy’s had a squeeze. “Anyway, Joy is
my sister. How could I kill my sister?”
John replied, “But I’m not related to you. At least, not as far as I
know.”

Red Terror Never Again

101

“Yes,” Jy-ying replied, “but you are Joy’s lover, and in her heart,
her husband.”
Joy thought she had shown the green monster the door, but when
Jy-ying said that, it was as though a wet blanket had been removed
from her body and the sun was shining on her. Other than acting toward
John as any woman would naturally, Joy was sure that Jy-ying would
not betray her.
With that, Jy-ying got up and returned to her chair. Folding her
hands on her lap and looking back at Joy and John, she said, “I’m back
to where I started. I came to this age to find a time traveler. Turns out it
was you two. Now, again, I have to find one or more time travelers. But
I will not be alone. I am now part of a team of three. I will call it the
Banks Team.”
Joy smiled at her—genuinely smiled at her for the first time. “Welcome, Jy-ying.”
John got a thoughtful expression on his face. “How do we catch this
or these communist time travelers? Why, we make them come to us.
Here, to San Francisco, where we can trap them. Where it would be
easiest.”
“How do we do that?” Joy asked.
“Look, girls, I solved our problem. Do I have to do everything? The
little details are up to you two.”

Chapter 15
November 15, 1906
San Francisco
Jy-ying

T

hey were sitting in Sam’s Grill on Bush Street for lunch. John
had dismissed the three guys for the day, and wanted this
chance to talk with Joy and Jy-ying about their plans. They had
found nothing amiss in the big events in the United States and elsewhere outside of Europe, but there was considerable middle-level
activity in Congress and the State Department about the revolution in
Russia. State had recalled its ambassador to Russia for consultation,
and had closed down several consulates, including the one in Moscow, because of the danger to American officials during the Red
Terror and the civil war. Intervention was much talked about; some
prominent senators were calling for American help for anticommunist
forces, including President Pro Tempore William P. Frye, but Secretary of State Elihu Root was opposed. President Roosevelt had called
an emergency cabinet meeting, and pundits were predicting that a major aid program for the starving Russians would be recommended to
Congress.
John voiced their conclusion: “The political changes in this universe must have started in Russia in 1905.” He asked them if they had
any suggestions for finding the one responsible for these changes.
“Yes,” Jy-ying said, “we do.”
John nodded and sat back to listen as she detailed their suggestion.
“For purposes of discussion, we will assume the communist time
traveler is one male, although it’s probably a female, the stronger sex.”
John pursed his lips, waved the thought away, and motioned for her
to continue.
“We discarded going to Russia or Germany and searching for this
person,” Jy-ying said. “We do not know the countries; we do not have
contacts in Europe yet. Our Tor Import and Export Company is not in
business yet, and provides no cover. We reluctantly concluded that you
are correct—he will have to come to us.” She looked at Joy. “How am I
doing?”

104

Rudy Rummel

“Couldn’t do better,” Joy replied.
Jy-ying continued. “So, how to bring him to us? Do we appear as
huge Bolshevik-communist supporters with tons of money to give to
major revolutionaries in Germany? Joy says, ‘No way do we aid the
communists, even as a trap,’ and I agree.”
Joy nodded emphatically.
“Do we seem to provide aid for reactionary or conservative causes
or people? We agreed that we would likely find ourselves blown up by
a revolutionary, if not the time traveler. And so on, for many different
strategies, until we ended up with the one and only good one.”
“I got that much,” John said, rolling his eyes. “Now, what is it?”
Joy answered, her voice silky. “Well, since you can’t figure it out, I
guess we’ll just have to help you.” She then got serious.
John’s eyes got wider and wider as she explained their plan. When
she finished, he smiled and nodded. Then he sat back, looking pleased.
“My compliments, ladies. Good thinking.” Glancing at Joy and then Jyying, he asked, “Who thought up this brilliant idea?”
“Actually, both of us,” Joy replied. “While you were having the
three guys run all over the library newspaper section checking out the
current events in both our chronologies, Jy-ying and I threw some ideas
back and forth. You said you wondered what happened to us. Well, we
found a quiet table and talked about it. Don’t you remember? You left
the details to us.” She grinned.
“It is a matter of sheer brilliance applied in a deductive manner,”
Jy-ying explained.
“Oh,” John said, “I thought this idea came from you two.”
“Ha! Sheer intellectual jealousy,” Joy said, looking smug.
Jy-ying could not believe where her new levity came from. Clearly,
it was encouraged by the barter between John and Joy, but it had to be
latent in her. In her career as a Chinese commissioned officer, she
would not have dared to display this side of herself. Everything had to
be serious. Even what one did with lovers and at home was a matter of
religious concern by the clerics, and prying eyes and tell-all jilted lovers and mates were an ever present danger. She was enjoying this new
freedom, and it lightened the deadly seriousness of their new mission.
John mulled the idea over, and then leaned on the table toward Joy.
“Let’s work on it. Time is of the essence, since it’s probable that more
than a couple thousand Russians are being shot, starved to death, or dying of disease every day. I’ll do the draft, and then both of you should
go though it to add or subtract. We all can’t be doing this at the same

Red Terror Never Again

105

time, so I suggest we also set up our company at its temporary business
location in the warehouse where we landed. Then we will have to hire
someone to help us with the publication and marketing, but I’m willing
to sink many millions into this.
“I’m going to start writing as soon as we get back to the hotel. I’ll
leave it to you two to schedule all the other things we have to do.” He
looked from Joy to Jy-ying. “People, we’re off and running.”

Chapter 16
November 16
Joy

I

t was about one in the morning when John woke her by getting into
bed. Eyes half shut, she mumbled, “How’s it going, dearest?”
He yawned and pulled the covers up to his chin. “I’ve got about fifteen or twenty pages done so far. They’re going fast, since it’s almost
all off the top of my head. Only occasionally do I need to consult the
chronology. I can’t believe how tired I am. And cold. It must be about
45 degrees in here.”
Joy felt more awake. “Do you know how long we’ve been in this
age? In an hour or so, it will be two days. Two days. I can’t believe
all that we’ve done and all that has happened to us in that short
time.”
John snuggled close to her and draped his arm over her chest.
“Hey, you’re like ice,” she yelped.
John pulled her tight against him. “We share and share alike, including your heat.”
Now wide awake, she felt relaxed and comforted in her lover’s
arms, despite his chilled body; she actually enjoyed the feel of his
cold flesh. Her mind idly roamed over the day. “Do you realize,” she
babbled, “that we landed here, found a message from the future
waiting, you saved me from suicide, we met the three guys and hired
them, we got our first rooms at this hotel, had an unusual meeting
with Jy-ying, found out about Trotsky’s victory in Russia and the
civil war there, did research on whether that was the first or a sequence of changes, determined that there was one or more
communist time travelers at work in this time, and found a way to
lead him or them to us—all in less than forty-eight hours? Can you
believe it?”
Silence.
She turned her head and looked at him. He was asleep.
“Wait until he finds out what more I have to tell him,” she told herself. “Then again, maybe he’ll find out before I say anything.”

108

Rudy Rummel

John
Something startled John awake. He sat up and looked around. Joy
was still sleeping, so it couldn’t be anything dangerous. Any threat, and
she would be wide awake and crouched at the door, ready to punch her
fist through it. He looked out the window and saw that it was barely
light outside; fog pushed against the glass pane and water dripped from
a gutter somewhere. He lay back, spooned Joy, and was almost asleep
in the comfort of her naked warmth when he heard it again.
A dog barking somewhere.
Not unusual. Dogs always bark somewhere, he though drowsily.
He’d almost slid back into sleep when the dog barked again. It was in
the next room, he was sure. But that was his room. It had to be in the
one next to his. But that was Jy-ying’s.
Now he was awake. He kissed Joy’s bare shoulder. “Hey, sleepy
head. You going to snore all morning? We have work to do.”
Joy opened her eyes, looked at him, and then jerked to a sitting position and covered her breasts. “Who are you? I don’t think you gave
me your name.”
John felt his eyebrows waver for only a second. “I didn’t? I am
Euscrewami, the Greek janitor. I make the rooms hot.”
He laughed as Joy threw the cover over his head. From under it,
he yelled, “And there is a dog in one of the rooms down the hallway. Can’t be Jy-ying’s, can it? If so, as the janitor, I will have to
kick it out.”
Joy giggled. “You can’t do that.”
“Why not?”
“Because she owns the hotel.”
John stuck out his head out of the covers. “Why?”
“She came to the hotel to get a room to stay in while she looked for
us. She didn’t know that we would rent rooms here also. Where we
stayed was not in your dumb Remembrance. Anyway, the hotel would
not rent rooms to Orientals.”
“She bought the hotel just because they wouldn’t rent her a room?”
“Yes.”
John shook his head. “That’s ridiculous. She could have gone elsewhere.”
“Dearest. They wouldn’t have rented rooms to us, either. I’m also
Oriental; you must know that by now, as much as I’ve tried to keep it
from you.”

Red Terror Never Again

109

John sat up and put his hands around his knees. “I wonder where
we stayed in the other universe. But then, I don’t see why Hands would
direct us to this hotel in this universe, and another hotel in the other
one. We must have come here. But then, I don’t understand why she
had trouble and we didn’t, and why she would do such a stupid thing as
buy the hotel for that reason.”
Joy was sitting more erect, and her eyes had a little more sparkle to
them. “We don’t know that we didn’t,” she pointed out. “I know you,
John. If we were turned away because I’m Oriental, you would have
insisted, and if they didn’t rent rooms to us, you would have bought the
hotel. Just as Jy-ying did.” She grinned. “Yup, I’m sure of it.”
“I would? Well then, there would be a good reason for it.” John
quickly ransacked his mind for such a reason. He knew there had to be
one. He grabbed what he found waving for attention from a corner.
“Ah, yes, of course; I would want a place for our business visitors to
stay, and for the three guys until they got settled. But Jy-ying had no
such reasons. She was being ridiculous.”
“Sweetheart, you’re precious,” Joy said with a loving smile.
“Did you forget about the dog?” John asked.
“I bet you didn’t even know we went out in the late afternoon to do
some shopping. You wouldn’t have known if San Francisco had another earthquake,” she teased.
“On the way back, we passed a line of garbage cans outside a restaurant, and there was a skinny little dog looking for food in one of
them. When he heard us and looked around, he was so sad looking. His
pert ears, black eyes, black nose, and little red tongue immediately won
Jy-ying over. She picked him up, carried him into the restaurant, and
paid a nickel for a big steak bone. She gave it to him outside, but when
we walked away he followed with the heavy bone in his mouth—it’s a
wonder his back end didn’t tip up.
“He wouldn’t go away when we reached the hotel. Finally, Jyying picked him up and took him to her room. I don’t think dogs
were allowed in this hotel before Jy-ying bought it. She simply
walked up to the desk clerk and told him, ‘You now allow one handsome dog in this hotel. This one.’ And she pointed to the dog she
carried. She left the clerk standing against the mail slots as though
he were pinned there.
“So, his barking is what you must have heard this morning,” Joy
finished. “Oh yes—she says we are now a team of four.

110

Rudy Rummel

John shook his head and gave her a dour look. “I don’t know, baby.
Our new mission is immeasurably important, and we can’t have pets
distracting us from that.”
Joy got up and started getting dressed. “You forgot one thing.”
“What?”
“Dogs hear what we can’t. They smell what we can’t. Helpful for
protecting us, don’t you think?”
John scratched his jaw, where he was letting his hair grow. “I
thought that was your job, as you told me when you vamped me into
volunteering for this mission with you.”
“Vamped? All I did was hint that we would be intimate. I can’t help
it if you were besotted by lust. Anyway, consider a dog Jy-ying’s
weapon augmentation.”
“Why hers and not yours? You’re the warrior.”
“Would you believe that she is a martial arts specialist, as I am?
Judging by some of the simulated moves she showed me in her room, I
think she will be my equal. Or close to it. You have two of us, dearest.”
John got out of bed and looked for his pants. “Jeez. I haven’t even
stepped out of the room and my head is full.”
Jy-ying
Jy-ying sat on the bed and watched Little Wei—“little one full of
presence,” she now called him—gobble down the sausage links
she’d brought from the hotel restaurant as soon as it opened that
morning. She had been up late washing the dog repeatedly in the
bathroom at the end of the hall, and deticking and defleaing him
each time. He had been good about it. No barking. No whining. But
by the third wash, he cringed into a ball when she picked him up. He
came out of it when she finally dried and fluffed up his long, chalkwhite hair with a towel.
Now he was a clean, soft white. He had urinated on the carpet by
the door, and she used the hotel towel to soak it up and then scrub the
spot. Before the restaurant opened, she had taken him for a walk until
he relieved himself. She knew she would have to set a routine for this,
but she really didn’t care. She loved dogs, but had never been able to
have one of her own because of her profession. Little Wei was too good
to be true.

Red Terror Never Again

111

When he finished eating and drank his fill from the universal
washbowl of this era, she told him, “Time to show you off, my little
guy.”
She’d already decided she would buy a red leash and collar for him
later, when she took him to a veterinarian for a thorough checkup.
Now, she would trust that he would follow her as he had outside at
daybreak.
She opened the door to her room for him, and he ran into the hallway and started sniffing the floorboards. When she closed the door
behind her, he looked up and tilted his head. “Guo lai—come here,”
she ordered. He could have no idea what those sounds meant yet, but
her hand motions must have translated for him, for he followed Jy-ying
to Joy’s room, where she knew they were now sleeping. She smiled to
herself when she thought of the reason why.
Joy opened the door when she knocked. “Good morning, Jy-ying,”
she said, and immediately looked down at the little dog sniffing her
feet. “And good morning, little one,” she cooed. She bent and picked
him up, and carried him into the room. “I want you to meet our boss,
Mr. John Banks.” She tossed Little Wei on the bed where John was sitting, now fully dressed.
Immediately, Little Wei began sniffing him. John picked him up
and held him at a distance from his face to look into his eyes. “You
now work for me,” he said. “Starting pay is two dollars a day, take it or
leave it. What say you?”
Little Wei stared at him, then back at Jy-ying as if to say, “Should I
humor this big guy?” John put him on the floor with a chuckle. “Jyying, you’re right. We are now a team of four. Let’s get breakfast, and
then I want to work all day on what I’m writing. You two—excuse me,
you three will be working on setting up the business and all that. But if
you have any trouble because you’re Asian—I found out this morning,
Jy-ying, that Joy is Oriental—let me know.”
He’s at it again, Jy-ying told herself. What did Joy call it? Ah, yes;
John’s humor, pronounced as though it’s a disease.
Jy-ying raised an eyebrow at Joy, who grinned broadly. “He discovered my, ah, you-know, is—” She made a horizontal slice with her
hand. “Rather than—” She swept her hand up and down. She giggled
and Jy-ying joined her as John turned red. Jy-ying had been shocked to
learn during her studies of the culture of this age, particularly that of
San Francisco, that white men thought the vaginas of Asian women
were horizontal.

112

Rudy Rummel

John went for the door. “I’ll get the guys. Meet you all in the restaurant.” He escaped in a flash, leaving even louder giggles behind him.

aaa
Jy-ying carried Little Wei in one arm as she and Joy approached the
two joined tables with John and the three guys. She was about to sit
down with the dog on her lap when the morning shift waiter rushed
over.
“I am terribly sorry,” he told Jy-ying, “but we do not allow dogs in
our restaurant.”
Jy-ying had one simple response to that: “Ha!” She stood straight,
tilted her head back, and gave him an icy stare. Waving her free hand
toward the men at the table, she asked in a steely voice, “My good man,
are you calling my friends at the table dogs?”
The waiter stammered, “No, no . . . ma’am. I’m referring to him.”
He pointed at Little Wei.
She held the dog up to the waiter. “To him? To Prince Ho Chi-wei
of the Manchu Dynasty? You are calling the prince a dog. If this were
China, I would have one of his guards cut off your head.” She waved
again at the men trying not to laugh as they watched from the table.
The waiter stepped back. His shoulders collapsed into a submissive slump and his eyes grew round. He struggled to say something.
“I . . . I . . . .”
Jy-ying softened her face and instructed him in a soothing tone,
“Just serve us. I will forgive you this time.” She turned to the others
and lamented loud enough for the waiter to hear, “Americans! So ignorant of China.” She sat down with Little Wei on her lap. Ignoring the
furor he’d caused, Little Wei looked around, seeking the sources of the
restaurant’s many interesting odors.
Shaking with laughter, Hands had his forehead resting on the table,
and Joy hid her face with her menu. Except for undecipherable cackles,
wheezes, and thuds, no one spoke for a while. Jy-ying sat in their
amidst, wearing a big smirk.
When they calmed down, Jy-ying introduced Little Wei. But only
Joy referred to him as Little Wei during the meal. To the others, still
smiling even as they ate, he was now known as Prince Wei. And that
was what he became.

Chapter 17
November 21
John

I

t was late, and John was exhausted. But it was done—125 pages. It
did not have to be long. Joy and Jy-ying had each gone over it and
made some changes, and he had tidied up the spelling and grammar
on his laptop and then printed it out on their laser printer. The printing
was too good for the age and might elicit questions from the publisher
they picked, but they couldn’t hire a typist to type a copy—the typist
would expect a handwritten copy to work from, and John was not about
to write it out in longhand.
The writing had been the easiest part. Now they had weeks of
preparation just to make sure it was published as they wanted. But first
they had to decide on its title.
They sat around a portable card table that Joy had bought as a work
table for John. The manuscript lay in the center, with the simple working title The Manuscript on it. Joy insisted on neatly aligning the pages
as a confirmation that it was finished. Prince Wei was asleep on the
bed, his legs sticking up in the air.
In a weary voice, John said, “We all have been thinking off and on
about the best title. Now we have to assign one. Joy?”
“You’re tired, John. Why not sleep on this? A day or so won’t matter.”
“Yes it will. Thousands more people will die. We’ve got to stop this
killing as soon as we can, Joy. I’m okay. Let’s go ahead.”
Joy gave him a long look, then finally nodded and said, “It has to be
something dramatic, something that will grab the attention of that time
traveler. Once he looks at the book, he should be seeking the author
immediately. What about ‘Looking Forward: The World, 1914–
2000’?”
John pursed his lips and looked at Jy-ying.
“I do not know,” she mused. “Would that attract the time traveler to
the book? He might think that it was just more stupid forecasting and
ignore it, although reference to 1914, when World War I in your First
Universe began—do I have the year right?” When John nodded, she

114

Rudy Rummel

continued. “It might catch his eye for a moment. He is a Bolshevik, a
communist. Maybe this: ‘The Future of Communism: Victory and Defeat, 1914–2000’?”
John scratched his chin under his growing beard; he hoped the itching would stop soon—it was getting irritating. He propped his elbow on
the table and his bristly chin in is hand, and stared at the manuscript.
He asked, “What are the two names that would immediately attract his
attention?”
“Hitler and Stalin,” Joy suggested.
“Yes,” John said. “Stalin has had no public role in the 1905 revolution in this universe, judging by the Post article, nor did he in the
First Universe. In 1905 he had just met Lenin, who was impressed by
his ability to steal money. Up to that time, he was a small-time criminal and agent of the Okhrana, turning revolutionaries in to the
Okhrana to save his hide. No one in this age, especially someone
writing from San Francisco, would be expected to know his name.
So, let’s put Stalin in the title. We should also use Hitler’s name
somehow.”
Jy-ying was writing on a notepad. She looked up at John. “When
did Stalin die?”
“In 1953. He was probably poisoned with warfarin by Lavrenti Beria, his minister of internal security.” With a little grin and a quick
glance at Joy, John tried to go on. “But I don’t think the truth—”
With her own grin and a knowing glance at Joy, Jy-ying interrupted with a raised finger. “Then maybe ‘Stalin’s World: Victory and
Defeat, 1914–1953’? For anyone of that universe who knows about
major events, it would be a shocker to see the precise dates for the beginning of World War I and the death of Stalin used.”
“Not to mention Stalin’s name,” John added, waving his own finger higher. “You know, Stalin fought Trotskyism, and in 1940, after
many tries, he finally succeeded in having Trotsky assassinated in
Mexico. Come to think of it, that Trotsky rather than Lenin is the victor in the 1905 revolution can only mean that this time traveler is a
Trotskyite. The battle between Trotsky and Stalin was fought—”
“John!” Joy exclaimed. “I thought you were tired.”
“Sorry,” John said. “Never too tired to improve people’s minds.
That’s why I was the professor and you were the—”
“Move on,” Jy-ying said with such command, John jerked his head
toward her, as did Joy. They saw her grinning.

Red Terror Never Again

115

Waving his thumb at Jy-ying, John asked Joy, “Have you been
teaching her?”
Joy gave Jy-ying a thumbs-up. “There is nothing I could teach her
that as a female she does not already know. Now, back to the title. I
think Jy-ying is onto it. How about making it ‘Communist Victory and
Defeat, 1936–1991: Stalin, The Great Terror, World War II, and the
Cold War’?”
“That is it!” Jy-ying exclaimed, and added, “Even though I do not
know what the Cold War was.”
John nodded slowly. Even he heard the exhaustion in his voice as
he explained, “The Cold War was the long period from 1948 to the fall
of the Soviet Union in 1991 when Soviet, Chinese, and their communist surrogates tried to spread communism by all means possible.
Countering that was an American-led Alliance that tried to contain
communism and deter a world war. Anyway, as to that title, I think the
time traveler would kill to get that book.” He hesitated, then added,
“We still have not used Hitler’s name. Joy’s title is great, but now my
suggestion is the coup. We can make the author Adolf Hitler.”
He looked at Jy-ying. “Hitler was the one who launched the Second World War in Europe by invading Poland. During the war, his
henchmen tried to murder every Jew the Nazis could get their hands
on. They murdered over five million of them, plus maybe fifteen million non-Jewish Poles, Russians, other Slavs, Frenchmen—”
“Incredible, incredible,” Jy-ying blurted. “What a blood-soaked
century you lived in. No wonder you are here to prevent it from happening again.” She sat back and looked from John to Joy. “And to use
Hitler’s name for the author. God be blessed, we are brilliant.”
“Yeah,” Joy responded, “and John helped also.”
John half smiled at her and tapped his hands together. He felt good
about this and wished he had a better way to show it. Ever since he
had read the Post article, he had been afraid that their mission was
dead, that there was nothing they could do—that all their plans were a
shambles. And ultimately, he feared that Joy would be so broken by
their failure to achieve what those who sent them here—her mother,
especially—had hoped that she again would attempt suicide. He had
hidden his deep, trembling pessimism from Joy. But now, there is
some light.
John looked at the women. In a soft voice he told them, “Okay
people, we have it. It doesn’t much matter how well organized the
book is, as long as it contains some essential facts about the old uni-

116

Rudy Rummel

verse that only someone from there could know. And it doesn’t matter
how attractive the book is to publishers, since we will be paying for
the publication and publicity.”
He rubbed his hand through his wild hair and let it drop into his
lap as he slouched back in his chair. “We can advertise it as a future
history based on current events, and leave it at that. I did write it as
though it were a textbook for students in an undergraduate class in history in the year 2000. The title belies that it looks backward, but it
doesn’t matter.”
“One thing,” Jy-ying pointed out. “The author—Hitler—is so obviously a come-on, as is the whole title, that he will know this is an
invitation, a trap.”
Joy nodded. “Right, but he has to find the real author. He will know
that he’s in danger, and so is communism, from our possible intervention. He will be forced to find the person who wrote the book.”
Jy-ying was on the edge of her chair. “Yes, and he will also know,
from what John wrote in the book, that the author is anticommunist.
And obviously, as a time traveler, the author must have the resources to
intervene to try to defeat Trotsky and prevent such revolutions elsewhere.”
“Yes,” Joy said. “I think we must now work on two tracks. First we
have to do all we can with our resources to get this book published and
into European and Russian hands as soon as possible. Second, we have
to deal with his knowing that he is being led on. And then, when we
have him here, what do we do with him?”
“Then we kill him,” Jy-ying stated.
John had stretched out his legs and leaned back against his chair,
closing his eyes to rest them. As if from a great distance, he heard Jyying stating the obvious, but he had avoided thinking about that. He
didn’t want to think about it now. He let his head rest on his chest. The
air seemed heavy, and their voices . . . .
Joy
“He’s asleep,” Joy said. “I don’t think he slept more than an hour in
the last two days. We can’t leave him like that. Help me put him to bed.”
Joy pulled back the covers on the double bed and she and Jy-ying
each put an arm around him and half-walked him to the bed while he
muttered something. They laid him out, and Joy took off his shoes.

Red Terror Never Again

117

“Can you help me undress him?” Joy asked. “I don’t want to sleep
against his scratchy clothes.”
Jy-ying hesitated. “But, won’t he be embarrassed?”
“Only if I tell him,” Joy said, unbuckling his belt. “You work on the
top and I’ll do the bottom.”
It took a little while and the usual mechanics, but they finally had
him naked and under the covers.
Jy-ying’s face had a little color to it. “He’s a handsome man,” she
said. “I envy you, Joy. But do not worry. I know in his heart he is
yours, and we have a mission to do together. I will not defeat it by trying to . . . ah, what do you call it?”
“Steal my man.”
“Yes, steal your man.” Jy-ying went to the door, stopped and turned
around, and bowed deeply to Joy. “You can trust your sister on that.”
After Jy-ying left, Joy crawled into bed next to John, but it was a
long time before she fell asleep. It was a small thing, but it brought the
green monster back: Jy-ying hadn’t said she would never steal John.
She had said, and Joy kept turning this over in her mind, that ‘We have
a mission to do.’ It seemed that, for the mission’s sake, she would not
go after John. But what about when—or if—they killed the time traveler, and that part of the mission was done? Or, did Jy-ying also
consider what they would do regarding Sabah part of that mission? Joy
sighed. Well, I’ll have to trust John, and I do. She put her arm over
him, rested her head against his shoulder, and fell asleep.

Chapter 18
December 20
Joy

A

fter weeks of preparation for the appointment they’d arranged, a
fascinating train trip finally brought them to New York. They
took one of the new Renault taxis to the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
on Park Avenue where, for appearances, John had reserved one of the
executive suites for Joy, and an ordinary room for himself, in case anyone checked.
They had a full day before their appointment. Almost immediately
after their arrival, they went to bed in the suite. Although the train trip
had given their body clocks four days to gradually adjust to the time
difference, John wanted to make sure he was well rested and alert for
what he had confessed he was dreading, even before their departure.
Neither could sleep. So John sat up on one elbow and told her what
she already knew. “I’m really nervous, baby. I can’t believe what I’m
going to do. I was brought up lower middle class, and know almost
nothing about high society or the rich. Now, I’m about to meet James
L. Stimson. He’s powerful. He’s rich. He owns Stimson Publications,
and his family owns Stimson Oil and Stimson Steel. His father was a
U.S. senator. I bet his family considers him an underperformer. He only
owns a New York publishing house, four magazines, and Stimson
bookstores, with branches all over the country. I never could deal well
with people of such high authority or wealth. I always feel shy when
I’m with them, and I don’t know what to say. I’m afraid I’m going to
flub this.”
“I’m not worried, dearest,” Joy assured him. “I’ve seen you handle
this kind of people, and you do very well.”
“Maybe outwardly, but my insides are quivering like Jell-O.”
“So? Who sees them, anyway? It’s the impression that counts, and
you project confidence, control, and even, when called for, haughty arrogance.”
“Really? Like Jy-ying?”
“Yes, exactly.”

120

Rudy Rummel

John lay back and rolled over on his side toward her. He rested his
hand on her arm. She didn’t feel the least bit sleepy and knew he was
still wide awake. She thought it best to get his mind off the appointment. In a soft voice she mused, “I miss air travel. In 2003 we could
have been here on a four-hour direct flight from San Francisco airport. I
was surprised by our train trip, though. This first time, I actually liked
it. I saw so much more of the United States in a way we’ve never seen
it before. I’d always flown from one coast to the other, except for that
trip to the Midwest when I checked you out for the mission—it was
awful. I had to sit through your . . . ” she gasped “. . . lectures at Indiana
University. Why, I even had to look interested!”
John was up on his elbow again, now almost leaning over her, faking the insulted look she knew so well. “Is that so, student Phim. It
couldn’t have been that bad. You did get all sexed up later to lure me to
your mother’s party.”
She sighed. “It was all for the mission, sweetheart. Sacrifices had to
be made. Ah, what was I talking about before we got onto your lectures? Oh, yes, the train trip. I was awed, sitting on the train watching
for hours, and then days, the passing mountains, rivers, plains, and forests. It’s hard to believe how large and varied the United States is.
Also, those Pullman coaches were great for sleeping—”
“And lovemaking,” John interjected.
Joy smiled at the memory. “Yes, dearest, until you fell off me, out
of my berth, and into the passageway—naked. Right in front of that
couple trying to climb into their own berths. I don’t know why that
bothered you so. I was ready for you when you climbed back in, but
you couldn’t get it up.”
John leered at her. “Now that we’re on solid ground, in a great New
York hotel suite, you had better be ready for me . . . er, after the appointment . . . ah . . . tomorrow night.”
“Ha! You’ll be so tired, old man, that I’ll have to tie it to a
chopstick.”
“There isn’t one long enough.” John beamed at his riposte.
She responded simply, “We’ll see.”
John
Joy’s “old man” quip the previous evening wasn’t far off. John had
makeup applied in his room by Gaston Yseult, the makeup artist of the

Red Terror Never Again

121

New Victory Theatre, for whose famous skill he had paid fifty dollars.
He looked twenty years older, with graying, sandy brown eyebrows and
a small, matching beard, neatly trimmed. Silver-yellow hair was
combed back from deep-looking wrinkles across his forehead; wrinkles
also radiated from the corners of his eyes, and furrows ran from his
nostrils around his mouth to disappear into his beard. His eyes were
shadowed and their depth emphasized, his mouth firmed and thinned,
and his cheeks and nose grayed. Overall, he now had a steely look, one
of long command and authority.
Age made a huge difference in this era.
Their appointment was in a half-hour, in the Whitehall Building at
17 Battery Place, West Street. They would take a Rolls-Royce Silver
Ghost “limousine” that had on the right front fender the American flag,
and on the other the Chinese flag. To allow him to attach the flags, he
had paid well the new “Luxurious Motor Car” rental company.
Joy had never looked better. For her time travel, Jy-ying had packed
special clothes so that she could pass herself off as a Chinese princess,
if need be. Although Jy-ying was a little shorter than Joy, Jy-ying’s
clothes still fit her well. So for two hours, John helped Joy into Jyying’s borrowed clothes and adjusted them as needed: a silk brocade,
ankle-length qi pao in stunning red and yellow imperial colors with a
mandarin collar and keyhole, cap sleeves, and frog closures; from the
left shoulder to the right ankle, it was richly embroidered in the imperial phoenix and dragon pattern, and each side of the dress had a
modest slit suited to the era. Her headdress was a phoenix tiara, worn
only by an empress, princess, or imperial concubine; it was decorated
with jade and pearls, and tassels hung down on both sides of Joy’s face
and over her forehead.
It was cold outside, almost freezing, so for the short trip Joy
donned an imperial jacket made from quilted silk mousseline with a
mandarin collar, frog buttons, phoenix and dragon embroidery (of
course), and female mink fur trim. On her fingers she wore large imitation diamond and ruby rings that only an expert jewelry appraiser
could tell were not real.
When they were finished, Joy posed for him, and then slowly
turned around. John just stood back, awed by her stunning elegance.
When he finally could speak, all he could say was, “Damn it to hell, I
don’t have a camera.”
Joy responded in a subtle, seductive tone, “But dearest, you have me.”
“Hold that thought until tonight,” John replied huskily.

122

Rudy Rummel

While it was appropriate for Joy to dress richly, middle-class bureaucrat was best for John. He dressed in a three-button, singlebreasted, worsted herringbone weave suit. Of course, there was only
one suitable color—dark gray. Underneath he wore a white shirt, white
linen collar, but no bow tie. This scam required a strong maroon fourin-hand, a suitable necktie for a high-middle bureaucrat.
John plopped on his head his new nutria fur fedora, picked up his
elegant Moroccan leather briefcase, and said, “Lets go.”
Over her arm Joy slid the black satin drawstring cord of her princess silk purse, which also repeated with jewels the imperial phoenix
and dragon embroidery of her dress. She walked to the door and stood
regally while John opened it for her.
They left the suite, John one step behind and to the right, carrying
the briefcase. They were the only ones in the curlicued cast-iron elevator. They walked through the palatial lobby, where conversation in
almost every group they passed stopped as they walked by. Joy strode
with head high and back stiff, while John moved as though he would
walk over any hotel guest who got in his way.
It was almost precisely 10:00 a.m. Their Silver Ghost waited in
front of the revolving entrance door. The green and white-liveried captain of the doormen opened the high door to the back seat of the
limousine for Joy, who immediately moved to the other side. John got
in beside her, and the captain bowed and closed the door.
Joy’s dress and elegance had so distracted John in the suite that he
had forgotten about his fears. Now, with the appointment time getting
close, his nervousness returned. As the driver supplied with the Silver
Ghost pulled out, John took Joy’s hand and held it, hoping his was not
shaking.
She turned to him and gave him a huge smile that caused his heart
to flutter as though the high school beauty queen had consented to attend the prom with him. She was so beautiful, he almost told her never
to take off the coat she was wearing, or the princess tiara, or to undo
her special hairdo for which she’d paid sixty-five dollars at a Chinese
salon. Then he remembered what was to come this evening. On the
other hand, she will take everything off.
The Silver Ghost pulled into the front portico of the Whitehall
Building and a blue and red-liveried front door captain opened the door
for them. Joy slipped her jacket off and left it in the back of the car before they emerged. The captain bowed and then, without a word, led
them to the revolving front doors.

Red Terror Never Again

123

They entered the main lobby and were immediately greeted by an
elderly man who stood with his hands clasped in front of him. “Are you
Princess Tz’u Li Poh?” he asked Joy.
“Yes,” she said, and gave him a small bow. “You pronounce my
name well.”
Without acknowledging her compliment, John’s presence, or introducing himself, he said, his handlebar mustache twitching with his
words, “Please follow me.” He led them to one of the elevators, which
had been waiting with its doors open with another man guarding it to
keep out other passengers.
The elevator took them to the eighteenth floor. Their escort led
them through the elevator’s doors, held open by an operator standing
at attention, and past a large counter with a bearded young man behind it. Behind him, almost covering the wall, was a large Mercator
projection map of the world, with each country set in a different
kind of wood. Stimson Publications ran across the top in red, white,
and blue embossed letters. The escort gave them a moment to be impressed by the map, and then took them to a private elevator to the
left of the counter.
John’s knees were shaking. It helped to look at Joy, who, throughout all this, walked and looked like, well, a princess.
When they got off the elevator at the next floor up, they were in a
luxurious split-level apartment. John was overwhelmed. On his left he
saw a luxurious apartment straight out of some tycoon’s home movies;
on his right he saw a sumptuous office. A very large, semi-round walnut desk dominated the office area, behind which was a floor to ceiling
window looking out on Manhattan.
From behind the desk a rotund, tall man emerged and strode up to
them. Apparently he had just been notified that they were coming, for
he stopped in front of Joy, bowed deeply, and said something in Chinese. Joy tilted her head back, looked down her nose at him, returned
his bow with a perfunctory one, and said something in Chinese in return, lofting her voice in some peculiar way that John assumed must be
the way Manchu royalty met commoners.
With that out of the way, John stepped up alongside Joy and the
man turned to him and put out his hand. As John shook it firmly, the
man looked him in the eye and said, “Please forgive my Chinese. I represented my family’s interests in China for many years. We were not
going to let the British and Germans have the country to themselves.

124

Rudy Rummel

But then I went into publishing.” He waved his free hand around the
office. “Even though we now have a subsidiary in China, I get almost
no chance to use my Chinese here.”
When Stimson released his hand, John said, “Thank you for seeing
us on such short notice. I have some documents for you that verify our
identities, if I may put my briefcase down somewhere.”
Stimson pointed to a carved mahogany coffee table sitting between
two puffy, white leather sofas in the apartment section of the highceilinged room, and led them there. He waved for them to sit down on
one of the sofas, but Joy stepped instead to the white leather easy chair
at the head of the two sofas and sat down gracefully. John waited for
Stimson to sit; with an awed look at Joy, he settled on one of the sofas.
John put his briefcase on the hand-carved French coffee table and sat
on the other sofa. From the way the sofas looked, he thought he was
going to sink into the cushions up to his armpits, but they had a comfortable firmness to them.
Having oriented the briefcase so that Stimson could see into it, he
took out a key and unlocked one flap lock on the left. As he was doing
that, Joy opened her opulent princess purse, took out another key, and
gracefully held it out to him with two fingers and a raised pinkie. John
took it gently, unlocked the lock on the right, and then lifted the lid.
Within was a file labeled United States Department of State. John
reached under that for a file with top secret written in large red letters
diagonally across it. He put the file on his lap, closed the lid of the case,
opened the file while ostentatiously hiding what was inside from Stimson, and pulled out two documents.
He handed the first one to Stimson, saying, “This one is from
Secretary of State Root, establishing my credentials. I doubt whether
you have heard of my Agency of Foreign Security. Take a moment to
read it, but I must have it back.”
Stimson read it, then handed it back with raised eyebrows. He
leaned over to the humidor close to his edge of the table, took out two
cigars, and offered John one. As John was taking it, Joy sat straight,
clapped her hands loudly once, and barked something in Chinese. Stimson jumped, reddened, and almost jerked the cigar out of John’s
fingers. He put both of them back in the humidor and shut the lid with a
clack that sounded loud in the quiet office-apartment. He sat back,
holding the hand that had held the cigars with the other as though he
had caught it in a door.

Red Terror Never Again

125

This moment was priceless, and John took his time looking down
at the other document until he had his expression under control.
Then he handed the document to Stimson, saying, “This is from the
Empress-Dowager of China Tzu-Hsi, establishing that Princess Tz’u
Li Poh is secretly here on her behalf and wishing that we, the United
States Government, respect her request and treat it with due confidentiality.”
Just the sheer richness of the thick, gold-edged paper on which the
document was written in the best English calligraphy virtually established Joy’s credentials. John gave Stimson only a moment to look it
over, appreciate its beauty, note the queen’s name and her Imperial Seal
at the bottom. Then he held out his hand for its return. He slipped it in
the top secret folder, opened his briefcase, and placed that folder again
beneath the top one.
“Now, before I go on, Mr. Stimson, I must have your pledge that
what you have seen and what you will hear, if the princess decides to
go ahead, is between us. No diary, no notes, no confiding in assistants,
your wife, or your mistresses.”
Stimson’s eyes were wide. His face was getting blotchy.
John was merciless. “We are on dangerous ground, Mr. Stimson,
and if you do what we request, we cannot risk word getting out. This is
for the sake of American foreign policy, for the sake of the empressdowager and especially the princess, for my humble sake, and for your
sake as well. Do I have your agreement?”
“But what am I to do?”
“I will tell you when I have your assurance.”
“I am a patriotic American, sir. I will do what the government requires of me.”
“Very good,” John said, and lifted the lid of the briefcase again. He
reached underneath the topmost folders for a thick folder that also had
top secret written on it, and placed it on the table. Then he reached into
a slot in the briefcase and pulled out a small Gideon Bible. He closed
the case, opened the folder, and pulled off the top an impressively
printed document about a secrecy act. Stimson’s name and that of his
company were printed in the midst of the governmentalese, and at the
bottom was a place for Stimson’s signature, and that of the witness
Bruce Sylvester—John’s pseudonym.
John picked up the Bible and told Stimson, “Please place your hand
on the Bible and repeat after me.” He then swore Stimson to secrecy

126

Rudy Rummel

regarding the documents he had seen, all that transpired in the office,
and the project he would undertake. When he finished he said, “Please
sign here,” and pointed to the space for Stimson’s signature.
When he’d signed, John signed “Bruce Sylvester” underneath, with
a flourish. Then he put the signed document on top of the folders in his
case, and the Bible back in its slot.
“Ah, don’t I get a copy?” Stimson asked.
“No, only the original will ever exist. Don’t you understand yet,
Mr. Stimson? We operate in absolute secrecy. If we could, we would
even pump the air out of this room and hide it in a vault.”
Stimson slouched back, nodded slightly, and his pressed his lips
together.
“Now,” John said, “with the necessary preliminaries over, I have a
manuscript we wish you to publish with the greatest speed.” He pointed
to the thick folder. “We could use the government printing office, but
then there could not be the secrecy we demand. Also, it could not do
what we require after the printing.”
John took two sheets of paper from a file slot in his case and
handed them to Stimson. From the inside of his suit coat he took a roll
of bills and counted out ten one-hundred dollar bills and put them next
to the folder. “The money is only to show our goodwill.” He indicated
the papers Stimson held. “Now, the paper on the top is to prove I gave
you the money. Government accounting, you must have guessed; not
even secret work can avoid it.”
Stimson took out a Waterman silver-nibbed pen and signed the paper.
John put the signed paper away, then said, “The remaining paper
gives the specifics of the distribution we require. You are to publish
a total of one hundred thousand copies, half of them in English.
One-half of those are to be distributed in the United States and Canada, and the other half in England. Twenty-five thousand copies are
to be printed as German translations and distributed in Germany; the
other twenty-five thousand are to be Russian translations and distributed in Russia. I know that with the civil war there, this will be
difficult in the southern and eastern regions, but you should be able
to sell them in St. Petersburg and Moscow, as well as other major
cities in the west and north.
“Advertise the books to the maximum in the major papers, and by
leaflets where that is best. You surely know how to do this well. Along
with the manuscript, you will find an author’s biography and the flyleaf

Red Terror Never Again

127

description for the book. Also included are short blurbs of various
lengths that we want—not recommend, Mr. Stimson, but want—you to
use in your advertising.”
John stopped and gave Stimson a long look until he began to
squirm. “If anyone from the government or publishing industry asks
you who the author is, you are to say that you dealt with him through
his lawyer, the man is an eccentric, and Hitler is not his real name. You
only know his P.O. box number in San Francisco.
“Of course, you are most interested in your reimbursement and
fee.” John pointed to the paper listing those specifics. “You will also
find a bank number and an account in your name at the Bank of China,
San Francisco branch, for one million dollars to cover everything. All
royalties are yours.”
John suddenly feared they had overdone it and the man might have
a heart attack. He had turned rigid, his hands had splayed out on his
knees, and he stared unblinkingly at John. He seemed to be in shock.
Finally his mouth moved and words spilled out. “One million? We
keep the royalties . . . my God, man, that’s a goddam lot of money. No
book has ever been underwritten for even a tenth of that amount.”
John let out his breath without realizing he had held it. He tried to
keep his voice level. “We want no statement of sales; this will be our
only contact. You should know that we will be following with great
interest your distribution of this book through your company accounts,
public and otherwise.” John let that sink in for a moment. “And there is
the publishing industry’s statistics of record. And we have our agents
here and there. You will not know them. One might even be that mustached gentleman who brought us to you.”
Stimson pointed a trembling finger at the folder holding the manuscript and asked, “This is in English?”
“Yes.”
“I don’t understand what this has to do with China or the queen, or
the State Department, for that matter.”
“Mr. Stimson, “Joy said haughtily. “Do you not understand? This
not for you to know. This secret business. You must understand.” She
turned to John and looked down her nose at him. “Is this right man?”
John gave Stimson a lingering look, and then looked back at Joy,
his head slightly bowed, his voice subservient. “Yes, Princess Tz’u Li
Poh, I think he can be trusted. He was just surprised at this. He is
American. He is not used to this kind of secrecy.”

128

Rudy Rummel

Joy stared at Stimson for a moment, then said, “All right. But you
understand that American government only arrest you and do something to your knuckles—knock on the knuckles. But I have you
kidnapped to China and beheaded.”
Stimson turned white and stammered something in Chinese.
Joy ignored him and stood. “We done, Mr. Sylvester?”
“Yes, Princess.”
She turned without another word and headed for the door, then
stood by it, head held somewhere near the ceiling. John closed up his
briefcase and put out his hand to Stimson.
Stimson took it limply and blurted, “The government can trust
me, sir.”
John turned, unobtrusively wiping his hand on his coat, and joined
Joy at the door. He opened it for her with a bow, and she whooshed
through it. The mustachioed escort was standing back from he door
waiting for them, and he immediately led them to their waiting White
Ghost.

aaa
Back in the hotel lobby, Joy said, “I like this. Take me to the hotel
bar, Mr. Sylvester.”
John put his hand on her arm to stop her from moving in that direction. Bowing a little so observers would think he was about to give her
some information, he told her, “Don’t be stupid. If there is a high Chinese official there he might want to make himself known to you, or
exchange pleasantries on hot sour soup in Peking. No. We’ve been successful so far. Don’t push it. Princess.”
Even on her most beautiful, made-up princess face, he could read
the laughter in her eyes. “Ha, Mr. Sylvester, you such kill joy.” Then
with a delicious wave of her hand, a lovely sign of dismissal, she uttered in a high and mighty whisper only he could hear, “I only fuck you
once tonight.”
John almost doubled over in what he hoped looked like a coughing
fit. People stopped to look at him with concern, and a red-suited bellhop rushed over to see if he needed help. John waved him back, took a
handkerchief out of his suit coat pocket, and pretended he was coughing into it. He knew from how hot he felt that his face was red from the
effort not to howl outright.

Red Terror Never Again

129

At last calming down, he looked at Joy, who stood nearby looking
snootily around the lobby as though she feared she would get her manicured hands and white-furred Chinese shoes dirty. He took a firm grip
on his briefcase and whispered to her, “To your suite. Before I collapse
on the floor.”
With John close behind, Joy led the way to the elevator. As people
entered she stood immobile, chin out, staring straight ahead, ignoring
everyone, and refusing to move to the back. When the elevator operator
asked her for her floor, John had to lean over her shoulder and give it.
Standing behind her, he could tell from their admiring expressions and
the pains they took not to touch this highly aristocratic Chinese woman
that the people were awed. Someone this elegant and aloof had to be
royalty.
By the time the elevator reached to top floor, it was empty except
for the operator and John and the princess. She strode out with John
behind, and when she reached her suite, she waited regally while he
unlocked the door. Then, back perfectly straight, she walked inside.
She approached the bed; as she was about to turn around, John gave
her a big kick in the buttocks, knocking her flopping onto the bed. Her
tiara flew one way, her purse another. Her hair came partially loose,
and her Chinese qi pao gathered up her legs.
“Oh, my,” John said. “I’m sorry, Princess Yu Luk Fun’e. My foot
slipped.” As she started to get up with a scowl, he jumped on her, covered her body, and held her hands flat. “I want my promised fuck,” he
whispered, and then he rolled off of her with a guffaw and held his
stomach.
He finally could laugh at what Joy had done to him in the lobby, he
could laugh at what regal Joy looked like on the bed, but overall, he
knew he really was not made for this kind of con game. He was a professor dedicated to truth, and any kind of fakery would have driven him
out of his profession. But he’d done it. And now it felt as though a bank
safe had been lifted off his back. He felt light-headed, and so he
laughed also in overwhelming relief.
Joy was laughing with him. She leaned over him and said, rubbing
her behind, “How can American government do this to Chinese princess? I complain to sister Princess Jy-ying and consort, Prince Wei.”
While John settled down, Joy stroked his little gray artificial beard
and told him, “You did very well, dearest. It was convincing. I will no
longer trust what you tell me.” She laughed again.

130

Rudy Rummel

Almost breathless, John asked, “What did you tell Stimson when he
was going to light a cigar?”
“It’s not easily translatable. Something like, light it and you’ll eat it.
To Chinese royalty, commoners are like dogs—they eat dogs, you
know. Having lived in China, he knew I was speaking in character.”
John was now preoccupied.
“John, what are you doing?”
“You made a princess promise, and now I’m cashing it in.”
It took mechanical wizardry to take off all her royal Chinese clothes
of this era, except for her inevitable white cotton panties. She found it
much easier to take off his clothes. But not quite; neither could wait
until she finished.

Chapter 19
January 2 , 1907
Jy-ying

J

y-ying picked Joy and John up at the San Francisco terminal in
her new 1906 Silver Ghost. She had received their telegrams
about their success, and about their relaxing, touristy days and
Christmas in New York once they were no longer under the pressure of
time. Their last telegram informed her that they would be arriving at
1:14 p.m. on track five.
She could not wait to show them her surprise. They had talked
about it before leaving, but they’d left it to her to do while they were
gone, if she wanted.
She’d parked in the station parking lot on the north side of Townside Street along with the buggies, horses, and other automobiles, and
met Joy and John when they got off the train. Joy came to her with
arms open and they hugged each other. “Welcome home, and happy
New Year, Joy and John, “ Jy-ying said, also looking over Joy’s shoulder to include John in the sentiment. She gave John a little peck on the
cheek, and noted his sandy beard had grown some. “Nice beard,” she
said, then added, “And thank you both for your telegram about your
success.”
“Happy New Year, Jy-ying, and nice to be back,” John said. “Two
train rides is enough for this era. I’m ready for a high-speed commercial jet. Maybe I’ll invent it in my spare time.”
“I’ll help,” Joy said.
Putting her arms through both of theirs, Jy-ying added, “Do not
forget me. I’ll just stay here until you get it running.”
As they approached her car, she saw John looking around. “How
did you get here, Jy-ying?”
“I drove.”
John’s face lit up with interest. “You have a new car?”
“Yes. And there it is.” She pointed to her deluxe Silver Ghost.
“Wow,” John said, “I’m impressed. I think that’s the best car made
in 1906. We rented one in New York to impress the locals.”
“Mercedes,” Joy said.

132

Rudy Rummel

“Who’s she?” John asked, the dimple at the side of his mouth
showing.
“Hu Chi?” Jy-ying said, trying to duplicate John’s nearly straight
face. “Is she from China?”
Joy shook her head at both of them. “You two will never make it as
stand-up comics. You know I mean the car. The Mercedes is the best.”
“Well,” John said, grinning, “we’ll just have to get one and see,
won’t we?”
“That’s a promise, John.” She smiled broadly. “You know we keep
our promises to each other.”
As they approached Jy-ying’s car, Jy-ying could hear Prince Wei
barking. Then she saw him jumping up and down against the window.
He wore a red collar, and she had washed his hair and fluffed it.
“Prince Wei missed you,” Jy-ying said to Joy. And I missed you both,
especially you, John, she thought, still feeling the warmth that came
with seeing him come off the train. Then she mentally stamped her
foot. No, Jy-ying. Do not ruin our mission.
She tried to zero her mind back to Prince Wei. Before Joy and John
had left on the trip, Jy-ying had the dog checked by the vet. She found
out he was a West Highland Terrier, a currently rare registered breed.
He must have been mistreated by his owner and escaped, the vet suggested. But he was in good health, aside from malnutrition.
John cranked up the car until it started, and Jy-ying drove, with
John in the passenger seat watching her drive with obvious envy. Joy
sat in the raised back seat playing with Prince Wei on her lap.
“Where are we going?” John soon asked, realizing that the roads
she was taking were not the way to the hotel.
“You will see.”
A half-hour later, noting fewer buildings, more expensive-looking
homes, and more acres between them, John shouted over the car and
wind noise, “We’re leaving the city. Are you kidnapping us?”
“No good,” Jy-ying said. “Nobody to pay ransom.”
Within minutes, she stopped at a large gate. A guard emerged from
a little guard shack, saw Jy-ying, tipped his visored blue cap, and said,
“Good afternoon, Miss Khoo.” She nodded at him and he went back
into the guard shack to pull down the large electrical switch that opened
the gate.
John was speechless, and Joy was leaning forward with her arms
on the back of the front seat. As Jy-ying drove them through the gate
and along a flower-lined driveway, she asked Jy-ying, “Visiting a
movie star?”

Red Terror Never Again

133

They approached the high columned portico of a large, three-story
brownstone mansion on a low hill. All around was grassy acreage scattered with trees spaced widely apart. Jy-ying glanced at it with
familiarity. She had walked the whole acreage of this estate, checking
out the ten foot wall topped by broken glass that surrounded the property, and looking for secluded spaces where an intruder might hide, or
gullies and bushes that might be used as concealed approaches to the
house. And she had walked the little stream that meandered around the
base of the hill and exited at almost the opposite point in the wall from
where it entered. In both cases a strong metal gate under the wall let the
stream enter and exit, while preventing any intruder from doing the
same thing.
She pulled up to the portico and announced, “This is our new home.
I named it Fort Hope—hope for the success of our trapping the time
traveler, hope for the success of our joint mission.”
“What a great name. And our new home?” John said in wonder.
“You mean we no longer have to crowd into a hotel room? I was thinking of getting an apartment building and fortifying it, but this is much
better.” He got out of the car and looked around at the surrounding
acreage. “I’m no expert like you Jy-ying, but this sure looks more secure than we could have made an apartment house.”
Joy had released Prince Wei to roam and moved to stand beside
John. They looked over the property and the outside of the mansion.
This far south from San Francisco, there was no fog; the sky was a
clear, sunny blue, the still air a comfortable near-60 degrees. As John
took off his overcoat to put over his arm, Joy asked, “Who did you kill
for this?”
Irritation at the question instantly welled up inside Jy-ying. She
thinks I would kill to take someone’s home. But in the next instant, she
remembered it was a typically stupid American saying, and she felt
chagrined at what she had thought.
Jy-ying waved her hand at the huge property and said, “I wrote
down what I wanted for a secure headquarters for us, and went to the
Luxurious Real Estate Company, the most prominent real estate firm
that buys and sells property for the rich—the big sneezes, you call
them.” After her misunderstanding of Joy’s comment, she was pleased
at this little show of her English slang.
“Cheeses. Big cheeses, Jy-ying,” Joy corrected.
Stupid language! Jy-ying exclaimed to herself, and hastened on. “A
pompous old man asked me how much I was willing to pay. He dared

134

Rudy Rummel

look me up and down, raised his eyebrow at me, and said, ‘We deal in
hundreds of thousands and even millions of dollars.’”
Warming to her story, Jy-ying continued. “I had gone to a bank to
prepare for just such arrogance. I took out of my purse one roll of bills
held in a large diamond clip, and slowly counted out a hundred onethousand dollar bills, in groups of ten. Then I showed him another big
roll. The man instantly became my servant; I am sure he would have
kissed my feet if I asked. I completely ignored him and called over a
young man, probably new to the firm, who had been watching. He
showed me around, and this was the fourth place I looked at. It belonged
to railroad tycoon Robert Q. Harrington. He was paranoid that his former
partners were out to kill him for swin . . . swin-something—”
“Swindling,” John said
“—from them, and built this fortress to live in with his wife and
daughters. He died from a heart attack, and his family had to sell it,
furnishings and all, to pay off his gambling debts. They could not do
anything with his company. His former partners sued the Western Pacific railroad company and a judge put its assets in . . . hiding.”
John helped again. “Escrow,” he said. “How much did all this
cost?”
“Two million dollars. I paid already. No big deal.” That was honest.
She did not feel it was anything to be amazed about, given the funds
with which she’d been sent to this era. Her time machine alone had two
million stored in it for immediate emergencies, and the National Council of Clerics had directed that she be sent about 250 million in
American real and counterfeit bills, jewels, and gold. She could augment that wealth at any time by betting on horse races and playing the
stock market. She had the day-by-day wins and losses filed on her laptop computer.
John looked at Joy. “How much is that in year 2002 dollars?”
Joy’s eyes emptied for about twenty seconds, and then came back
to life. “Oh, not much. Just about forty million, three hundred thousand
dollars.”
Frowning, John looked at Jy-ying. His voice was insistent. “That’s
a fortune, and I am not going to let you do this alone. I’ll reimburse you
for two-thirds of it. I am your boss and I have spoken.”
Jy-ying stepped back. She did not know what to say. She looked at
Joy, who wore a slightly amused expression. She glanced back at John,
who had put his hands on his hips and looked like he was about to accuse her of stealing his wallet.

Red Terror Never Again

135

She looked back at Joy, who shrugged and told her, “He bossman—big bark, no teeth.” Joy must have seen how confused Jy-ying
was, for she turned toward the doors and asked, “Aren’t you going to
show us in?”
Jy-ying led the way, and John followed with the warning, “Twothirds. You are not going to get away with paying the whole thing.
Humph.”
At the ornate, high front doors, a man stood waiting for them in a
traditional butler’s pinstripe trousers, vest, and black coat. Jy-ying introduced him as “Andrew Slater, the butler. This is Dr. John Banks,
your master, and Joy Phim, your mistress.”
The man bowed deeply and smiled at them. “I am happy to be your
servant,” he said to John.
Jy-ying told him, “Thank you, Slater. I will show them around.”
And with Prince Wei at her heels, she led the way through two large
carved doors into a tiled foyer with a coatroom, and then into a huge
ballroom two floors high, with a magnificent electric crystal chandelier,
oiled teak parquet floor, and carpeted stairs that curved up to the second
floor bedrooms.
“We play tennis here,” Jy-ying said. She was pleased with the gasps
from Joy and John. Just wait, she thought.
She led them to the right wing, which began with a gym and exercise room. “Harrington thought it a good idea to get some exercise, but
never did. But his daughters used it often and thought they would be
gymnasts at one time. Then they got married. It will now be our martial
arts practice and sparring room.” She eyed John mischievously. “It is
also a good place for a beginner to learn elementary techniques.”
John suddenly yelled, “Hyaaiii!” and grabbed Jy-ying by the arm.
He so surprised her that she lost a second while her defensive training
kicked in, and John used that time to throw her, swirling dress, cape,
and all on a mat. She rolled in spite of the ankle-long dress constricting
her legs, and sprang to a crouch with fists ready. Prince Wei somehow
knew this was play and, lowering his chest and raising a rear end that
shook with the wagging of his tail, he started barking at John. He
wanted to participate.
John looked nonchalantly at Jy-ying, brushed his hands against
each other, and pointed out, “You need practice.”
Head tilted, hands on her hips, Joy looked at him. “Not bad,” she
said loudly enough to be heard above the barking, “but you didn’t
swing her high enough off your hip.” She quickly grabbed John by his

136

Rudy Rummel

suit coat and tossed him next to Jy-ying, who immediately put one foot
on his chest to stop him from rolling to his feet. Prince Wei seized his
pant leg in his teeth and started shaking it vigorously.
Still lying on his back, John appeared to relax, lifting his arms to
put his hands behind his head. Instead, he grabbed Jy-ying’s foot and
tossed her backwards to land on her stomach with a whoosh. Joy and
Prince Wei were on him almost before Jy-ying landed. As he tried to
stand and fight Joy off with all he’d learned from her, she got him
twisted around and sat on his back with an arm lock around his neck
and her knee in his back. Prince Wei now shook his coat sleeve. Jyying rose and, while Joy held John down, she tickled him. John
squirmed away from her fingers, but Joy held him tight in spite of his
greater weight.
Finally he yelled, laughing, “I give up.”
Jy-ying looked at Joy as she released John. With a raised eyebrow,
she asked, “Does English have a word for someone who is lower than a
beginner?”
“Let’s see. ‘Novice’ is still too good. So is ‘greenhorn’ and ‘neophyte.’ I guess we’ll have to invent a word. I know. We’ll call those
lower than a beginner a John.”
“Ha-ha,” John said as he straightened out his coat and pants, and
then petted Prince Wei. “It took two of you so-called experts to down
this man.”
“Yes, my John,” Joy answered, laughing.
Jy-ying laughed also, and felt warm and fuzzy, almost light-headed.
This was the first time she and John had touched like that, and the areas
where his hands had gripped her seemed almost electrified. To distract
herself, she hurriedly led the three of them to the next room, which was
a library complete with French doors, books lining every wall, a sliding
ladder, and, in the center, a large library table with six hardwood armchairs. “Our study study-room,” Jy-ying said.
Next to the library was a paneled study with an entrance from
both the library and the ballroom; the study contained its own glassenclosed bookshelves, lush beige carpeting, a mahogany desk, a
brown leather sofa, and matching easy chairs. “Our room,” Jy-ying
said, grinning.
Off the study was a large file and safe room. “For our time machines and supply capsules. As you can see, I already have moved my
capsule and time machine in. I keep the door double locked. I suggest
that you bring your supply capsules and machine here as well, from

Red Terror Never Again

137

wherever they are now. The wooden flooring lies on a concrete bed and
that on bedrock, since the room was meant to hold all kinds of heavy
file cabinets and a large safe.”
As she spoke, Jy-ying mused, They’ve kept the location of their
capsules secret. Quite rightly. They would have been stupid to put such
absolute trust in me at this stage. But now there can be no secrets. Our
lives and our joint mission are at stake, once John’s—our—book is
published.
She led them back through the ballroom to a bar and billiards room,
and then into the left wing where the cook’s quarters (“I kept on the
cook and her assistant”), large kitchen (“We cook rice here”), dining
room (“We eat rice here”), lower lounge (“Our talk-talk, war room”),
and finally, the drawing room (“Here we chat-chat with guests”) were
located. “There is an upper lounge on the second floor, overlooking the
ballroom and across from the bedrooms,” she added.
What they’d seen since leaving the gym left John and Joy speechless. Jy-ying remembered her first tour of the house, and knew how
they felt. She took Joy’s hand and, with John and Prince Wei following, she headed for the stairs and led them up to the second floor
bedrooms. She stopped at the door to the grand master bedroom, and
told Joy and John to enter.
Inside, they saw a huge room furnished largely with Victorian furniture, all dominated by an incredible four-poster bed that Prince Wei
jumped up to sit on, panting. The hand carved corner posts and the bed
itself were handcrafted from solid hardwoods and cherry veneers. It sat
on a lush white carpet. On the wall behind the headboard was painted a
large Japanese landscape, with low, wispy gray clouds encompassing
the sharp contours and hidden peaks of several forested mountains; in
the foreground, a small white boat with a red rectangular sail tacked
against the breeze on an aquamarine lake.
The mellow tones of ancient ivory and old satin finishes glowed
from a marble, veneer-topped nightstand, a hand carved dresser and
chest, beveled landscape and floor mirrors, chests, an armoire, and a
beautiful mahogany writing desk. The floor was a teak parquet similar
to that of the ballroom, and around the door to a balcony were rich velvet draperies topped with a box pleat valance.
On one side of the room, a door opened to the sitting room and
walk-in closet; another open door revealed the gold plating of the bathroom’s plumbing.
“Hot water?” John asked, his voice breathless.

138

Rudy Rummel

“Of course,” Jy-ying answered, as though she had been asked if the
mansion had electricity.
“Very big tub?” Joy asked, glancing at John.
“Of course,” Jy-ying answered levelly, but she didn’t hide her little grin.
John took another look around the room, then, obviously trying to
keep a straight face, he asked Jy-ying, “Where is Joy’s bedroom?”
Jy-ying answered, “There is no bedroom suitable to her elegance
and grace. So she will have to sleep here until we redecorate one of the
bedrooms. Perhaps you can move in another bed.”
All three laughed.
“Where is your bedroom, Jy-ying?” Joy asked.
“Mine is down the hall, the wife’s bedroom. It actually is the next
room, and there is a private door between it and this room so Harrington and his wife could get together without anyone knowing.” She
pointed to the door.
“Oh, I forgot,” John spoke up suddenly. “What about the three
guys? Are they still living at the hotel?”
“I sold the hotel back to the previous owner.”
“Did you get a good deal?”
“Yes, the previous hotel owner was more than happy to buy the hotel back, except for a one thousand dollar exchange fee he said he had
to pay the government. I did not believe him, but that is okay.”
“Where did the guys go?” John persisted.
Jy-ying pointed up.
John paled. “They’re dead?”
“No, silly. They are in guest bedrooms upstairs,” Jy-ying answered.
As John sighed, Jy-ying looked at Joy. “Is ‘silly’ the right word?”
“Yes,” Joy answered, nodding with pursed lips. Then she raised her
eyebrow and observed, “We will never be able to keep this place
clean.”
“Not to worry. I have hired a cleaning company that specializes in
mansions like this. They will come in once a week and clean only the
rooms we use, which I calculate is about one-third of them. There are
twelve bedrooms alone, only eight of which we will use. Two are for
the cook and her assistant.”
“Any other helpers?” John asked, seeming reluctant to use the word
“servants.”
“I have hired the same guard company that maintained security
here before, which keeps four men on duty at all times, two of them

Red Terror Never Again

139

continuously patrolling the wall and grounds. They also have three
Doberman pinschers on duty. There is a kennel behind the house, by
the stable, and I’ve already introduced Prince Wei to them. They
gamble—”
“Gambol,” John corrected almost absentmindedly as he continued
to stare around the bedroom.
“—all over the property with him. I think he intimidates them.
Also, he has come to realize that they guard the outside, and the inside
is his responsibility.” She paused. “Let’s see, what else? Oh yes, we
have a stableman to take care of the five horses we have. On property
like this, there are many jobs that the horses do best. And we have a
gardening company as well that uses the horses.”
John’s jaw was gradually dropping.
“You met the master butler. He is also a live-in, with his wife, who
does the odd jobs that always need to be done around here. In counting
bedrooms, I forgot that he also takes up one. He manages all the help,
including the people that the various companies send to us.”
John asked, “Is there a garage?”
“Yes, in the rear, next to the stables, with six cars already parked in
it. There is an American Mercedes, a Buick Model F, and three Fords—
two Model C and one Model K. I also park my Silver Ghost there.”
Joy yelled, “I get the Mercedes!”
John looked startled. “No way.” Joy gave him an intense stare, and
he added, “Not without tossing a coin.”
He then asked, “Did you give the three Fords to the guys?”
“Yes John, of course. We also have a mechanic whose workroom is
in the garage, although he is not a live-in.”
“What does the butler use for transportation?” Joy wondered.
“He will not drive. He only uses a horse and buggy.”
Joy was beginning to look as dumbfounded as John. “Is that it?”
Joy asked, as though yet another plate of food had just been put on their
overloaded table at a Chinese feast.
“I think so. But I probably forgot something.” Jy-ying bounced with
satisfaction over Joy and John’s reception of all she had done. She was
surprised at how accepting they were. She had expected arguments
about the size of the house, about the three guys living with them,
about their vulnerability through the hired help, about the total cost,
about her doing all of this without consulting them. At the very least,
she thought, they will question the total cost of the companies I’ve
hired, and the salaries of the live-in servants . . . rather, help.

140

Rudy Rummel

As if he’d picked up her thought, John rubbed his hand along his
growing beard and asked, “How much do all these companies and the
hired help cost in upkeep?”
Jy-ying had that figure ready. “They cost seven hundred dollars per
month.”
“Not bad,” John said. “Remember, we pay two-thirds. Is there a
basement?” he asked.
“Yes, but the butler calls it the downstairs and the rest of the house
the upstairs. It seems to be some kind of status distinction. There is a
gigantic gas hot water heater in one corner.” Then she said, “Oh, you
will want to get settled. The butler will bring your luggage to the master bedroom from my car. At 4:00 this afternoon I will introduce you
two to the whole staff, including the foremen of the various companies
we have working for us. For all this to operate smoothly, I had to tell
them our rank in relation to one another. Then they know whose orders
take precedence, and whose are so low in status that their orders can be
virtually ignored.”
“Oh,” Joy lamented, “poor John.”
Jy-ying looked askance at John, who seemed about to tweak Joy’s
nose. Then she went on. “So, I have told them that John is the master of
the house.”
“Ha!” John exclaimed.
Jy-ying quickly added, “They think, Joy, that you are John’s unofficial wife—you two could not get married because your royal Chinese
parents objected, but you command John—”
“Of course,” Joy interjected.
“—but you’re second in command in the household and at his business. I am Joy’s live-in sister, so the servants better obey me as well, by
virtue of that. And the three guys are John’s business employees, honorable guests here, and thus not to be trifled with.”
She waited, but John and Joy seemed more than impressed. She
continued with, “At six the cook will announce that dinner is to be
served. The butler will oversee it in the dining room.”
“Jesus,” John exclaimed, “the first thing I’m going to do in the dining room is blow a fart.”
“And I’m going to barf,” Joy added.
“That’s okay,” Jy-ying said, chuckling, “I have already told them
all about you two.”

Chapter 20
January 5, 1907
John

J

ohn parked the Mercedes in front of the mansion, leaving it to
their mechanic to drive the car into the garage. Gripping the
newspaper in one hand, he hurried into the library, where he knew
he would find Joy and Jy-ying studying Russian or German, or practicing their Russian and German on each other. It was too late for their
language tutor to still be there.
He entered through the open door and immediately noticed that
something was wrong. Joy was pale and seemed to be trembling. Jyying’s eyes were large, and as he got closer, he could see tears in them.
I hope they haven’t been fighting, he thought. If it becomes violent,
I’ll have to rebuild and restock the library. Time to distract them. “Bad
news,” he yelled. “Poland has—”
Joy jerked, looked around at him, held her palm out toward him,
and silently shook her head.
He had never seen that look on her face before. It stopped him cold.
He didn’t know whether to put his arm around her, or leave and close
the door on what was an utterly private matter between the two.
Joy said nothing to him. It was as though he was not there. She
turned back to Jy-ying and reached across the table. Jy-ying took the
outstretched hand in hers, and both of them started weeping. Prince
Wei had been asleep under the table, but the crying woke him, and he
ran over to Jy-ying and began jumping on her house dress.
John quietly turned around—It’s a woman’s thing—and headed for
the door.
Joy sobbed, “Don’t go.”
John turned around as both women got out of their chairs and came
around the table. They clasped their hands together and stood staring
through tear-filled eyes at each other, as though studying an alien being.
“I’d better go,” John said, feeling like a man at a woman’s social tea.
Joy and Jy-ying whispered in unison, “Stay.”

142

Rudy Rummel

John just did not feel like sitting down while both women were
standing there crying, so he just stood uncomfortably where he was, not
knowing what to do in the face of this female emotion. It was beyond
man’s understanding.
A minute went by.
John cleared his throat. He heard one of their guard dogs bark, and
Prince Wei perked up his ears and his tail stood straight up as he listened, then he went back to trying to attract Jy-ying’s attention.
Finally, still staring at Jy-ying, Joy nodded toward John. Hand in
hand, they came to stand in front of him. He had never seen Joy’s face
like this. It looked torn between elation, disbelief, shock, and love.
Love? John was totally confused.
Joy held up Jy-ying’s hand toward John, and tried to say something,
but the words kept breaking into sobs. “I want . . . you to meet . . . the
real . . . J . . . Jy-ying.”

Chapter 21
July 14, 1907
Rosa

S

he was unhappy at leaving her lover again, but he could not
come with her. Consolidating the new communist government of
Poland was too important, and the mutiny of the garrison at
Bydgoszcz had to be put down. He had wanted Rosa to take over the
job of economic minister, but as much as she wanted, she just could
not. True, she was Polish by birth and in her heart, and she was thrilled
at the independence just granted Poland by Trotsky—Lenin had come
to Warsaw to personally declare Polish independence from Russia “forever.” Yes, he had even used that word—but, as she told Leo, she was
an international citizen and communist first, and the job was now revolution in Germany.
What a blow to capitalism that would be. Communism seemed victorious in Russia, with all its incredible resources and intellectual skills,
and now Poland. Next, Germany. Maybe not next year or the year after,
but surely in less than a decade. France would be easy after that, and
nothing could then save England. Europe would be theirs, and already
they had contact with communist activists in China. If China went
communist, Asia would follow, then South America, and the United
States and its lackey Canada would be isolated in a Red world. They
would have to succumb.
What a future. And she was part of it—more than a part. She was
contributing to this final victory of the working class.
Those happy thoughts filled her mind as she unlocked her small
apartment. She immediately was overcome by the apartment’s oppressive
stuffiness, and the acidic smell of old clothes. She dragged her two suitcases and large handbag into the apartment, then unlocked and opened the
two windows looking on the brick-walled apartments next door.
Her German lieutenant, Karla, had a key to her apartment, and had
piled messages and mail on her round working table in the middle of
the room. These would be the important pieces for her eyes only. All
the other communications would be in her office at the new Spartacus
League headquarters.

144

Rudy Rummel

She sighed and dropped onto the bumpy floral couch. I am tired. I
am hungry. I miss Leo already. We had so little time together. And this
place is hot.
Leaving everything the way it was, she lay back on the couch, fitting her body around the bumps, and stretched her heavy legs out. She
needed a nap before throwing herself back into the organized chaos at
headquarters—telegrams and phone calls to handle; commands to give;
articles, pamphlets, and newspaper articles to write and edit; meetings
and more meetings to schedule and lead; visitors to welcome; egos to
caress and weaklings to stiffen . . . . She let one foot fall toward the
floor and was asleep before it hit.

aaa
The bloody reactionary German Freikorps were beating on her door
with a fire axe, and she ran to the window to see if she could jump out.
Below, men with guns watched her window. Certain death. She ran to
the bathroom where she always had her weapons hidden under her dirty
clothes, but they were gone. She was caught. She was dead. She knew
this would come eventually, but she had hoped she would see the German revolution succeed first. It was too far along for the capitalists and
their bourgeoisie supporters to stop now. Even with her death.
She rushed back to the table and scooped up her messages, mail,
and telegrams in both hands, then ran back to the bathroom and started
tearing them up and tossing the pieces into the rust-stained toilet. The
beating on the door got louder. She flushed everything down the toilet,
and walked back into the other room.
There was nothing she could do now. She stood near the table, facing the door. Waiting for death.
The axe had broken through to slit the door in several places. In one
spot, it had smashed a small hole through the wood.
She recalled their victories. Next Germany. We are unstoppable. I
will die happy.
With head high, she focused on the hole as the axe enlarged it. They
would get no screams or tears from her. A hand darted through the
hole, opened the door, and two men with guns rushed in. One knocked
over the round table, sending the lamp crashing to the floor with a
knocking sound . . . knocking sound . . . knocking.

aaa

Red Terror Never Again

145

The heavy sound of knocking on her door startled her awake. Her
heart raced, pounding within her body, and she was sweating.
“Kurcz´—damn. Kurcz´,” she said in Polish. “Again, that Pierdolony
nightmare.” She rolled off the couch and stood swaying for a moment
before stumbling to the door. “Wait,” she shouted. She cooled down
her emotions and straightened out her clothes. Then she opened the
door a crack and saw the green-eyed man standing there.
As the biggest benefactor of the Polish revolution and Spartacus, he
was always most welcome, anywhere. She tried to smile, but her
nightmare still lingered. “Please come in,” she said, opening the door
wide. “I just returned from Poland and had been taking a nap.” She
rubbed her hand over her face. “I had something of a nightmare.”
She straightened up and went to the table. She pushed her messages
and stuff to the back of the table and covered them with an open newspaper. “I am sorry about the condition of the apartment, but as I say, I
just returned from Poland. I have no food or drink to offer you. But, I
can give you a seat,” she said with an attempt at a smile, and pulled a
second chair close to the table.
The man wore the same clothes he had on the last three times he
visited her. But he did not smell, so he must get them cleaned, or he
had duplicate clothes. Odd I should notice such a trivial thing, she immediately thought, but the man is strange.
He sat down with surprising lightness for his size, and said in his
impossible German, “Good to see you again. Your lieutenant told me
when you would arrive, so I came to get your view on your revolution
in Poland, the reactionary war waged against you there, and the progress of Spartacus.”
In the next hour she brought him up to date with well-organized details. It came naturally to her. She had a doctorate, was a writer by
trade, and therefore in seconds could easily organize complex events
into a coherent monologue. And monologue it was, since Green Eyes
asked no questions, but only looked at her intently, with an occasional
nod. It actually became disquieting, since he gave so few clues to indicate whether he understood her or not. Since his spoken German was
poor, she began to wonder if he understood more than a word here and
there.
“That is it in general,” she said. “Is there anything you want to
know about in more detail?”
“No,” he said. “That was a good summary. I assume you are okay
regarding funds.”

146

Rudy Rummel

“So far,” she said. “We are not even able to spend what you so generously gave us as fast as I’d planned.”
He nodded and replied, “I want you to know that I am very happy at
the your and Leo’s progress. Keep in mind that if you need more funds,
I can supply them. Just make a note of it for my next visit.”
“Can you tell me when that will be?”
“No. I have much to do, and cannot stay in one place for too long. It
would only be a guess as to when I would be free to see you next.
Maybe in a month or two.”
He got up to leave, and Rosa was about to join him at the door
when she remembered something. She went over to her traveling bag
instead and pulled out a thin book in German.
She handed it to him. “I read that on the train. It’s a crazy bunch of
predictions about the future of Russian communism. It is sheer guesswork without a shred of knowledge or understanding of Russian
communism, but it’s entertaining for that—”
She stopped as she saw his face. It had turned white and the book
was shaking in his hand. The other hand he had put up on the door, as if
keep himself from falling. He seemed mesmerized by the title. He
whispered something in a foreign language; all she could make out was
the author’s strange name, “Hitler.”
He came out of it, grabbed her arm roughly, and almost dragged
her back to the table. He pushed her into a chair. Standing over her,
he slammed the book down, still visibly shaken. He demanded to
know something, but his German was too mangled for her to understand.
She was getting frightened of this man. He was a stranger. She
knew nothing about him except that he was a communist supporter and
benefactor. He could be a wild and dangerous man when excited. And
the book had clearly excited him beyond all reason.
He took two deep breaths, and his body slumped visually as he relaxed his muscles. “I know this supposed author,” he hissed. “He is a
fascist.”
“What is a fascist?”
“He is a German socialist, but one of the greatest enemies of communism and Russia. If he could, he would kill every communist in the
world, and every Jew. He tried.”
“He tried? I never heard of him. I do not understand. Why did he
write this stupid book?”
“He did not.”

Red Terror Never Again

147

The man grabbed the book and rushed to the door. He flung it open
and threw more gibberish over his shoulder as he hurried to the stairs.
All she could get out of it were the strange names “Joy” and “John.”

Chapter 22
July 14, 1907
John

J

ohn parked the Mercedes near the hitching post at the San Francisco Post Office, with a clear view of the entrance. He had his
H&K on his lap, and Joy was sitting beside him with her Magnum
out. Jy-ying, or rather who he thought of now as Joy 2, was in the back,
presumably with her own weapon ready. They varied the time that they
parked at or near the post office according to a random formula Joy had
worked out and passed on to the Simpson & Small Detective Agency
working for them.
At precisely 3:00 p.m., a common looking working man in drab
corduroy cap and farmer’s baggy dungarees came out and looked
around. Seeing John’s Mercedes—this was the day for the Mercedes—
he strolled over, quickly dumped on John’s lap a pile of letters and a
package from their post office box, and then unhitched and mounted a
bay nearby.
Besides picking up what was in their box for them, John paid the
detective agency what was a small fortune in this age to keep a threeman surveillance schedule on the P.O. box. If anybody loitered near the
box or acted suspicious, they were to tail them when they left and find
out who they were and where they were staying. John was the front
man to the detective agency, but it was Jy-ying who drew on her Sabah
Security Guard knowledge to make sure through John that the detective
agency did this surveillance properly.
To make sure the agency knew the seriousness of this, John explained that he and the two women were secret agents, working for
whom he could not say, and they were trying to break up a dangerous
spy ring. They could not work through the government’s security apparatus because the ring seemed to have a traitor high up in it. John
warned the agency, which upped their bill considerably as a result, that
its agents should be well armed, but able to defend themselves armed
or not. He also had them sign a secrecy pledge like that he’d had Stimson sign.

150

Rudy Rummel

John gave the package to Joy who, with one glance at the return address, yelled so that Jy-ying could also hear, “It’s from the publisher.”
“This must be it. What the hell took them so long getting it to us?
The telegram to the P.O. box I received in June said it was out then.
Typical way publishers treat authors, I bet,” John complained.
Before driving off, he wanted to see the book himself, but Jy-ying,
always the most security conscious, insisted that he get away from the
post office. “Immediately, John. Like now.”
Muttering that he could no longer tell Joy and Jy-ying apart, he holstered his gun, then drove into the chaos of horse riders, horse-drawn
wagons, automobiles, and bicycle traffic on Market Street. To make it
worse, John kept glancing at Joy as she sucked in her stomach, lifted
her tactical knife out of its sheath under the waist of her skirt, and cut
the heavy twine around the package. She also cut the wrapping paper
away, revealing three slim books. She whooped and Jy-ying leaned
over the front seat to see.
Joy shouted into the Mercedes and traffic noise, “Communist
Victory and Defeat 1936–1991, by Adolf Hitler.” The cover—done
in the garish, poster style and limited publishing colors of the age—
showed the hammer and sickle overlaying an illustration of an execution: a prisoner was being shot in the back of the head while other
prisoners stood in line, some praying, some making the sign of the
cross, some on their knees obviously begging for their lives. She
held one of the books up for Jy-ying to see the cover. “You did a
nice job of creating that cover from our video of twentieth century
wars and democides.”
“Thanks to your fantastic Photoshop program,” Jy-ying responded.
Joy picked up the other two books, and warned John when he had
to brake hard to avoid a bicycle, “John! Watch the road. You don’t
want to make that time traveler’s job easier, do you?”
Jy-ying yelled at him, “Pull over, sweetheart, and I will drive so
you can look at the books.”
“Yeah,” Joy shouted at him. Turning to Jy-ying, she hollered with a
grin, “One-track mind.”
John ignored them, but did concentrate on the traffic.
Joy looked back at the books and yelled, “One is in Russian, the
other in German. I can read much of them now,” she added with a
touch of pride in her voice. She passed them both to the back. Jy-ying
gently shoved Prince Wei off her lap to take the books, and began to

Red Terror Never Again

151

leaf through them, looking from the English pages to the German and
then the Russian, as though she were comparing the translations. “I’m a
genius to have thought this up,” she crowed.
“I thought of it,” Joy blared. “You only refined it.”
Keeping his eyes on the traffic, the exchange between the two
women again refocused his mind on what really had never left it since
they’d told him. Again he thought, I’m living in a dream world. None
of this is real, and I’m going to wake up soon.
Multiple moving images then flooded his mind and his driving became mechanical, eyes to hands to feet without mental intervention. He
had not forgotten about the books, but beyond his hearing Joy and Jyying were now chattering about them, Jy-ying in the rear leaning forward on the front seat, Joy angled against the front seat, with their
heads close together so they did not have to shout.
He glanced at them, and shook his head for the thousandth time
over what he had found out that day in the library. Yes, from then on
I’ve been in another world. Then, as certain images he now knew so
well pushed the others from his mind, he felt a semi-erection pushing
against his trousers.
January 25
Fort Hope Library
Joy held up Jy-ying’s hand toward him, and tried to say something,
but the words kept breaking into sobs. “I want . . . you to meet . . . the
real . . . J . . . Jy-ying.”
John was utterly mystified.
Crying also, Jy-ying wiped her eyes with one hand, and spoke almost too quietly for John to hear. But the shock and elation, the
happiness of discovery, and the disbelief at what she was saying filled
her soft, trembling voice. “Joy and I were discussing our childhoods in
more detail than we had ever spoken before. I knew she was found
alone on a boat and almost dead when she was about four years old. I
knew her parents apparently had tried to escape persecution in Vietnam
and were killed by pirates. I knew her foster mother Tor named her Joy
and adopted her.”
I knew all that, John thought. What’s so important about it?
Jy-ying turned to look at Joy, who nodded. “Today, just out of interest, I asked what she remembered of her childhood before then. She

152

Rudy Rummel

remembered very little, of course, but she was able to vaguely recall the
name ‘Tien Yen.’ I could not believe it. I pressed her for more names. I
used word discovery tricks of association, and finally the name ‘Hua’
came out, and then she told me it was associated with a vague image of
what must have been her mother. I could not speak, I was so shocked.”
Joy had control of herself now. She put her hand on Jy-ying’s arm
and told John evenly, but still with a sense of wonder, “I was astounded
by Jy-ying’s behavior. Finally she asked me, ‘Do you remember your
real name?’ I told her that I vaguely remembered several names. Especially something like ‘Tang,’ or maybe ‘Jy-cheng,’ maybe for a baby
sister.”
Jy-ying turned back to Joy, and took the hand on her arm into hers.
Her voice wavered. “John. Joy is me and I am Joy.”
“I can’t believe it,” John blurted. “Impossible. Scientifically impossible.”
Jy-ying went on as though she hadn’t heard him. “Our mother was
of the Chinese Hua family, one with a long history. Her mother’s parents immigrated to Vietnam, where her mother met and married our
father, a Chinese man named Shihao. Joy also vaguely recalled his
name. Our sister was named Ting. In my universe, our father died with
our mother in the 1984 rebellion against Sabah; Ting was killed months
later by anti-Sabah rebels. Our parents were in the secret police and
fought for Sabah.”
In spite of their obvious sincerity, John stepped back and crossed
his arms. “Okay, you two, game’s up. Nice try, with all those false tears
and such, but you can’t fool me. I’ve read enough to know that time
travelers could not meet and shake hands with themselves.” He pointed
to their clasped hands. “Or hold hands.”
Joy compressed her lips. Jy-ying pointed to her, saying, “Joy is
from the First Universe. I am from the Second Universe. We are now in
the Third Universe. This makes it possible.”
Joy added, “It has to be possible, John. We are standing here, both
of me.”
John uncrossed his arms. “Really?”
They both said, “Yes.”
Chills raced up his spine, and he had goose bumps on his arms at
the enormity of this. “Excuse me for being dense, but I still don’t understand. Jy-ying has a scar, but that could happen to either of you. It’s
that she doesn’t look completely like you, Joy. And she is an inch or so
shorter.”

Red Terror Never Again

153

Jy-ying’s voice was steady now. “The Vietnamese government
forced all first and second generation Chinese to return to China. There
were so many such refugees in China and so little aid that many of us
suffered from diseases and malnutrition. I lived in a refugee camp with
little food. In the United States, Joy had a much healthier diet than I
did, and grew taller.
“When I was five, I caught noma, a gangrene that affects the
mouth and face. Fortunately, it was a mild case—if it had been severe I would have had extreme facial disfigurement and could have
died from septicemia or pneumonia. Still, as mild as my noma was,
it scarred my lower face. My foster father, who in effect adopted me
after my parents were killed, was a high official in the Sabah
Guards. When I was sixteen, that age when teenagers are most sensitive about appearance, he had a sympathetic Security doctor perform
a series of plastic surgeries on me. The small scars from the surgery
are almost hidden under my chin.”
Thoughts tumbled about in his head. John felt weak and cold. He
pointed to the table and almost rushed to it, then dropped down in a
chair and leaned on his elbows. He waved Joy and Jy-ying to the chairs
on the other side of the table.
Jy-ying picked up an anxious Prince Wei, and let him lick her wet
face.
John cleared his throat, and went as usual for humor to get him over
this stupendous emotional shock. “Gee, if we could only bring me back
from Jy-ying’s universe, we would have Joy-Joy and John-John. What
a foursome that would be.” The words dropped off at the end, and he
didn’t smile.
Neither did Joy and Jy-ying.
March 19
It had been impossible to accept at first that the woman he loved so
deeply was also Jy-ying. But, in so many ways, she was. Leaving aside
what Jy-ying’s security profession and her religion introduced into her
life, her personality matched Joy’s. Almost all the things he loved in
Joy he began to find in Jy-ying when he started looking for them—the
banter, the lip, the femininity, the strength, the dedication, the honesty,
the willpower, and the sexuality.

154

Rudy Rummel

Strangest of all, Joy would now talk of Jy-ying intimately, and
when she noticed Jy-ying giving John a lingering, half-lidded look, no
cloud crossed her face. He felt good about that. But then he didn’t. It
made him feel . . . odd.
One after another, the guys had gotten up the courage to romance
Jy-ying, but except for a short spurt with Hands, whom she told Joy she
liked very much, she remained single. When John brought it up with
Jy-ying, she shrugged her shoulders as Joy would have done.
The double Joys distracted him. No, they obsessed him. He knew
also—he couldn’t miss it—that something was obsessing Joy, and it
wasn’t simply that Jy-ying was her. And it was getting worse. She put
things off. They had yet to start their import and export company. They
had agreed to change the name he and Joy had planned in honor of her
adoptive mother Tor. She still loved her no less, but Hua had been both
Jy-ying and Joy’s real mother, and they’d decided therefore to name the
new firm the Hua Import & Export Company.
John understood. He thought.
They kept the three guys busy with odd jobs, things that needed to
be done around Fort Hope, and they didn’t seem to mind. They had a
job where they had none before, a great place to live, free food and
automobiles, and John treated them very well. And there were two gorgeous women to stare at, which they did often enough for John to have
to explain to them that Joy was his, and not up for grabs, so to speak.
About two months after Joy and Jy-ying found out about each
other, the problem Joy was having, and that John had hidden from himself, became clear. They were laying naked in bed, the way they always
slept together, and John got aroused. Joy held and massaged him, and
murmured, “Poor Jy-ying. She hasn’t been getting any sex, dearest. Not
with anyone she can love. It’s not good. She is, like me, a loving and
sexual woman.”
John was not in the mood for conversation. He sighed, “I thought
she and Hands slept together,” and nibbled on her earlobe.
“No,” she whispered, eyes half-lidded. “She didn’t want to.”
John tried to foreclose on this distracting conversation with some
foreplay. Joy gently pushed his hand away. “She couldn’t because she
loves you.”
John felt the heat flow away, as did his erection.
Joy got up on one elbow and looked at him. Her tone still intimate,
she confessed, “She is me and her love for you is what I feel. It’s natural. I love you very much, dearest—both of me.”

Red Terror Never Again

155

John turned on his own elbow to face her, and put his bearded chin
in his hand. He lifted his eyebrows and asked, “Where is this going,
baby?”
Joy pulled him down next to her and kissed him. The heat was coming back. But then she said, “I want you to make love to me.”
Finally. John was again more than ready, and was about to get on top
of her when she stopped him with her hand. “Not this me. The other me.”
John lost it again. “You want me to make love to Jy-ying?”
“Yes, but you must understand that she is not a different woman.
She is me.”
“I can’t do that, baby. No way. It would be wrong. Like having an
affair. I would not feel right about it. No. I can’t believe you would ask
me to do this.” He gulped without realizing it. “It’s disloyalty to you. If
there were another me and you were bedding him . . . . ” He realized he
was protesting too much, but couldn’t help it.
“It’s okay, I’ll be with her.”
“What?”
“I’ll be with her with you. You will have us together as one, which
we are.”
“That’s group sex, Joy. I’ve never done that. It’s . . . ah, perverted.”
He did not have the vocabulary for this.
“Don’t be silly,” Joy murmured.
Joy got up and put on the embroidered red silk robe that Jy-ying
had bought for her, and left the room. Five minutes later, Joy returned
with Jy-ying wearing the same kind of robe, but in blue. She looked
uncomfortable as John hurriedly covered himself. Prince Wei was right
behind her.
Joy sat on the edge of the bed, leaned over to him, and gave him a
peck on the cheek. “Here I am, dearest. Both of me,” she purred. She
stood, took off her robe, and lay down almost next to him, leaving
room for Jy-ying.
Prince Wei jumped on the bed and began to sniff Joy’s crotch. Jyying grabbed him, put him on a cushioned chair, and commanded him
in a husky voice, “Liu—stay.”
Joy had been momentarily distracted by Prince Wei. Now she
turned back to John, her face flushed. Her voice soothed and caressed
him. “Jy-ying and I have discussed this several times and we agree,
dearest. But my being with her this first time is a surprise for her.” She
motioned to Jy-ying, who also took off her robe and stood with a shy
smile looking into John’s wide eyes.

156

Rudy Rummel

Jesus Christ, I’m dead, and on my way through the heavenly gates.
He looked at Jy-ying and saw for sure what he had wondered about
since he met her—yes, she had an equally gorgeous figure, the same as
Joy’s, down to the breast deformity and the bush.
His last rational thought for the evening was, Yes, heaven’s gates.
For Joy ripped the covers off him, looked, fingered him, and meowed
to Jy-ying, “We’re going to have to work on him a little.”
Prince Wei watched from the chair. He had never seen such interesting human behavior before. And his mistress was right in the middle
of it.
Fort Hope
Cook
Insulated and painted to be unobtrusive, the plumbing from the upstairs master bath descended along a corner in the large kitchen and
through the floor to the basement. The plumbing was not completely
soundproofed, however. Early the next morning the cook heard the
sound in the pipes of the upstairs bathtub being filled and emptied,
filled and emptied, a little filled, a lot emptied. Accompanying this was
a lot of thumping on the ceiling—the bathroom floor—and in the bathtub. It only touched her consciousness, however, much like the
snapping of wood in the fireplace.
But when Master Banks, Mistress Phim, and her sister Miss Khoo
beat their three guests to the table for breakfast, she did notice the rosy
glow on their faces, as though they had been jogging around the property in the spring chill, which those crazy people did almost every day.
When she brought in the links, scrambled eggs, and the rice both
Joy and Jy-ying insisted on, she used the new word she had learned
from them. She asked, “Have a good jog?”
“Oh, yes,” Master Banks said. He looked at the two women, his
grin cutting his face in half. “Wasn’t our jog great?”
The cook didn’t understand why the ladies reddened slightly at that,
nor why they wore such peculiar grins of their own when they both answered, “The best ever.”
She was totally mystified when Master Banks spewed coffee across
the table and Mistress broke out in laughter when she commented,
“Well, you all look petered out.” She was glad to see, however, that
Miss Khoo looked as puzzled as she was.

Chapter 23
July 14, 1907
Jy-ying

J

y-ying looked around the library table and wondered again if they
had done all they could to protect themselves if attacked, all they
could to capture or kill the time traveler who had wrecked the uniuniverse in which they’d landed. As soon as they returned to Fort Hope
from the post office, they had come to the library to carefully go over
the books they had received and to review their notes and preparations.
Now they all sat at the large library table with the three books, their
laptops, note paper, newspapers, and the many books in which they had
been doing research, some still open, some with scraps of paper sticking out to index something important.
They had decided to put off starting the Hua Import and Export
Company until they dealt with the time traveler. But there was one
more decision to be made. “We' have to do it,” Jy-ying finally said.
“It hurts our security for them not to know. They won’t be alert to
danger, otherwise. And the additional six eyes and ears would be a
significant help.”
John looked thoughtful, and then he held up his finger. Joy was
right, Jy-ying thought, it is a hateful finger.
“I’ve been troubled by keeping them ignorant of what we’re doing,”
he said. “Their lives may be at stake also, especially if we’re attacked
here. They’ll soon be finished with the listing and inventory of all the
important and export companies in and around San Francisco, so
they’ll be around more. But, there’s a risk. One or all of them may
think we’re raving lunatics, and run off telling the world what crazy
people we are. How better for the time traveler to find out about us?”
“I don’t think so,” Joy responded. “I’ve been impressed with their
character, and we were extremely lucky in that. Of course, it depends
on how we tell them. This we should plan carefully.”
“Also,” Jy-ying added with a little grin, “they may have a girlfriend
or two with them. We did tell them that this is their home, and to feel
free to bring their friends here, as long as they tell the cook well ahead
of time if for supper. Or breakfast.”

158

Rudy Rummel

“There are the butler and other help—” John still could not call
them servants “—although there is no special reason that they should
know.”
Joy looked thoughtful for a few seconds. “That brings up another
problem. We don’t know whether the time traveler is man or woman—”
“Has to be a man, to have had such success, “ John interrupted,
without even a smile.
“Yes, our man,” Jy-ying said, her smile wide with the happiness she
felt over their new love. She looked at Joy, smiled, and nodded her
head toward John.
Joy smiled in return, and continued. “So, if it’s a woman who is
young like us—”
“And beautiful like you two,” John broke in again.
“And incredibly patient about being interrupted,” Jy-ying responded, and went on with, “She has an entry through all our defenses
by vamping one of the boys.”
Jy-ying picked up Prince Wei, who was sleeping at her feet, and
stroked his back while he resumed sleeping on her lap. “That decides it,
does it not? They must be made aware of the danger, even of girlfriends.” Jy-ying looked at John. She had gotten to know him well
enough now to almost anticipate his humor. She knew it was as natural
as breathing to him.
“Yes,” John said, tapping his pencil on the table and looking at Joy
from under his brows. “All us males must be aware of that danger.”
The telephone on the wall next to a book stack gave two quick
rings. John rose and picked up the receiver. After a moment he replied
to the caller, “I think the cook will be relieved not to have your elephant-sized stomachs to fill. Enjoy yourselves.” He hung up and told
Joy and Jy-ying, “Guess we won’t be telling the guys tonight. They’re
going out to dinner and then to a nickelodeon. I bet we’ll have at least
two more women under the roof afterwards.”
“You mean under them,” Jy-ying said, smirking.
Straight-faced, John added, “Or two or more under one of them.”
“Beast,” Joy yelled, crunching up a sheet of paper and throwing
it him.
“Pervert,” Jy-ying shouted and, rolling up a newspaper, she reached
over the table and bopped him on the head.
John was laughing so hard he could hardly speak. “Girls . . . girls,
you must learn to control yourselves around me, as hard as it is.” He
doubled over in his chair.

Red Terror Never Again

159

Joy pushed him off the chair and jumped on his chest with a loud
hoot, and Jy-ying raced around the table and fell across his thighs. They
both almost doubled up with laughter themselves as Prince Wei tried to
kill John’s trouser leg.
In three tries, John finally stammered out, “No, no, not in the
library.”
July 16
Joy
Two nights later, while John, Joy, and Jy-ying lay naked in bed together with Prince Wei sleeping at their feet, Joy mused about their
success with the guys. “They now know everything. Everything, but
one thing. They know about our mission and why, since we showed
them the video of twentieth century wars and revolutions. They know
about the nuclear attack on the democracies—”
Jy-ying, who had been sitting against the back of the bed reading on
the other side of John, put her Russian history book down. She looked
over at Joy, and her face sagged. “I am sorry for the distraction of my
sobbing. I could not help it. All those people killed, all that history destroyed, by my religion. No one in China, not even in Security, was
ever shown pictures of the destruction. It was all abstract. If I had seen
then what I saw today, I would have resigned my commission and fled
the country.”
Joy nodded. “That is exactly what I would have done. And I would
have fled to one of the new Muslim democracies you told me existed at
that time. Anyway, your crying and my tears are what finally convinced
the guys that we were telling the truth. They have this thing about us
being iron ladies, especially Sal. He keeps asking me to arm wrestle.”
Joy turned on her side, leaned on her elbow, and idly played with a
light blonde hair on John’s chest. “They took it well. No hysterics, no
‘You’re crazy.’ Just ‘how can we help you?’ I was surprised.”
“Yeah,” Jy-ying said, also leaning on her elbow to tweak one of
John’s chest hairs. She chuckled. “With the hundred dollars John gave
them to arm themselves, they must have bought half an armory. They
came in clanking this evening. A good gun only costs a couple of dollars, so I expect they each have a handgun or two, a shotgun, and
probably a rifle.”

160

Rudy Rummel

She waved her hand along John’s body. “Well, there is one thing
they do not know about us. It’s lucky that the previous owner and
his wife wanted a door between their rooms so they could quietly get
together.”
Joy replied, “Lucky for us, and too bad for John. Have you noticed
how tired he’s been lately? Why, I found him the other day sleeping in
his study, with his head on the desk.”
Jy-ying frowned and rubbed her fingernail down John’s chest. “I
think he may have only two or three more good years.”
“I don’t know.” Joy tweaked his nipple. “He can hardly stand up
straight in the morning now.”
Jy-ying pulled on another hair as though to see how long it was.
“You mean on his feet?”
While Jy-ying held the one hair up, Joy tried to twist another hair
around it. “I’m afraid that’s all I’m going to mean, soon. You
know,” Joy mused, “men are like automobiles. Great when they’re
new—they ride very well. But as they age they get bumpy and rattle,
and you get less mileage for the gas. They rust, their engines begin
to go, and before you know it they can’t even be steered well. And
finally, they go poof.”
John’s face had turned red. No longer able to hold the laughter in,
he finally let it out, put his arms around both of them, and pulled their
heads to his shoulders. “I love you two.”
“I love you too,” they both said.
Joy felt warm and contented. She was more at peace with their love
than ever before. The world was perfect, there was no other universe,
there was only the three—rather, the two—of them. She sighed and
whispered huskily, “Prove it. If you’re not too tired, that is.”

Chapter 24
July 23, 1907
Green Eyes

T

his is ridiculous. Where could they be hiding? He knew what
they looked like, he knew John had bought the Fairfax Hotel.
Hands’ biography of them had made that plain. But when he
went there, the owner said John had never bought the hotel, although
when he described them, the owner said they had stayed there. No forwarding address.
He knew from John’s Remembrance that by this time they had
set up the Tor Import and Export Company, but it wasn’t registered,
and there were no business ads in the paper associated with that
name.
He knew they’d landed in a warehouse, address unknown, and had
bought it the same day they landed. He systematically checked all the
major banks, spilling counterfeit money around like pennies, and finally located the sale of the property. But when he appeared inside the
warehouse, weapon ready, it was empty. He could tell from the clues—
disturbed places in the dust and the scuff marks where objects had been
dragged, among other things—that their capsules and time machine had
been there.
He knew they would buy an apartment house, but no one resembling the pair had bought an apartment house or a house in the last six
months.
He knew they would buy a car, given what he’d read about Joy’s
driving. He checked all of the automobile distributors. No one had sold
anyone like them a car.
He felt the anger growing again. It welled up from his guts and
heated up his thoughts. “Shit, shit, shit,” he said in a language that
would be oddly familiar to English speakers. “I never thought they
would be onto me. Damn them.”
Well, he had tried to take the fast route to them. Now he would just
have to play the patient detective. He did not want to take the time. The
time he was spending here was increasingly dangerous for him. He had

162

Rudy Rummel

been lucky so far, but he now risked being caught. It was okay to drop
in for a short visit, do what was necessary for the revolution, and then
return. But he had been here a while and his human auric—energy
field—was bound to be picked up eventually.
He moved to the passenger seat of the stolen Buick and unfolded
his neutronic screen. He activated it and by voice command moved
from one robot fly-view to another. The robot surveillance flies he had
brought with him were now on the walls around “Hitler’s” P.O. box.
He spoke a few words and the screen went through the ten hour consolidated holo of the activity around the box as recorded by the flies.
It automatically stopped fast-scanning when a man approached the
box and opened it. He took out a pile of letters, put them in a case, and
closed and locked the box. The man was not John.
“Son of a bitch. More waiting.” He spoke a series of instructions
toward the screen, and in the post office one of the robot flies flew to
wait just above the box. To preserve its proton energy it would make no
holo until activated as it had been commanded.
Now I have to wait another shitty day or so.
April 24
He returned to within contact distance in a stolen Ford, and after
unfolding his screen, he checked his special robot fly. The fly’s holo
had started immediately when someone unlocked the box. It flew to
land on the person’s coat near his collar with a front view of what he
was doing.
He ordered a fast scan. The holo zoomed forward until the fly was
carried to a Buick. He saw the mail dropped onto a man’s lap. As instructed, the fly flew into the car and attached itself upside down to the
car’s roof. The holo on the screen automatically righted the threedimensional image, and went to wide-angle view. John’s face came
onto the screen as he said something to his passenger.
He had seen that face in the hated photographs and paintings he’d
grown up with. He ordered the holo to switch to a view of the passenger. He gaped as Joy came into view; she was even more beautiful than
her pictures. He noticed the scar, and was surprised. But that may have
been powdered over in the photos.
I was right. It’s that goddam John and Joy who are after me. Well,
fuck them. They’re dead.

Red Terror Never Again

163

The fly did not take a holo of the back seat. It had not been ordered
to do so. It flew out the open window and did a fast fly around the
automobile and back into the window to again attach itself upside down
to the automobile’s roof, such that it had a clear view of the road ahead.
John drove off, and the man could see in what direction John drove, but
then within a mile or so, the fly was out of range.
He’d seen the car they were driving, but the damn cars had no license plates in this era. It was a Ford, but he didn’t know the model
number and for all he knew, it might have been stolen. Shit, now it will
take longer.
He put his screen on search and alert, and slid into the driver’s seat.
He put the idling Ford in low gear, and jack-rabbited into traffic in the
same direction John had gone.
He drove straight southwest on Market until it went south around
Twin Peaks and then changed into Portola Avenue. With increasing
frustration he followed that until he reached Ocean Ave.
No signal from his special fly. Where the hell did they go?
The robot fly would sense when it was out of range and go into its
sleep mode until the screen came back into range, when it would
awaken, ready for new instructions.
He pulled into the lot of Hardy’s Food Store. He directed his remaining robot surveillance flies to fly to the limit of their contact range
in a search pattern looking for the one robot fly, and then to repeat the
search along a different segment of the distance on their return. He was
in effect doubling the range of his screen.
He waited. No contact with the fly in the car.
The flies returned, and he drove further south, and tried again.
Nothing. Another try.
Nothing. His surveillance flies were losing their proton energy, his
screen warned him; their power supply would be depleted in one more
go-around.
He again found another location, sent out his flies, and waited.
Contact. The special fly was activated again and communicating
through the surveillance fly that had found it. It was still upside down,
attached to the interior roof of the Ford. He could see that the Ford was
parked in a large garage. He instructed the robot to fly out of the garage
and to the front of what looked like a very big house.
But then there was a sudden shift in perspective, a collapsing of the
views, darkness, and loss of contact. He tried various commands. Nothing. He smacked the dashboard with his hand and raged, his hot anger
turning his shout into a scream: “Where is that goddam house?”

164

Rudy Rummel

Fort Hope
Mechanic
The Ford had been out on the road; it was dirty, and had to be
cleaned. The house mechanic unlatched the top from the windshield
and pushed it back to lie in a pile of folded canvas behind the back
seats. He never heard the soft crunch of the tiny robotic fly as it was
caught in a folding strut.
He then unstrapped the top from the rear latches and, with a grunt,
lifted the top off and to the ground. He would open it there later. It was
easier for him to clean the canvas on the ground than crawling around
and leaning over the high top when it was attached to the Ford, especially since it would not hold his weight.

Chapter 25
July 24, 1907
Jy-ying

J

y-ying sat in her favorite easy chair in her room; Prince Wei slept
on her lap. John and Joy were napping in the master bedroom.
She didn’t feel like a nap herself, so she’d told them she had some
things to do in her—now really her and Joy’s—room. Since she almost
always slept with them, she had turned her bedroom into a study-prayer
room, a place where she could sometimes be alone with Prince Wei and
with her thoughts. Sometimes Joy also used the room to be by herself,
while Jy-ying and Prince Wei slept with John.
She had completed her afternoon prayers but, troubled by them, she
was trying to determine the problem, and indeed, again think about
their joint mission.
The heat and passion she’d felt with John, now surely the love of
her life, and the initial—she had trouble with a word for this—
“strangeness” of group (but not really group) sex, had almost settled
into a routine, though it was no less pleasurable. That passion, and their
lovemaking, had almost completely dominated her mind. It was bound
up inextricably with her discovery that she and Joy were one and the
same person, with her new love for John, and with her love of self—
Joy. What was left of her thoughts involved their security and stopping
the time traveler.
Now that the great passion, the great heat and lust, had settled into a
routine of joyful lovemaking—she stopped and told herself with a
chuckle, “Ha. I made an unconscious pun. Good thing John didn’t hear
that”—now she felt relaxed enough to deal with what had been trying
to insert itself into her thoughts.
Her Sabahism was an increasing strain for her. Joy was agnostic,
tending toward Buddhism. John was agnostic, tending toward atheism.
She performed her prayers five times a day, time stolen from the many
things she had to do—maintaining their security, her practice sessions
and sparring with Joy, her jogging and weight lifting, helping Joy train
John further in the martial arts and weapons, and now training the three
guys, now officially their guards. She grinned. Not to mention bed time.

166

Rudy Rummel

She rubbed Prince Wei’s back, finding pleasure in the feel of his
hair, and feeling good about his unconditional loyalty and love. Half
awake, he rolled on his back to have his stomach scratched, which she
did with delight, happy to see his pleasure.
She leaned over and kissed his black nose, then sat back and idly
scratched Prince Wei’s stomach again. It was so quiet she felt she could
almost hear the dust fall on the room’s Indian wool carpet. She sighed.
“I feel disloyal,” she told him. “Disloyal to the prophet Sabah, disloyal
to Islam, disloyal to my religion. I no longer have the same intensity of
obedience to the religion.” She’d been missing some prayers, and had
given no thought to what was an awful fact from the perspective of her
religion—not only was she intimate with Joy and John, but she didn’t
try to convert them at all.
“I think that video of Sabah’s—his son’s—nuclear destruction of
the democracies to globalize Sabahism was like a knife plunged deep
into my beliefs. I’m not in China now. There is no Imam friend to persuade me otherwise, as there was when I was about to give up the
religion after hearing rumors of the destruction. Now there are only my
doubts, and they have returned in full force.”
Prince Wei, asleep again, lay stretched across her lap on his side.
She stroked his side. “The worst of it, from the point of view of my .
. . religion, is not my increasing apostasy, but what has happened to
my mission.” She shuddered involuntarily. “To think I was going to
kill John and Joy. Now I could no more do that than I could kill you,
my little Prince. Worse, I now love a non-Muslim more than anything in this world. Like Joy, I would die to save his life. And nonMuslim Joy’s.” She grimaced, feeling chilled. “To kill her would be
killing myself.”
She tried to climb out of this gloomy line of thought. The mission!
Yes, the mission to save Sabah and Sabahism.
She put her feet up on the redwood coffee table and turned Prince
Wei to lie along her legs. A mosquito flew across her vision and jittered
above her head, and she reached up and clapped it between her hands.
When she looked at the palm of her hand, the corpse was bloody. My
blood, she thought idly as she wiped her hand on a piece of tissue paper.
“The mission. Do I still want to save Abul Sabah, once we get the
time traveler and stop or turn around the communist revolutions sweeping Europe?” She smiled at the megalomania of that. “Yes, just the
three of us. That idea is what John calls a ‘ha-ha.’ But, if the three of us
do succeed, as remote as that is, what about Sabah?”

Red Terror Never Again

167

She sighed again, deeper. I don’t know. I don’t know. Children were
sold in his part of the world; they could buy him from his parents and
adopt and raise him. But would the angel Gabriel then communicate
with him on behalf of God? And even if he did, how could Abul create
Sabahism without the power he had in Uighuristan, and eventually, in
China?
She rested her hand on Prince Wei’s side. “It’s moot anyway. That
damn time traveler and his revolutions have so changed the future that
probably there will be no Sabah, and even if there is, he will not become the Prophet. There is probably no decision for me to make. My
mission probably disappeared with these revolutions.”
She felt better. The emptiness in her stomach had disappeared.
“That’s it. I don’t need to make a decision now, not for years. I
will just—”
There was a knock on the door to John and Joy’s bedroom, and Joy
opened the door. Prince Wei jumped down and ran over to jump up and
down on her red robe. No one disciplined him for this greeting of his;
he always received a caress or so, and even sometimes a stomach
scratch.
Joy announced, “We’re up. We’re going to the kitchen for the leftover mochi I bought at Yamishiro’s yesterday. And green tea.” She
turned and yelled into the room behind her, “You hear that, John?
Green tea for a change. Not that English tea. Not coffee. Incredibly savory green tea.” She turned back to Jy-ying. “Join us?”
“Sure. How could I say no to green tea?” Jy-ying joined Joy at the
door. She was surprised at how light she felt now. She might even
forgo her late evening prayers.

Chapter 26
Morning, April 25, 1907
Green Eyes

E

ach time he used surveillance flies he had to get a judge’s warrant and make a report to the judge on the results of their use.
What made it worse was that their proton nodes had to be
changed. This was recorded at the armory and a copy sent to the judge.
And the loss of a surveillance fly was considered so serious that unless
there was a very good reason for the loss, there would be an internal
investigation.
He had lied. He had created false documentation. I’m up to my nostrils in shit now, and I’ll soon go under, unless . . . unless what?
He let out a deep breath of frustration. No matter what happened to
him, he reminded himself, he had launched the revolutions. The one in
Russia was bound to succeed. Poland’s was on the cusp of success, if
the mutiny at Bydgoszcz could be put down. But Germany was still a
question. Rosa needed time she might not be granted, because of the
reactionary forces collecting against Spartacus.
Maybe I will never return. Maybe I’ll live in Germany and work
with Rosa for the revolution there. She could sure use my skills and
knowledge. And when she’s successful, I’m sure she would set me up
well. Maybe as a minister. Yes, that would be a great idea. I know how
to hide in time, and they would never find me.
If it were not for those fucking meddlers, John and Joy. They had
succeeded in destroying the November, 1917, Russian Revolution; they
had succeeded in preventing World Wars I and II. Now they might still
succeed in stopping these current revolutions and rolling them back.
All my risk-taking, all my planning, would then be for naught. Except,
and he smiled at the thought, not even they could bring that evil Stalin
to life again.
He was desperate now. If he did not find and eradicate them very
soon, he risked plunging mankind back into the exploitive hands of the
capitalist plutocracy of moneyed greed. He could not stand to do that.
Even as a boy he had questioned why there were rich and poor, why all

170

Rudy Rummel

could not be equal in employment opportunities and income. Especially
income. It was fundamentally wrong, he had thought for over half his
life, that his parents could receive a hundred times that made by his
best friend’s parents, with all the advantages in life he had over his
friend as a result. It was wrong, and he would make sure this new universe recognized that. He could not let communism die as it had in
John and Joy’s universe.
But unless he hurried, unless he succeeded in eradicating them
soon, he would be caught, and maybe—just maybe—his dream defeated.
He had driven around the area where he knew their house was located in a stolen Dolson automobile, but he’d seen no house whose rear
might resemble the one the fly had holoed. For legal reasons and to
avoid confusion among competing buyers and real estate firms, a central record was kept at City Hall of all houses bought and sold in the
area. It was a public record, and he had eaten up more precious time
going through those records. He could find only three expensive houses
in that locality that had been bought within the last seven months, and
none had been purchased by a Banks or a Phim. Of course, they could
have used false names, so he’d written down the addresses.
Now, in a stolen telephone truck with the telephone repairman
shivering under a canvas in the rear, he drove to the Wilgur Pinson
house first.
A long, winding driveway led to the mansion’s entrance. When he
climbed down from the cab, he had to adjust the repairman’s blue and
white uniform so it didn’t look too tight. As it was, he could only button the bottom three buttons on his denim pants and then button the
heavy service coat so that the opening in his pants would be hidden.
There was a yellow raincoat in the back of the truck, and with a little
salute to the man lying trussed up on the floor in his underwear, he
put it on. Carrying a bag of tools and wires, he approached the mansion’s door.
A maid answered his knock and he said, “I am from the telephone
company. We are having line trouble with your phone. I am here to
check it out and repair whatever is necessary.”
The maid tilted her head and looked carefully at his unbearded face.
“You’re a foreigner. You speak funny.”
“No, I am from New York.”
“Oh. Come on in.”
“Where is your telephone? You have just one?”

Red Terror Never Again

171

“No, two.” She led him to the kitchen.
“This is one,” she said, nodding to the wall phone. “I’ll take you to
the other.” And she led the way to the study, where she pointed to a
wall phone near a desk. “I have work to do. You know your way out,
don’t cha?”
“Yes, and thank you.”
As soon as the maid disappeared, he checked the photographs on
the desk, the painting of a handsome woman over the fireplace, and the
desk drawers. Easy decision. No John and Joy here.
The next house had a guard and a gate. He gave his explanation,
and was surprised when the guard called someone from the guard shack
and, watching him, spoke into the phone and listened to the response.
He put down the phone and stepped to the truck. “I’m sorry. You will
have to wait while your company is called to verify your request.”
This is their house, he thought. Only they would exercise such security.
He waited a few moments, then called the guard over. “I have other
jobs to hurry through. I’ll come back later.”
Without waiting for a response, he tried to back up the truck, something he had not done before—he didn’t realize he had to readjust the
spark and throttle. He backfired and jolted backwards, almost stalling.
He got turned around while the guard stared and, with another loud
backfire, got the truck moving forward in first gear. Then he shoved it
into second with a clash of gears, and disappeared down Crocker Road.
He drove several blocks, then down a side street, and then another,
and parked the truck at the edge of a forest. He walked back toward the
mansion, and soon noticed the tall wall that surrounded it. The wall hid
the precise location of the mansion. He had to have that.
He found a tree well back from the wall—evidently they had
cleared all trees and bushes within twenty feet of the wall, and no
branches were allowed even close to overhanging it. No matter. He
climbed a paper bark tree until he could see the mansion, then secured
his feet against the soft branches while he pulled an instrument that
looked like a small telescope from his pocket. He put it to his eye and
scanned the outside of the mansion. He looked carefully at the French
doors, the rear windows, and the solid-looking side door. He checked
the half-glass door off a small balcony on the second floor and an adjacent picture window. That was where he would enter.
He adjusted several recessed small knobs, took the instrument away
from his eye, and pressed a button to fix in its memory the three dimensional coordinates shown in a little window in the instrument’s side. He

172

Rudy Rummel

counted to one hundred, which gave him the minute movements in the
earth’s rotation and the relative change in the location of the star’s xrays that he needed for the double-check. He could not make a mistake,
otherwise he might end up cut in half by a wall or a floor. He again put
the device to one eye, and went though the same procedure. Then he
subtracted the first coordinates from the second, and with a result of
zero he was satisfied.
He returned to the truck, drove it about a mile away, and parked it
on a small side street. He went to the rear, took off the telephone man’s
clothes and his gray metallic belt, and changed into his own clothes,
putting the metallic belt on over them. After loosening the rope tying
the telephone man’s feet and hands, he told him, “You should be able
free yourself in an hour or so. As to me, nobody will believe you.”
He touched something on his belt and disappeared.

Chapter 27
Evening, April 25, 1907
Joy

S

itting comfortably in bed with her back against a pile of pillows,
Joy was trying to read Tolstoy’s War and Peace in Russian. She
had her knees up and the covers pulled over them up to her lap.
Beside her were two Russian-English dictionaries.
John was in the library trying to refine Jy-ying’s German. He could
speak and read it, and was using flash cards to increase Jy-ying’s vocabulary. The guys had taken their girlfriends to see the new silent
movie The Golden Beetle.
They all were on alert, but Joy felt safe in the bedroom—safe
enough to reach her magnum in seconds if the house, John and Jy-ying
in the library, or the bedroom were attacked. She had her holster purse
hanging off the chair close by, and her throwing and tactical knives on
the chair seat. And she had drawn the curtains to the balcony as well.
Can’t be too cautious, she thought.
“Gospodi pomily?” She underlined the phrase in Tolstoy, and went
to the open dictionary to look it up. “Ah, ‘Lord have mercy.’ That
makes sense,” she told herself, and went back to her reading.
An area by the balcony door shimmered. Joy caught it out of the
corner of her eye. A man’s shape began to form. Tolstoy went flying as
Joy tried to do a quick roll to reach her magnum. But the covers restrained her, and by the time she had one foot on the floor and her hand
on the magnum, the man was fully materialized. He held a small tube
in his hand.
With the magnum in her hand, Joy tried to twist around on one foot
to get a fast shot at the man. The tube flashed. A wide beam encompassed her whole body, partially paralyzing her instantly. She tried to
fight it, drawing on all her strength and focusing it on the simple act of
moving the hand with the gun and sighting on the man. Her whole body
shook with the effort, but she could do no better than slow motion. No
good.
As she again drew on all her energy and willpower, using every
trick she had been taught to force her hand to sight the magnum on the

174

Rudy Rummel

man, he just walked over to her, stood to the side of her gun, and put
the tube back into his belt. With two hands he jerked the magnum out
of her hand. He emptied its cylinder and slid the gun and the cartridges
under the bed, out of reach.
He waited while she slowly got her other foot under her, but she
was so sluggish she almost toppled. He took her arm and held her up
until she was stable.
Snail-like, she straightened her body, and let her useless hands lazily drop to her sides. Her eyes could move freely, and she tried to gauge
the man and her danger as he went to the door and locked it.
He came back and looked at her carefully. His smile was huge,
showing even white teeth, and his green eyes sparkled with anticipation. Her robe hung open and she had nothing on underneath. He
stepped up to her, removed the robe from her shoulders, pulled the
sleeves from her arms, and tossed the robe away.
Joy gradually straightened her back even more, and slowly tilted
her head back, chin out.
He walked around her body, studying it. He caressed her buttocks,
and then stood in front of her, looking her up and down. She stared unblinking into his eyes. She would make not the slightest move to cover
herself, even if she could.
“Interesting. John never mentioned in his Remembrance that your
left breast was half the size of your right one.” He put his hand over
the right one and massaged it, and pulled on its soft nipple. He took
several steps back to get a better full view of her. “God, you still are
gorgeous,” he exclaimed. “Your photographs were just imperfect reflections of your true beauty. Even seeing those photos when I was a
teenager made me want you. And later, after I studied Marxism and
the history of communism, and how you and John destroyed its great
promise in my universe as Stalin did in your original universe, I
wanted to destroy you.”
He gave her a huge, toothy smile. “Now, I have succeeded. Trotsky
will win. His world, his communist revolution will win. I will be there,
and there will be nothing,” and he spit the words into her fiery eyes,
“nothing you can do about it. The great, progressive era of MarxismTrotskyism is here. The age of bloodsucking capitalism and all its evils
is over.”
Joy ignored what the man was saying and doing. She had known
from the very beginning of their mission that her life was at great risk,
the probabilities against surviving long. So, one evening while John

Red Terror Never Again

175

slept, she’d quietly composed her death haiku. Now that she could see
that her end was near, there were only two things to do. First she imagined John with his smile, his sparkling eyes, his unruly hair, and his
loving voice, as she repeated to herself her haiku:
In death I hug you
With my last breath I kiss you
Souls to meet again
Take good care of him, Jy-ying, she thought. I’m sorry Mom; so
sorry.
The final thing, and she had also been trained in this, was called the
death trance. Samurai used it when committing seppuku—ritual suicide—or after losing a good battle, while they stood weaponless,
waiting for the enemy’s final cut. With a final image of John filling her
mind, she invoked the trance, and killed all her emotions—all but a
stream of utter hatred and contempt that she hurled at the man through
her eyes. Last, she closed down her mind. She would now know nothing. She would feel nothing. But for her eyes and what was in them,
she was dead already.
She stood, head high. She waited, but that had no meaning for her.
She was simply there.
He looked her over again, and then in one step he pushed her backwards onto the bed. She fell on her back, her legs hanging off the bed,
her body under no control, the scorching fire in her almond eyes filling
her face and blazing at him. He reached down with two hands, spread
her legs, and then started taking off the work pants under his odd metallic belt.
Jy-ying
John held up the flash card that said in English Impossible. Without
hesitation, Jy-ying said, “Unmöglich.”
John was a natural linguist and in becoming a professional historian
he had learned to read and speak German, French, and Spanish. But
Russian he did not know. So, this was his turn with the flash cards, and
when the deck was finished, Jy-ying would pick it up and test him.
Amazingly, Joy was further along than either of them, and Jy-ying
thought that must be due to her being conversant in Japanese, although

176

Rudy Rummel

what that might have to do with it she had not the vaguest idea. But
they were so much the same in natural skills, and that was the only language difference; it had to be the explanation. Anyway, Joy wanted to
read Tolstoy while John and she caught up.
John lifted another flash card: rate of exchange.
“Der Wechselkurs,” Jy-ying answered.
He was about to show her another card when Prince Wei, who was
stretched out on the floor sleeping, raised his head, looked toward the
library door, and growled. He suddenly leaped up, ran through the open
library door, and stood in the ballroom growling. His ears were flat
against his head, his hair bristling, his tail down.
Jy-ying had her Taiyang .38 out in a second, and rushed after him,
stopping at the edge of the door. John was a second behind her with his
H&K in both hands; he stopped on the other side of the entrance.
Jy-ying crouched, then swung into the opening, gun pointed at the
top of the stairs.
Nothing.
John stepped out and while he covered the upstairs, she leaned over,
put her hand around Prince Wei’s muzzle, and squeezed it to quiet him.
He knew what that meant—she had made sure by training him. No
matter what else he learned, that had priority.
She kicked off her shoes, and then covered the upstairs with her gun
while John sat on the floor and quietly removed his boots. His face was
pale, his brow knitted with concern, Jy-ying knew, for Joy.
When he was ready, she signaled for him to follow her, and rushed
up the carpeted stairs to the master bedroom at the left of the stairs.
John and Prince Wei were right behind her. She flattened herself
against the wall to the right of the bedroom’s door, while John did the
same on the left. Prince Wei stood in front of the door, bristling, his
whole body rigid and leaning toward the door, ready to attack.
As soon as John was in position, she reached out and slowly turned
the doorknob, while pushing gently inward. Had there been the slightest click and movement in the door, she would have flung it open and
thrown her body inside, scanning the room with her gun. But it was
locked.
“Locked,” she lipped to John. “Watch the door.”
She edged along the wall to her own bedroom door. She slowly
checked if it was locked. The knob turned. Gun at the ready, she quietly
opened the door a crack, then wide enough to check the room with her
gun. Empty.

Red Terror Never Again

177

She rushed inside, and over to the door to the master bedroom. She
slowly tried the door. It was unlocked. She looked down at Prince Wei.
He was at her feet, staring at the door, his whole body trembling to attack. She picked him up and put him behind her feet so she wouldn’t
trip over him.
She a took a deep breath, cleared her mind, and focused all her energy on what she must do. In no more than a second or two, she became
a pure weapon with five human senses, her gun an auxiliary extension
of her hands.
Green Eyes
He stood up panting and looked back down at her body. He had
tried to avoid her eyes, her whole face. She had looked like she wanted
to tear him apart with her fingernails and chew on the bloody pieces.
He had never been looked at like that and it had gotten to him.
The first time he entered her, he’d looked at her eyes, and he lost
his erection immediately. He had covered her face with her robe and
tried again, but he lost his erection before he could come. He got it
back by playing with her body, then he tried not to think of her eyes
when he entered her a third time, but he could not get out of his mind
the image of their fiery repulsion and loathing. He had wanted to try
her mouth, and that gave him an erection when he thought of it, but
with that look she gave him he was not so stupid, even as partially
paralyzed as she was.
He realized he was running out of time. He had to get this over
with, and there was still John to find, but that would be easy. So would
eliminating him, as well.
He slid the robe off her face without looking at her eyes.
He unclasped his metallic belt so he could pull on his baggy pants,
and he put the belt back on.
He did what he had planned.
And, with a last, lingering look at her body, he headed for the hallway door.
The side door flashed open and hit its stop with a bang. The sound
blasted his reaction time into high gear; in a blur he snatched the tube
out of his belt, jerked his head toward the sound, and was about to spit
out the signal for his protective shield to activate around his body when
he saw Joy—Joy?—leaping into the room with a gun pointed at him.

178

Rudy Rummel

Something white and low to the floor hurtled toward him at a velocity too slow for the shield to stop, and he hesitated for another split
second. As he started to point his tube at it, his insides exploded, his
hands splayed open, the tube fell, and he could only gasp as the hazy
face of Joy and her smoking gun receded into darkness.
The scar. I forgot about the scar. The one on the bed does not . . .
have. . . .
He collapsed to his knees, and slowly toppled over onto his back.
Prince Wei was at his throat, ripping out flesh. But the man was already dead.
John
John heard the shots and grabbed the doorknob, twisting frantically.
Still locked. He skipped a step back and threw his shoulder at the door,
but it wouldn’t give. He kicked it—useless. He bolted down the hall
and almost fell as he skidded into Jy-ying’s room. He dashed through
the door into the master bedroom.
Someone was on the floor, blood pooling around him. Prince Wei
stood over him, looking at John with a bloody muzzle.
He saw Jy-ying over Joy’s naked body. She was doing something to
her eyes, and then she felt for a pulse. John flew onto the bed and
crawled toward Joy. He reached her head, and screamed, “JOY.
JOOOY!” He kissed her lips, her eyes, her cheeks, and whimpered,
“Please God, no.”
Jy-ying put her ear to Joy’s chest, listening for a heartbeat. In a
minute, she raised her eyes to John and shook her head.
John screamed, “No, no,” and broke down in body-wrenching sobs.
Jy-ying pulled the covers up over Joy’s body except for her head,
which John now held in his lap. He was shaking uncontrollably.
Prince Wei jumped on the bed, sniffed at Joy, and started an undulating howl.
After doing what she had to do, Jy-ying let her own control go. She
pulled Joy’s dead hand to her cheek, kissed it, and slowly slid down the
edge of the bed holding it to her lips. She moaned at her loss, at the
death of this great warrior in her prime—her death—and John’s heartbreak. Finally, the flood of tears came.

Chapter 28
November 14, 1907
John

T

hey were on their way to Bremen on the Kaiser Wilhelm II. John
felt as though he was being rocked to sleep in a cradle as the ship
rolled gently in the calm, cold Atlantic. He was stretched out on
a deck chair under two ship’s blankets. Jy-ying lay beside him on her
own chair, sound asleep under another ship’s blanket, her head moving
back and forth against the deck chair with the roll of the ship. Prince
Wei was curled up on her lap under a towel, also asleep.
His mind drifted as he stared out at the ocean swells. They were as
ready as they would ever be for this. Jy-ying now spoke passable
German and Russian, and John spoke Russian well. They had finally
got their company going and named it after Joy—the Joy Import &
Export Company.
The revolution in Poland had been overthrown by a military coup.
First Secretary Leo Jogiches of Soviet Poland and all the top officials
he appointed had been executed, and all others in the Warsaw Soviet
had been arrested. John and Jy-ying had nothing to do with it.
In Germany the nonradical social democrats, with the help of their
traditional unions, had maneuvered the Kaiser’s government into attacking the Spartacus League. Rosa Luxemburg had been assassinated
with an axe in her apartment by Freikorps killers. John and Jy-ying
also were long distance bystanders. As John said, politics took its
natural course.
Trotsky still controlled the Red Army and St. Petersburg and Moscow, but more peasant rebellions were occurring, and the success of
the White Armies, particularly those in Siberia, was growing. Soon
there would be major battles on the road to St. Petersburg.
John had made contacts through expatriate Russian democrats in
Germany and France, and was about to offer half his and Jy-ying’s
great wealth to them. Their aim was to assure, when the final victory
over Trotsky occurred, that it was the democrats and not old regime
royalists who took power.

180

Rudy Rummel

Once they turned over this massive political funding, they would
travel to St. Petersburg under forged identities as important American
and Chinese communist activists wishing to establish secret soviets in
their countries. They had been guaranteed an appointment with Trotsky by the Russian embassy in Washington. Trotsky, John was told,
was very interested in furthering revolution in both countries, and
would provide all the secret help he could. He would die from poison
within one week of their appointment, giving them plenty of time to
escape.
He sighed. Joy would have been happy at the progress they’d
made.
Joy. He could almost think of her now without the anguish, the
grief. Jy-ying had helped; after the first days, she had dampened her
own pain at losing herself to help him through his heartrending mourning. He would not have survived without her, and in fact had come
close to shooting himself that horrible evening and again the next day.
He looked over at Jy-ying again. I love her for herself, so I’ve
found out. Not because she seems so much like Joy. She is that, but she
also is different. She could never replace the real Joy, nor should she.
My love for Joy will never die, nor will my love for Jy-ying.
He had a Banks crypt built at Cypress Lawn Memorial Park, and
he’d bought a beautiful ceramic urn painted with a bouquet of flowers,
vines, and birds, all in a balanced harmony of color and shapes. He
imported it from China, knowing Joy would love it. It was also big
enough for his and Jy-ying’s ashes, when their ends came. Jy-ying had
cried when she first saw it.
He had hung Joy’s golden locket around the urn, and put a photograph of her on the wall behind it.
He pushed the heartbreak away. He could do that now.
He also was able to touch on that night, and recall what Jy-ying
had told him. He had been paralyzed with grief, but Jy-ying had collected herself and met the butler as he was coming up the stairs in his
robe. He’d been carrying a lantern, to check out the shots he’d heard,
he told Jy-ying.
She thanked the butler for his worry, and told him that John had
been shooting at rats he saw on the balcony. Coincidentally, Joy
had just then received a phone call from Western Union. An emergency telegram had arrived from her father. Her mother had died
that day, and she would be leaving the next morning for New York
to take care of her frail father, and their business. John was broken

Red Terror Never Again

181

up over her leaving, she said. When the butler looked totally confused, she admitted that she and Joy were not sisters and she would
explain in a day or two.
When the butler returned to his room, she had waited, giving in to
her tears, for the three guys to come home. Dolphy was staying at a
friend’s apartment for the evening, but she explained to Hands and Sal
what had happened. Shocked and horrified, they’d called Dolphy, who
drove back to Fort Hope immediately. They all commiserated with
John, shed their own tears, and then helped Jy-ying bury the strange
man that night.
Hands had searched him, and put in a pile all the strange equipment and devices he had secreted on him in one place or another,
especially in his odd metallic belt. They found his police badge in one
of its compartments. His name was Michael Livingston. He was born
in Toledo, Ohio, in 2303, and he was a time police officer of the
United Democracies. That’s all they could get out of the strange, three
dimensional badge. They buried it, his belt, and all his devices and
clothes with him. Two days later, when Jy-ying checked, the grave
was open and empty.
The day after Joy’s murder, Jy-ying pretended she was Joy, and
dressed in black clothes the guys had hurriedly bought downtown.
She wore a black mourning hat with a black veil pulled down over
her face. To be sure she was not recognized, she had heavily powdered her scar.
When she said a quick good-bye to the staff, the heavy sadness in
her voice was no act. When her voice dropped to a stuttering whimper,
Hands repeated on her behalf what she had told the butler.
Hands, who took over the male role in the household until John recovered, explained to all that John’s devastated and broken look was
the result of a drinking binge he’d embarked on when he found out
about Joy leaving. He was afraid it was for good, Hands explained.
Jy-ying’s travel trunk that the three guys had carried out to the
waiting carriage had Joy’s body in it, wrapped in canvas.
Jy-ying paid thousands to have Joy’s body cremated. She played
the role of an immigrant Chinese princess, and Joy was her royal sister
who’d died mysteriously in her sleep. She haughtily explained that she
was not going to have some white American coroner mess around with
her sister’s body, and so she lacked a death certificate.
Jy-ying knew the servants were mystified about Jy-ying staying
while her sister Joy returned to the east to be by their father’s side at

182

Rudy Rummel

their mother’s funeral. She’d convened the staff and confessed to them
her lie about being Joy’s sister. She explained that was the simplest
way of handling their remarkable likeness. She told them she worked
for John’s business because of her knowledge of China and its languages, and also acted as a stand-in for Joy when needed. She left that
unexplained.
John let his head fall back against the deck chair and closed his eyes.
Each day after that day, and “that day” it would always be, cost Jyying. She ate little, her eyes seemed to sink into her face, and she
stopped both jogging and her martial arts practice. He knew she
stopped praying also. Each evening they cried together, he until there
were no more tears to shed. But she always had the caressing hand, the
soft, sympathetic tone, the commiserating hug for him.
She slowly came out of it in a month. He wasn’t able to put the
worst of it behind him until before this trip abroad.
He opened his eyes briefly to look over at her again. Yes, he was
sure, she’d gotten him through it.
The rocking was getting to him; he was falling asleep. It was so
warm under the blanket, the rocking so gentle. So . . . . A breeze caressed his cheek.

aaa
“Hello, dearest.”
“Joy! I don’t believe it. Is that really you, baby?”
“Yes, dearest, I came to visit you. That was me touching your cheek.”
“I’m dreaming this, aren’t I.”
“Maybe, but does it matter?”
“No. I don’t see you; where are you?”
“Here I am,” and she appeared in her Levis and gray sweatshirt,
with her red headband, and her hair in one long pigtail.
“Strange that you should appear like that. I would have preferred
you dressed in that tight blouse, golden choker, and taupe skirt you
wore when you first came to my faculty office. That’s when you
vamped me.”
“That wasn’t really me, sweetheart. This is me.”
“Oh, so you finally admit you were dressed to vamp me.”
“Yes, dearest, and I couldn’t be happier as a result.”
“I miss you, baby. I want our souls to be together again, as they
were when you were . . . here.”

Red Terror Never Again

183

“They will be. That will come. And then there will no longer be
two of me, but only one.”
“Jy-ying saved my life, you know.”
“I know. She loves you, John, as I do.”
“I love her too. But you and I are special. Our first days together,
your training of me, our first lovemaking, our fights, our time travel
together, finding the message—all that is you and me. It’s special, and
that she cannot share.”
“I know.”
“Is there a way I can call on you when I need you, baby? A secret
code of some kind?”
“No, that’s not needed. I am always here, in your heart as you are
in mine. We can never be separated.”
“But, can I call on you?”
“You do when you think of me, my dearest.” Joy smiled and tilted
her head. “I have one favor to ask of you, my darling.”
“Anything.”
“Please treat Jy-ying as you treated me. You’re too serious with
her. No banter. None of your awful humor. None of your boring lectures. No precious endearments. It’s as though the real you died with
me, and all that remains is a stuffy companion. You haven’t made love
to her since my body’s death, have you.”
“No.”
“Dearest, she is me. Treat her so.”
“I cannot.”
“Why?”
“My heart did die with you.”
“Please, John, I live through her. Think of that. I live through her.
Now be yourself, John, or I’ll have to rip off your arm and beat you
over the head with the bloody stump.”
“You and what army?” John hesitated, then smiled and said, “I
can’t get into the spirit.”
“That’s the spirit. Take care, my love.”

aaa
John woke up, stretched, looked over at Jy-ying. She was awake
and looking at him, her eyes reflecting the sunlight off the ocean. And
something else.

184

Rudy Rummel

He reached out and took her hand, and for some reason he was the
happiest he had been since that day. He felt full of love for this
woman, and felt like showing it.
“I love you,” he told her. “Let’s go to our cabin. I want to show
you how much.”
Jy-ying looked at him askance. “Yes, my man, that is exactly what
I had in mind.”
“Of course you would, sweetheart.” He leered at her. “What redblooded, beautiful woman wouldn’t?”
Jy-ying was startled. She stared at him wide-eyed for a moment,
and then the tears started flowing from her eyes. She wiped at them
with her hands, and said with a happy grin, “Can it, John.”

Epilogue
2004
Roosevelt College, San Francisco
“Introduction to Modern World History”

C

ompleting her class segment on the Russian Revolution of 1905–
1907, Professor Shirley Becker pointed out that with the death of
Trotsky, the White Armies were able to defeat a dispirited Red
Army in the famous battle of Tocho. St. Petersburg then lay open to the
victorious White Army led by General Rayevsky and a military dictatorship followed. One year later, that was overthrown from below by a
democratic rebellion throughout Russia.
A male student put up his hand, and when the teacher called on
him, he said, “I read that a woman did him in.”
“A woman?” she asked, frowning.
“Yes, I read that here.” He waved at a cheap copy of Outline of
Modern Russian History on his desk. “It says that she was his Korean
mistress, Jan Ping. Trotsky wrote her love letters. She was a Korean
spy and assassinated him.”
The teacher was silent for maybe ten seconds. She had not looked
at the outline, and distrusted it. It was not on her bibliography for the
class. She finally responded, “No, she didn’t do it. Her secret British
lover Ron Hanks did. Then they both disappeared, and historians can
find no trace of them since. It is rumored that they were caught in Siberia while fleeing to Korea, and executed.”
One of the brightest students in the class put up his hand. She nodded to him and he held up a thin book. “My uncle died and in his
possessions my father found this old book. I’ve looked at it and wonder if you’ve read it. It’s got crazy stuff in it. The title is Communist
Victory and Defeat 1936–1991.”
“Oh yes. That book became famous as one of the first alternative
future history novels, and famous for the absurdity of Hitler’s imagination in writing it. It has no relationship to history, but it is interesting
for the kind of crazy universes that people can imagine, if they really
let their minds go. And, I should add, when they forget what we have
learned from history as well. Read it just for fun.

186

Rudy Rummel

“Anyway, class, read Chapter Fourteen in your anthology about
the globalization of democracy and peace in the early twentieth century. It’s a classic by John Banks, an independent millionaire-scholar
of the 1930s. Class dismissed.”

Afterword

T

he attentive reader of more than one of these novels in this series
may have noticed a few inconsistencies. I know they are there,
but what am I to do? We know so little of this vast universe of
which our minute planet and its sun are but one of billions of stars in
our galaxy, itself one of billions of galaxies in our universe. We cannot
even pride ourselves in this universe of matching the size of a bacterium on a slide in our everyday world. Nor can we assume that our
knowledge of the universe is any greater than our size in it.
Thus, an infinitude of things must go on in this universe that are not
only incredibly beyond our understanding, but of which we have no
knowledge whatsoever. And here we are, with less than bacteriumsized knowledge, sending people back in time, creating new universes,
and monkeying with the nature of the universe. That things happen to
our intrepid time travelers that look like inconsistencies from one novel
to another are but inexplicable workings of the universe. I could try to
impose our mini-knowledge on all this and override these inconsistencies; or I could say that, in sending people through time, some
anomalies occur in their atomic restructuring in the past; or I could say
there is a burp in the universe. But we really don’t know. All we can do
is live with what the characters believe is really them when their transition to a new time is complete.
Even that which we will all experience, death, is an unknown. True,
we can say our physical body dies, but what of our soul, our spirit, that
which is the conscious “me”? Does it survive in some way? Could dead
Joy brush her lover’s cheek as a breeze, and ask a favor of him? It
would be arrogant and far beyond our itty-bitty knowledge in this
boundless universe to say, “It cannot be.” Let’s be honest. We don’t
know.
Then again, Joy did appear, didn’t she?

aaa
On more worldly affairs, in Chapter 1 and elsewhere I mention that
Stalin was an Okhrana agent provocateur who reported to the Okhrana
on revolutionary activities, but he also was a criminal who stole money
and participated in murder. This is almost heretical in some quarters,

188

Rudy Rummel

and in any case, virtually unknown among many historians. The best
source on this is Roman Blackman, The Secret File of Joseph Stalin: A
Hidden Life (London: Franck Cass, 2001).
Much of what has been described about the Bloody Sunday massacre on January 22 (new calendar) actually happened. Bloody Sunday
was not as bloody as portrayed here for the purposes of the fictional
project of Green Eyes. But in reality, czarist troops at various intersections and bridges and at the square in front of the Winter Palace did
open fire on peaceful demonstrators, who carried no weapons and were
intent only on an appeal to “their father,” Czar Nicholas, for reforms,
not revolution. And cavalry and Cossacks with whips and sabers
swinging were unleashed on them (there was no use of Maxim machine
guns). The death toll has never been established, but according to various reports, it may have been between 150 and 200 killed, with
between 800 and 1,000 casualties overall.
The assassinations, strikes, and mutinies described before and after Bloody Sunday actually occurred (except for Witte’s
assassination; he was appointed Russian premier in October of 1905
and resigned in disgust in April, 1906, at the czar’s refusal to implement more liberal policies; he died in 1915). Russia was in a
revolutionary state, and what saved the monarchy at that time were
the reforms initiated by Witte in the face of the czar’s increasing opposition. They damped the revolutionary spirit of the workers and
liberals, and the harsh crackdown on radical revolutionaries by Witte
and Interior Minister Stolypin, and especially by Stolypin when he
was appointed premier in July, 1906.
The military largely remained loyal to the czar, and in December of
1905 Trotsky and the whole St. Petersburg Soviet were arrested. Trotsky was tried in the autumn of 1906, and sentenced to life deportation
to Siberia.
Nonetheless, in this 1905 revolution the Bolsheviks learned much.
When the opportunity came in 1917 with nationwide revolutionary unrest over the lack of deep reforms, the heavy losses in World War I, the
resulting collapse of the Romanov monarchy, and its succession by a
weak social democratic government, the Bolsheviks struck. And succeeded.
On Gapon and Bloody Sunday, there are a number of studies available, many by Marxists and hardly objective. Among the best, and one
I recommend is Walter Sablinsky, The Road to Bloody Sunday: Father

Red Terror Never Again

189

Gapon and the St. Petersburg Massacre of 1905 (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1976). If you prefer an excellent fictionalized
account, there is Emily Hanlon’s Petersburg (New York: Ivy Books,
1988).
The Red Terror, Civil War, Bread War, and famine following the
fictional successful 1905 Bolshevik Revolution described in Chapter 11
actually occurred after the 1917 Revolution. My account in John’s
words follows very closely the actual history of this bloody period.
Some writers have focused on Stalin’s control of the Soviet Union from 1928 to his death in 1953 as the bloodiest period of
communist rule over the Soviet Union. True, Stalin was a megamurdering tyrant under whom perhaps 43 million people were murdered
(the figure often given is 20 million, but this ignores those murdered
by Stalin during World War II and up to 1953). But Lenin should not
be ignored as he is. Yes, John is correct. Incredible as the number is,
during Lenin’s absolute dictatorship from 1917 to 1922, the years of
the Red Terror, Civil War, and famine, overall about 9.4 million
Russians died, were killed in battle, or were murdered—more than
died in the preceding World War I. If Lenin had stayed in power as
long as had Stalin, he might well have killed as many if not more
people.
Few would deny any longer that wherever it’s been in power,
communism—Marxism-Leninism and its variants—has meant in practice bloody terrorism, deadly purges, lethal gulags and forced labor,
fatal deportations, man-made famines, extrajudicial executions and
show trials, and genocide. It is also widely known that as a result, millions of innocent people have been murdered in cold blood. Yet,
amazingly, there has been virtually no concentrated statistical work on
what this total might be.
In my own research on this (see my Statistics of Democide at
www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/NOTE5.HTM, and my book Death By
Government [New Jersey: Transaction Publishers, 1994]), I have tried
to get some quantitative understanding of the cost of communism, especially as compared to those murdered by other types of regimes. Of
course, any figures can only be rough approximations. Even were we to
have total access to all communist archives, we still would not be able
to calculate precisely how many the communists murdered. Consider
that even in spite of the archival statistics and detailed reports of survivors, the best experts still disagree by over 40 percent on the total
number of Jews killed by the Nazis. We cannot expect anything near

190

Rudy Rummel

this accuracy for the victims of communism. We can, however, get a
probable order of magnitude and a relative approximation of these
deaths within a most likely range.
With this understood, the Soviet Union appears the greatest megamurderer of all, apparently killing nearly 61,000,000 people. Stalin
himself is responsible for almost 43,000,000 of these, as mentioned.
Most of the deaths, perhaps around 39,000,000 of them, are due to lethal forced labor in gulags, and during transit to them. Communist
China up to 1987, but mainly from 1949 through the cultural revolution, which alone may have seen over 1,000,000 murdered, is the
second worst megamurderer with 39,000,000 killed. Then there are the
lesser megamurderers, such as North Korea (1,663,000) and Tito’s
Yugoslavia (1,072,000).
Obviously the population that is available to kill will make a big
difference in the total democide, and thus the annual percentage rate
of democide is revealing. By far, the most deadly of all communist
countries has been Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge. Pol Pot and
his crew likely killed some 2,000,000 Cambodians out of a population of around 7,000,000 from April, 1975, through December, 1978.
This is an annual murder rate of over 8 percent of the population; the
odds of an average Cambodian surviving Pol Pot’s rule were slightly
over 2 to 1.
In sum, the communists probably have murdered something like
110,000,000, or nearly two-thirds of the nearly 170,000,000 killed by
all governments, quasi-governments, and guerrillas from 1900 to 1987.
Of course, the world total itself is shocking. It is several times the
38,000,000 battle-dead killed in all of the last century’s international
and domestic wars. Yet the probable number of murders by the Soviet
Union alone—one communist country—far surpasses this cost of war.
And the murders of communist China almost equal it.
How were all these people killed by communists? Many of the
deaths were due to terrorism like the Red Terror—that is, the murder of
specific individuals by assassination, extrajudicial executions, torture,
beatings, and such. Many were massacred, killed indiscriminately en
masse by soldiers machine-gunning demonstrators, or entering a village
and killing all of its inhabitants. Much genocide, or the killing of people because of their ethnicity, race, religion, or language, was carried
out. Many more were murdered in deportations—forced mass transportation to distant regions, and the resulting deaths from starvation or

Red Terror Never Again

191

exposure. And there was the democidal famine, which was purposely
caused or aggravated by a communist government or which was knowingly ignored, and aid to its victims withheld.
Then there was the particularly deadly communist forced labor. It
not only accounts for most deaths under communism, but is close to the
world total, which also includes colonial forced labor deaths (as in the
German, Portuguese, and Spanish colonies). Communists also committed genocide, to be sure, but only nearly half of the world total.
Communists even used a quota system. Top officials would order local
officials to kill a certain number of “enemies of the people,” “rightists,”
or “tyrants.”
How can we understand all this killing by communists? It is the
marriage of an absolutist ideology with absolute power. Communists
believed that they knew the truth, absolutely. They believed that they
knew through Marxism what would bring about the greatest human
welfare and happiness. And they believed that power, the dictatorship
of the proletariat, must be used to tear down the old feudal or capitalist
order and rebuild society and culture to realize this utopia. Nothing
must stand in the way of its achievement. Government—the Communist Party—was thus above any law. All institutions, cultural norms,
traditions, and sentiments were expendable. And the people were the
lumber and bricks to be used in building the new world.
Constructing this utopia was seen as a war on poverty, exploitation,
imperialism, and inequality. And for the greater good, as in a real war,
people are killed. And thus this war for the communist utopia had its
necessary enemy casualties—the clergy, the rich, the bourgeoisie, capitalists, wreckers, counterrevolutionaries, rightists, tyrants, landlords,
and noncombatants that unfortunately got caught in the battle. In a war
millions may die, but the cause may be well justified, as in the defeat of
Hitler and an utterly racist Nazism. And to many communists, the cause
of a communist utopia was such as to justify all the deaths, just as it
was for the fictional Green Eyes.
The irony of this is that communism in practice, even after decades
of total control, did not improve the lot of the average person; it usually
made living conditions worse than those before the revolution. It is not
by chance that the greatest famines have occurred within the Soviet Union (about 5,000,000 dead during 1921–23 and 7,000,000 from 1932–
3) and communist China (about 27,000,000 dead from 1959–61). In
total, almost 55,000,000 people died in various communist famines and
associated diseases, a little over 10,000,000 of them from democidal

192

Rudy Rummel

famine. This is as though the total population of Turkey, Iran, or Thailand had been completely wiped out. And that something like
35,000,000 people fled communist countries as refugees is comparable
to the countries of Argentina or Columbia being totally emptied of all
their people. This was an unparalleled vote against the utopian pretensions of Marxism-Leninism.
But communists could not be wrong. After all, their knowledge was
scientific, based on historical materialism, an understanding of the dialectical process in nature and human society, and a materialist (and thus
realistic) view of nature. Marx had shown empirically where society
had been and why, and he and his interpreters proved that it was destined for a communist end. No one could prevent this, and standing in
the way would only delay it at the cost of more human misery. Those
who disagreed with this world view and even with some of the proper
interpretations of Marx and Lenin were, without a scintilla of doubt,
wrong. After all, did not Marx or Lenin or Stalin or Mao say that . . . .
In other words, communism was like a fanatical religion. It had its revealed text and chief interpreters. It had its priests and their ritualistic
prose with all the answers. It had a heaven, and the proper behavior to
reach it. It had its appeal to faith. And it had its crusade against nonbelievers.
What made this secular religion so utterly lethal was its seizure of
all the state’s instruments of force and coercion and their immediate use
to destroy or control all independent sources of power, such as the
church, the professions, private businesses, schools, and, of course, the
family.
But communism does not stand alone in such mass murder. We do
have the example of Nazi Germany, which may have itself murdered
some 20,000,000 Jews, Poles, Ukrainians, Russians, Yugoslavs,
Frenchmen, and other nationalities. Then there is the fascist Nationalist
government of China under Chiang Kai-shek, which murdered nearly
10,000,000 Chinese from 1928 to 1949, and the fascist Japanese militarists who murdered almost 6,000,000 Chinese, Indonesians,
Indochinese, Koreans, Filipinos, and others during World War II.
And then we have the 1,000,000 or more Bengalis and Hindus
killed in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) in 1971 by the Pakistan military. Nor should we forget the mass expulsion of ethnic Germans and
German citizens from Eastern Europe at the end of World War II, particularly by the Polish government as it seized the German Eastern
Territories, killing perhaps over 1,000,000 of them. Nor should we ig-

Red Terror Never Again

193

nore the estimated 2,000,000 deaths in Mexico from 1900 to 1920,
many of those poor Indians and peasants killed by forced labor on barbaric haciendas. One could go on and on to detail various kinds of
noncommunist democide, as I have done in part in previous novels of
this series.
But what connects them all is this. As a government’s power is
more unrestrained, as its power reaches into all the corners of culture
and society, and as it becomes less democratic, then the more likely it is
to kill its own citizens. There is more than a correlation here. As totalitarian power increases, democide multiplies until it curves sharply
upward when totalitarianism is near absolute. As a governing elite has
the power to do whatever it wants, whether to satisfy its most personal
desires, to pursue what it believes is right and true, it may do so whatever the cost in lives. In this case power is the necessary condition for
mass murder. Once an elite has it, other causes and conditions can operate to bring about the immediate genocide, terrorism, massacres, or
whatever killing an elite feels is warranted.
Finally, at the extreme of totalitarian power we have the greatest
extreme of democide. Communist governments have almost without
exception wielded the most absolute power and their greatest killing
(such as during Stalin’s reign or the height of Mao’s power) has taken
place when they have been in their own history most totalitarian. As
most communist governments underwent increasing liberalization and a
loosening of centralized power in the 1960s through the 1980s, the pace
of killing dropped off sharply.
Communism has been the greatest social engineering experiment
humanity has seen. It failed utterly and in doing so it killed over
100,000,000 men, women, and children, not to mention the nearly
30,000,000 subjects who died in its often aggressive wars and the rebellions it provoked. But there is a larger lesson to be learned from this
horrendous sacrifice to one ideology. That is that no one can be trusted
with power. The more power the center has to impose the beliefs of an
ideological or religious elite or impose the whims of a dictator, the
more likely human lives are to be sacrificed. This is but one reason, but
perhaps the most important one, for fostering liberal democracy.
The Society knew that, as John Banks did. And that is why they
sent John and Joy back to 1906 to . . . well, you know the story. But,
yet, not all of it.

