NEVER AGAIN Book 2

NUCLEAR

HOLOCAUST

NEVER AGAIN

R.J. RUMMEL

Llumina Press

Copyright 2004 R.J. Rummel
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic or mechanical, including
photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from both the copyright owner and the publisher.
Requests for permission to make copies of any part of this work should be
mailed to Permissions Department, Llumina Press, PO Box 772246, Coral
Springs, FL 33077-2246
ISBN: 1-59526-308-X -- 1-59526-307-1
Printed in the United States of America by Llumina Press

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rummel, R. J. (Rudolph J.), 1932Nuclear holocaust not again / R.J. Rummel.
p. cm.
ISBN 1-59526-308-X (alk. paper) -- ISBN 1-59526-307-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Nuclear warfare--Fiction. I. Title.
PS3568.U447N83 2004
813'.6--dc22
2003027676

Praise for books by Nobel Peace Prize finalist

R. J. Rummel
"26th in a Random House poll on the best nonfiction book of the 20th Century."
Random House (Modern Library)
". . . the most important .. . in the history of international relations."
John Norton Moore, Professor of Law and
Director, Center for National Security Law, former
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the U. S. Institute of Peace
". . . among the most exciting . . . in years."
Jim Powell
". . . most comprehensive . . . I have ever encountered . . . illuminating . . . ."
Storm Russell
"One more home run . . . ."
Bruce Russett, Professor of International Relations
". . . has profoundly affected my political and social views."
Lurner B. Williams
". . . truly brilliant . . . ought to be mandatory reading."
Robert F. Turner, Professor of Law,
former President of U.S. Institute of Peace
". . . highly recommend . . . ."
Cutting Edge
"We all walk a little taller by climbing on the shoulders of Rummel's work."
Irving Louis Horowitz, Professor Of Sociology.
". . . everyone in leadership should read and understand . . . ."
DivinePrinciple.com

". . .exciting . . . pushes aside all the theories, propaganda, and wishful thinking . . . . "
www.alphane.com
" . . . world's foremost authority on the phenomenon of 'democide.'"
American Opinion Publishing
". . . excellent . . . ."
Brian Carnell
". . . bound to be become a standard work . . . . "
James Lee Ray, Professor of Political Science
". . . major intellectual accomplishment . . .will be cited far into the next century"
Jack Vincent, Professor of Political Science."
". . . most important . . . required reading . . . . "
thewizardofuz (Amazon.com)
". . . valuable perspective . . . . "
R.W. Rasband
". . . offers a desperately needed perspective . . . . "
Andrew Johnstone
". . . eloquent . . . very important . . . . "
Doug Vaughn
". . . should be required reading . . .shocking and sobering . . . . "
Sugi Sorensen

Relevant books by R.J. Rummel
Understanding Conflict and War (five volumes)
Lethal Politics: Soviet Genocide and Mass Murder
since 1917
China’s Bloody Century: Genocide and Mass Murder
since 1900
Democide: Nazi Genocide and Mass Murder
Death By Government
Statistics of Democide
Power Kills: Democracy as a Method of Nonviolence
Saving Lives, Enriching Life: Freedom as a Right
and a Moral Good (online book)

To the unknown Joys and Johns
of this universe that fight and die
so that others may live in freedom

Acknowledgements
I owe many thanks to the thorough evaluation, many helpful suggestions, and careful editing of Marg Gilks. Whatever strengths this
book has I owe to her. As with Book 1, I also am indebted to the many
visitors to my website at www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/ who commented
on or questioned the material there. They often had an impact on this
novel.
And as always and foremost, is my wife Grace. She made this novel
and series possible. Without her, I could not have written it. Another
kiss, sweetheart.
To be sure, this is a book of fiction. Although some characters may
in name and position bear a striking resemblance to historical figures,
they are fictional. Nonetheless, I must say that whatever errors of fictional facts exist are mine, and wholly mine.

Foreword
As I pointed out in the foreword to War and Democide, Never
Again, Book 1 in this Never Again series, love is one of our greatest
mysteries and the greatest reward that we can receive and give others.
Here I revisit the story of the love between a man and a woman, and
their love for humanity, and continue my effort to uncover a subversive, insidious, and almost invisible force in human relations. This is
the enemy of love and the struggle between the two pervades this book.
What is it? If you read Book 1, you will know. You can start here
with your eyes open, unlike the lovers thrust by me, a merciless author,
back in time again. But, this time, not alone.
R.J. Rummel
www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/

Chapter 1
New York
October 7, 1994, New Universe

B

ehind Lora, a sudden, blazing-white light cast everything into stark
black and white, like a photographic negative. “What the . . . ” Lora
blurted, just before a thunderous blast pushed her into the earth.
She shuddered, cringed from it. The sound hammered her for seconds,
then diminished like thunder reverberating in distant mountains; it lessened further into a distant crackling, breaking, tearing, clanging. Finally
it disappeared altogether, leaving a vacuum of sound, as though all
noise had been sucked into the earth. All were stony silent—birds, insects, cars; no tree branch rustled, no voices called.
More seconds. She heard an approaching roar. Then, in a flurry of
leaves, broken branches, shingles, and small rocks, a hot windstorm
picked her up like a doll in a child’s hand and hurled her against a tree
trunk. All around, a maelstrom of banging, thudding, shattering, falling
things exploded in her ears. Stunned, the breath knocked out of her,
Lora gasped for air, tried to focus her eyes, tried to stop the world from
spinning.
A more profound stillness settled around her.
I’m dead.
No, Lora’s body screamed: that thudding was her heart; that salty
iron taste her blood; that grit on her lips, that smell, was the dirt covering her face. As if proving further her survival, excruciating pain
blasted her mind, and she let out an involuntary screech.
Her mind struggled against the shock and pain to gain control over
her body. She had to discover what had just happened. The world
steadied, her eyes focused, but nothing made any more sense than an
abstract painting of complex and intertwined lines, patches of color,
gray images, black holes. Then, as a strange image suddenly clicks into
an obvious picture, she realized her head was upside down and, through
the tangled branches of a shrub, she was watching an angry, roiling, red
and black mushroom cloud climbing above Manhattan to blacken the
morning sky.

2

R.J. Rummel

Sound gave up its paralysis in an eruption of distant screams, cries,
howling dogs, the metallic crunch of shattered cars, and breaking
things. Almost with regret, Lora recovered full consciousness. She was
sprawled upside down in a twig dogwood shrub with one leg against an
oak tree, her dress suit bunched around her chest, and her shoes gone.
Asteroid, it’s an asteroid. Its hit New York. It can’t be anything
else. After all, her mind spun out as if to defy the horror emerging in
her mind and the pain and nausea of her body, Joy and John eliminated
major international wars—against all odds, they succeeded. Their
peace has lasted for almost a century.
My God, this can’t be an attack.
Lora tried to reorient herself. Mark and I had breakfast . . . about
9:15 we locked our apartment . . . headed for our Institute in Manhattan . . . garage being remodeled . . . car parked on Graham Street . . .
walking toward the car . . . .
MARK! Where’s Mark?
She tried to right herself, and gasped from another rush of pain. Her
right arm was twisted behind her. As she bent and turned to get at her
arm, she screamed. Her eyes teared, and she bit her lip. It felt like
somebody was cutting the muscles of her arm out with a dull, red-hot
knife.
Gritting her teeth, Lora rotated her body to disentangle herself from
the branches of the bush. Lying on her back, she pushed her body out
of the bushes with her legs. Panting, nauseated, she sat up and stared at
her right arm. It was broken near the elbow, the lower ulna and radius
bones twisted backwards at a right angle. White bones streaked with
blood protruded.
I can’t wait for help. A catastrophe has happened. I’ve got to find
Mark.
She jerked her eyes from street, to houses, to street, to trees. She finally located Mark leaning against a tree. Christ, his right arm can’t
bend at that angle.
“Mark. Mark! Can you hear me?”
He’s moving. He’s alive.
Lora gritted her teeth, gripped the broken segment of her arm, and
twisted. Agony made her squeal through her teeth. She straightened her
broken arm with her left hand. Dizzy, near vomiting, she held it gingerly as she struggled to her knees, then staggered to her feet. She stood
swaying. Finally she checked her body for more injuries; saw scratches
and punctures, but they weren’t bleeding much.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

3

“Nothing serious,” she told herself, needing to hear a voice. “Just
hold the arm out from your body.” She spit blood and probed with her
tongue—she’d bitten the inside of her lower lip.
She needed all her strength to lurch toward Mark. “Sweetheart,” she
called, “can you move? We’ve got to get to a hospital.”
Blood dripped from a cut on his cheek. Mark grimaced and grunted
as he struggled to his feet. He stood rocking back and forth like a
drunken sailor. With his good left hand he felt around his ribs, and
yelped. “Besides my arm,” he moaned, “I think some ribs broke.”
Letting his broken arm hang, he shuffled over to her and put out his
good hand to help support her. His eyes opened wide when he saw her
broken arm. “Jesus, “ he exclaimed, “your arm. I’ve got to get you to a
hospital.”
Lora leaned against him, happy that they both had survived whatever had happened. She rested her head on his shoulder for a moment
to calm herself, then lifted it and looked around for other survivors. No
one had been nearby, this late in the morning, and there had been little
traffic on their narrow road.
“Our Lux looks okay,” Mark said.
The whirlwind had blown it backwards into a telephone pole, but
Lora could see no serious damage. As they helped each other toward it,
she realized that snow-like grit and ash was falling from the towering
black and gray mushroom cloud that now loomed over them. Already it
coated everything. What had been a clear, sunny day was now dim and
hazy, blanketed in a gray fog. They pulled several broken branches off
the car, and Mark managed to brush the debris and fallout from the
windshield with his good hand.
Lora suddenly exclaimed, “My purse. What happened to my
purse?”
Letting her broken arm hang around the protruding bone and trying
to ignore the pain, she limped in her torn stockings toward the tree she
had been thrown against, and saw her purse and shoes had been flung
nearby. She quickly shoved her feet into her shoes and as she returned
to the car with her purse, she heard frantic whining. She spied a small
terrier, its tail between its legs and ears flat against its head, running
into one object after another. Each time it fell, got up, and tried a new
direction. It was bleeding from the mouth.
Lora pointed at the terrier with her good hand. “The poor thing
can’t see,” she said in a voice that reflected the dog’s anguish.
The terrier heard her voice. It headed toward her, but after another
crash and tumble, she pleaded, “Here. Come, boy.” The terrier stopped

4

R.J. Rummel

about four feet away, trembling, and turned its gaze blindly in her direction. She opened the car door with her good hand, limped over to the
terrier, and picked him up by the scruff. She put him on the floor of the
car and commanded, “Stay.”
Lora laboriously climbed into the car, then rested her broken arm
on her lap and her head on the dash. She took deep breaths to steady
herself. She heard Mark cry out a couple of times and looked up with
fear. He was trying to get his keys from his right pants pocket.
“I’ll help you, “ Lora yelled.
Mark shook his head.
He couldn’t get the fingers of his left hand deeply enough into his
right pocket. Gritting his teeth against the pain from his ribs, he bent
over and with his left hand pushed up on the pocket under the keys, jiggling them upwards within reach. He raised his right leg to jam the
keys against his pants, balanced himself by putting his right foot on the
car, then pulled the keys out with a grunt.
Mark carefully maneuvered into the driver’s seat, but his broken
ribs kept him from sitting straight. “Okay, here,” he rasped, trying to
angle his body toward her so he could hand her the keys. “I can’t start
the car.”
She inserted the ignition key, started the car, and turned on the
windshield wipers. “Can you steer?”
“Yes. But you’ve got to change gears.”
Lora gripped the gearshift with her left hand. “I can. Just yell
‘shift,’ and I will. This is one time I’m sorry we didn’t get a car with an
automatic transmission.”
Mark headed for Saint Catherine’s Hospital in Brooklyn, a few
miles away. The terrier remained huddled at her feet, shaking. It moved
its head, trying to look around with its sightless eyes. Blood caked
around its muzzle.
How sad, Lora thought. It doesn’t know what’s going on. Then it
struck her—Neither do we.
Aside from her first confused thought about an asteroid, she had not
thought beyond her concern for Mark, the terrier, and her throbbing
pain. Now it hit her like a punch in the face. Almost incoherently, she
yelled, “My God, Mark. Jesus. It wasn’t an asteroid. It was a nuclear
bomb. We’ve been attacked with a nuclear bomb.”
“Shit. Shit.” Mark almost drove into a three-car pileup in an intersection. “Jesus Christ, a nuclear bomb! Who could do this?”
Lora moaned, “Goddam, I’m too messed up to even guess who did
it. It has to be the worst monster that ever lived.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

5

Mark scowled and his mouth compressed into a thin, tight line. She
immediately regretted distracting him, and pointed to the road. As
calmly as she could, she said, “First, to the hospital.” She saw him try
to compose himself and refocus on getting them there.
Mark threaded their car around numerous stalled vehicles, accidents, and downed trees that blocked the streets, several times
detouring through gas stations, parking lots, and front yards. They
made it to St. Catherine’s before the flood of injured reached it, although the ambulances, police vehicles, and walking injured crammed
the emergency entrance. Mark parked on the grass in a remote corner of
the grounds so that vehicles converging on the hospital would not block
their car.
The terrier no longer trembled, and Lora thought it best to leave
him in the car. She petted and stroked him with her good hand and told
him, “You be a good boy, now. We’ll be back.”
The hospital was on the fringe of the mushroom cloud, which was
dissipating in the light wind. In its place grew an uglier cloud of solidlooking black and gray smoke from the thousands of fires ignited by
the nuclear blast. As Lora limped with Mark toward the hospital, she
saw virtually no fallout on the ground and parked cars. In contrast to
what she knew must have occurred in Manhattan, the hospital building
stood untouched. The imposing structure was a mishmash of architecture, the result of years of added extensions. The old, central three-story
brownstone building remained, though, and looking toward it with her
back to Manhattan, Lora thought it looked like a church in calm repose
against a cloudless blue sky. The air here smelled fresh and felt crisp.
To handle the emergency load, the hospital had augmented its staff
with every available doctor and nurse, but fortunately, the deluge of
human misery had yet to arrive. Frightened doctors and nurses gave
Mark and Lora emergency medical treatment within a half hour. Doctors set their broken arms, put them in casts, and tightly taped Mark’s
ribs. Because of her protruding bones, a doctor wanted to give Lora a
general anesthetic before working on it, but she refused.
“Give me a local and do what you can to get me through the next
couple of weeks,” she told him. “I’ll have surgery later, if need be.”
Both required many stitches, and afterward they filled prescriptions
for pain and antibacterial drugs at the hospital pharmacy.
Worried, their fear showing, all the medical personnel wanted to
know what had happened. Mark and Lora could do no more than tell
them that the explosion was probably a nuclear bomb, and that they soon
would be overwhelmed with patients injured in every conceivable way.

6

R.J. Rummel

An officious nurse came around with a clipboard and asked them to
fill out an information sheet. She seemed oblivious to the horror around
her.
“Sorry,” Mark said, “neither of us can write.” He indicated their
broken arms. “What do you want to know?”
“Names?”
Lora answered, “Lora Joy Reeves and Mark John Docker.”
“Work?”
She responded, “I’m president and owner of the Joy Phim Democratic Peace Institute, and Mark is my assistant and translator. And my
husband.”
The nurse continued to ask for personal, medical, and insurance information until Lora put a stop to it. “We have to leave. I’m sorry, but
we’re running out of time.”
“But—”
Mark interrupted. “You have our telephone number. Give us a call
if you need more information.”
The nurse nodded, clasped her clipboard to her chest, and said over
her shoulder as she walked off, “Have a good day.”
Before leaving, Lora used the toilet. She emerged from the bathroom shaking and chilled with shock. She had dared peek at herself in
the bathroom mirror. Proud of a beauty that in her late forties had only
turned elegant, she now resembled an old woman. Her normally dark
brown hair was matted and dirty, with grayish clumps and strands curling outward at odd angles. The cheek she had bitten was swollen, her
lips puffy, her eyes red-rimmed and bloodshot. A witch out of a horror
movie looks good by comparison, she thought ruefully, regarding the
patches of antibacterial ointment and a large bandage that seemed to
accentuate the lines in her face.
Feeling as if she was about to vomit, she stood at the entrance to the
bathroom and tried to soothe her emotions. For the first time since the
catastrophe, she took a real look at Mark. He appeared much worse
than she did. She had always admired his good looks and strong body,
and his prematurely gray hair had only added to his attractiveness. Now
he couldn’t stand straight, his shoulders were rounded, and his face reflected all his suffering. Somehow he had lost a patch of hair, and one
eyelid drooped in a face gray and haggard. There was a large patch
bandage on his cheek. With his disheveled appearance and torn and
dirty clothes, he looked like an unwashed, homeless druggie. That his
one arm hung in a sling didn’t help.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

7

Seeing her distraught look, Mark put his good arm around her
shoulder in spite of his painful ribs, kissed her on the forehead, and
brushed her cheeks with his lips. “We survived, precious. We’re alive. I
couldn’t bear losing you. I love you.”
Lora took his hand, kissed it, and looked up into his eyes. “I love
you too, honey,” she tried to purr. It sounded like a moan.
Outside the hospital, they saw ambulances and police cars backed
up to the emergency entrance, and dozens of stretchers deposited on the
asphalt holding bloody and mortally injured people. An occasional cry
punctuated the hubbub as triage doctors and nurses scurried from one
stretcher to another, dividing the injured into those beyond help, those
in need of immediate treatment, and those able to wait. A large crowd
of injured people stumbled or limped into the hospital, some crying,
some moaning, and some appearing stoic or dazed. Some were blinded
and helped along by others. Two nurses organized them all, so that the
most badly injured who might survive could receive care first.
Fortunately, Mark’s foresight paid off; their Lux was not blocked.
When they got in, the terrier remained where Lora had left him. He still
held his tail tight against his stomach, but he sat up and looked in her
direction with clouded, dead eyes. He sniffed her, then licked her hand
as she tucked him in between her lap and her sling. She stroked his
stomach. Her eyes grew moist. “You poor little guy. You may be permanently blinded.”
Mark drove back to their apartment, steering with his left hand
while she jockeyed the gearshift. Traffic was now stop and go on a few
main roads, unmoving on all the others. Mark had to take a circuitous
route along back roads, and detour through parking lots and alleys.
Lora’s right arm now only ached and, freed from the pain that had
dulled her mind, she gave full thought to the nuclear attack. Its full
meaning hit her with the force of a violent slap in the face. My God, our
Institute must have been destroyed—all our people were killed.
Tears flowed, and sobs wrenched her body and jarred her broken
arm. Physical pain again tried to flood her mind, but could not compete
with her anguish. “The bomb exploded about 9:30,” she pushed the
sounds out. “Almost everyone would have been at work—all our department heads and our staff . . . dead. Janice, Bob, Shirley, Ed, Tony—
Tony, whose parents are among our best friends. We’ve known him
since birth! And brilliant Betty. And more. So many more . . . dead.
Oh, Mark.”
The little terrier sensed her grief. In spite of his own misery, he
tried to push himself up on her lap and lick her face. Lora held him to

8

R.J. Rummel

her with her sling and cried so hard that she couldn’t shift the car. Mark
almost stalled when he had to slow down, and finally stopped the car.
Freed from having to think of shifting, she mentally collapsed into
mourning.
She pounded her fist on the dash, scaring the terrier. “So many
good people, so many promising futures,” she sobbed, “wiped out. So
many families and loved ones devastated. And they were our people.
Our people. All those in the middle and top positions within the Institute that we personally hired and nurtured . . . .” She shuddered, then
screamed, “Killed! All of them!”
Mark’s grunt of pain and his touch penetrated her misery. Lora
looked up though her tears to see that he had tried to put his arm around
her shoulders and pull her close, but his sling had prevented him. He
turned sideways and grunted again as he put his left hand on her shoulder and squeezed it.
Her sobs soon diminished to tearful shudders. She put her good
hand on top of his and whimpered, “They were our family.”
Mark shook his head, and Lora saw his own tears. “We were lucky.
Had we not slept late, we would have been at the Institute at 7:30, and
dead now, too. Those calls we made late last night to Southeast Asia
saved us, made us oversleep. I can’t believe our luck.”
She felt him squeeze her shoulder again, as though trying to assure
himself that she was alive. She tilted her head and kissed his hand. She
wept for a few more minutes, then willed her misery to silence. She
mourned for her dead no less, but now there was the future to think
about. One thought now filled her mind: We have a transcendent duty,
a blood obligation to all the dead, not only our own. It focused her energy, overcame her pain and anguish and gave her purpose. She patted
Mark’s hand, turned her face up to his, and said, “Let’s go.”
He took his hand off her shoulder and grabbed the steering wheel
with his good hand. “I know what we’ve got to do,” he whispered.
“We have a duty,” Lora said, her voice breaking. “To ourselves, to
our dead, and to humanity. Yes!” she exclaimed, and turned to Mark.
“We’ve almost a full tank of gas. That will give us a start toward our
scientific and engineering affiliate in Santa Barbara. But first, we’ve
got to return to our apartment.”
As they approached their apartment, refugees, injured, and vehicles
of all kinds filled the main roads as people tried to flee the boroughs or
the fires and rubble in Manhattan. Almost no one kept to their side of
the road. Debris and tree limbs cluttered the streets. Raging fires now

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

9

engulfed whole blocks. Mark again took to the narrow tertiary roads,
and they were glad their apartment was on a small, seldom traveled
road, reachable by back streets that few residents of Queens knew
about. Even so, they had to detour through lots and, in two cases, backyards, knocking a fence down with their car. On one road no wider than
a path, they teamed up with another car to push a tree limb out of the
way with their bumpers.
They parked in front of their apartment, locked the car, and rushed
inside. Lora put the terrier down and, while Mark got their suitcases,
she jabbed the TV and radio on-buttons, looking for news about the nuclear attack. Despite being hungry for news, they had avoided turning
on the car radio so they wouldn’t be distracted during the difficult
drive. They could not afford to damage the car—what they were sure
was their only way to get to Santa Barbara, without stealing another
car.
TV and radio reception was full of snow and static, and pictures and
sound disappeared for minutes at a time. The news they did hear was
sketchy, contradictory, and sometimes panicky. On one Gordon News
channel broadcast from Philadelphia, the anchor claimed, “The attacks
are acts of God for our immorality.” As he started screaming, “Sinners,
repent!” cameramen forcibly removed him from the news desk. A talk
radio station host claimed, “It was the Russians. They attacked us. We
have sent bombers over Russia to drop nuclear bombs on them in retaliation.”
That’s so stupid, Lora thought. We don’t have any nuclear bombs
anymore. We disarmed the last of them over twenty years ago.
An academic analyst on the KNS TV news channel claimed, “The
United States has brought this upon ourselves, for lording it over and
exploiting other countries, particularly poor countries.”
Through it all, Mark and Lora wept. They tried to focus on packing
their survival clothes and supplies. Suddenly Lora screamed, “Listen!”
and dropped onto the arm of their easy chair.
The radio reception from Newark NYNU was clear: “. . . confirmed
that a nuclear bomb destroyed Washington, D.C. at the same time the
one in New York went off. The President of the United States, Vice
President, Speaker of the House, and President pro tempore of the Senate were all killed—”
“Holy Jesus,” Mark cried, gaping at the radio. He leaned on the
edge of the dinner table.
Worse was to come.

10

R.J. Rummel

“ . . . Cabinet was also devastated. Killed were the Secretary of
State, Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary of Defense, the Attorney
General, and the Secretary of the Interior. This leaves George Peabody,
Secretary of Agriculture, who was giving a speech in Florida. He was
sworn in as President in Fort Lauderdale by the Chief Justice of the
Florida Supreme—” The voice broke down and in moments was replaced by someone with a deep but mournful voice.
“This has just come in . . . Central London, Berlin, Paris, and Moscow also were wiped out—”
“Oh my God!” Lora shrieked. “Our affiliated institutes in those cities must be gone—all our people. Mark, I can’t bear it.” She collapsed
slowly to the floor. She was beyond sobbing, beyond physical pain. She
lay trembling on the floor, her good hand covering her face, and wailed.
Mark’s face had become a sickly white. He almost fell into the easy
chair next to Lora. He put his face into his left hand and bawled. They
barely registered the rest of the news announcement.
“Great Britain lost not only its top leaders, but also the queen.
Germany and France were also politically guillotined. The President of
Russia survived only because he was visiting his mother in Kazan.”
Minutes later, Mark wiped his face with the edge of the satin tablecloth, still shuddering with suppressed sobs, and knelt down beside Lora.
He stroked her shoulder and hair. When she pulled her wet hand away
from her face to hold his, he told her in a quavering voice, “C’mon, precious. We’ll have to save some big tears till later. No time.”
She couldn’t get any words out, but she got herself under control
and he helped her get up. She held him lightly, avoiding his ribs, and
put her head on his shoulder for a moment before gently pushing away.
They both went back to packing what they would take with them.
No one knew who did it. There was nothing but speculation on the
radio and TV. “It’s Russia,” a high government source reportedly said.
“Crazy!” Mark swore at the radio. “It’s been a democracy for three
decades. We’ve had no serious conflict with Russia.”
A radio talk show host exclaimed, “A rich and powerful secret international organization did it. They used nuclear weapons to take over
the world.” Others blamed “those evil Islamic extremists,” but couldn’t
agree on who would have organized and led such an attack.
Lora found her voice, although it trembled. “The problem is, without a major international war in the twentieth century, secret and
security services in the democracies have atrophied . . . and political
acumen about surprise attacks has dulled.” She wiped her eyes and face
with a tissue and blew her nose into another.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

11

Mark glanced at her and nodded. He piled more folders on the
floor.
Once they’d accumulated all they were going to take to the car,
Lora pointed to the phone and whispered, “No matter how long it takes,
we must do it.”
“Yes,” Mark replied. “I know, but I hate it.”
They began to telephone the surviving families of their department
heads, secretaries, and others that they knew personally. Few calls went
through, and static and fade-outs made conversation difficult. They
tried to console the few they reached. They cried with them and gave
them the private telephone number for their affiliate in Santa Barbara,
telling them, “Call if you need any aid, or just want to talk.”
Only to those who knew the secret of their institute, the husbands
and wives of their department heads, did they divulge their plans. All
approved. Through their tears, they offered Mark and Lora whatever
help they could give.
Lora tried to call their Santa Barbara affiliate, but none of the telephone numbers worked. She tried to eletter and swore when she
couldn’t get a connection. Mark put his good hand on her shoulder and
quietly pointed out that their ecomm hub had been in their Manhattan
Institute.
Finally, they each made several laborious trips to the car to load it
with what they had piled near their apartment door—food, water, first
aid and other survival supplies, camping clothes, important documents
and disks, laptop computers, weapons, and all their cash and jewelry.
They secured everything in the apartment for what they thought
might be a long or permanent absence. Lora gave the terrier water. He
had peed in a kitchen corner. “Why am I doing this?” she asked herself
as she cleaned it up, but did it anyway. The terrier’s tail was extended
now, but still not wagging. She didn’t blame him. Mine wouldn’t wag
either, she thought as she took him with her to the car.
Coughing from the smoke that now hung in the air, they drove the
three blocks to where their car had been parked before the explosion
and knocked on a number of doors in the neighborhood, asking if anyone had lost or knew anything about the little dog that Lora carried in
one arm. Few people answered their doors. Those who did were too
distressed to care, or knew nothing about the terrier. Lora gave up after
an hour. There was too much at stake to delay any longer. They began
what normally would have been 2,780 mile drive to Santa Barbara.

12

R.J. Rummel

aaa
At one time, Lora had consolidated all the scientific and engineering work in their New York Institute. Increasingly, however, she found
that much of the research related to their mission was done in Santa
Barbara. The city had mushroomed into the scientific, technological,
and computer capital of the world. She therefore set up an affiliated
institute there and moved their most important scientific work into it
from New York. It’s a good thing I did, she thought. Otherwise, we
could never do what we intend to do now.
“Let’s see,” Mark mused. “What routes are we going to take?
We’ve always flown long distances.”
Lora reached into the back seat with her good hand and picked up
Simpson’s Road Atlas. She took their compass out of the glove compartment. “We have all we need,” Lora murmured, still subdued by
horror.
Mark studied the maps, and asked Lora to help him remember the
routes. “We’ll catch Route 5 outside of New York to Pittsburgh, and from
there Transcon Route 42 through Columbus, St. Louis, Kansas City, Denver, and Las Vegas, to a junction outside of Los Angeles. Then it’s a short
hop on Route 96 to Santa Barbara. Three routes in all.”
So they thought. They didn’t realize what a nightmare of back
roads, detours, undesignated farm roads, and dangers would be involved in driving anywhere in the aftermath of this national
catastrophe. More than once, that road atlas and simple compass saved
them from getting completely lost.
They drove three hours on, three hours off, day and night, and made
room on the back seat so that their off time could be spent sleeping.
Even though they had casts on their right arms, they developed a way
of shifting. They took their encased arms out of their slings before they
changed places, and while driving they would bend over the edge of the
steering wheel, grip the knob of the stick shift with their extended fingers, and shift only when they had to prevent stalling or to get the car
moving. It was most difficult for Mark because of his broken ribs. Seeing his tight-lipped grimaces, Lora knew it was painful for him, but he
insisted on doing his share of the driving.
They faced urban refugees, traffic jams, blocked roads, suspicious
cops and state troopers, and overeager national guardsmen. They had
brought their driver’s licenses, Institute I.D.s, and federal retirement
cards, all with photos, and those got them through roadblocks and state
border checks.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

13

Gasoline was scarce. Many gas stations had been vandalized and
those they found selling gas were demanding as much as fifteen dollars
a gallon. They learned to stop at the first functioning gas station as soon
as their tank dropped down to half-full.
The first time they filled up at a combined store and gasoline station, they bought a bag of dog food and a large thermos. From then on
they filled the thermos with coffee when they stopped to eat once a day,
and drank coffee along the way to assure they wouldn’t fall asleep
while driving, especially at night.
After they ate they let the terrier out of the car and fed him. During
their toilet breaks, they also let him roam around to get used to his
blindness. He never explored far and responded to “Spunky,” the name
Lora gave him. His tail now wagged when he approached them, and he
judged where he was going by sound and smell. He had shaken off his
misery and proudly held his head high.
“I’m beginning to love the little guy,” Lora told Mark.
On their second day on the road, they heard the incredible ultimatum over the car radio. There was no longer any question of who was
responsible for the most monstrous slaughter in human history.

Chapter 2
Abul Sabah
Peking, October 8, 1994, New Universe

A

bul Sabah glared at his son Turghun in sad anger. He could no
longer hide his hatred.
I wish he were dead.
Turghun stood staring through the bulletproof glass, his face shining with the light of victory. Beside him, so pear shaped that not even a
tailored uniform could be made to hang right, was General Mirzat
Zunun, his chief of all combined military forces. By his narrowed eyes
and smug expression, he appeared to be gloating already over the coming victory.
It is a wonder he does not crow like a rooster, thought Abul.
On the other side of Turghun towered long-faced and full-bearded
Imam Ch’en Hsun. He was the head of China’s National Governing
Council—in effect, a council of Islamic Sabah clerics—and wore his
emblematic toe length, all white, dragon court robe. Always inscrutable, always slippery tongued, always a holy word of Sabah on his lips.
Abul did not trust him and had advised his son against appointing him
to that powerful position.
Abul dropped his eyes for a moment—they felt almost too heavy to
move—and gazed down with disgust verging on horror at the activity
on the other side of the glass. A chill spiraled up his spine, competing
with the apparent arthritis flaring up in his neck. He felt nauseous. If he
vomited, he knew in what direction to spew it all.
Below was a roomful of metal desks topped with Yang computers,
Lan consoles, and microphones. There were twenty desks, two for each
of the major powers whose cities were to be destroyed. Twenty carefully screened technicians and scientists wearing headphones manned
them. Each had a key paired up with that held by the technician at the
other desk. The two keys would be inserted within four seconds of each
other into key locks on the consoles of the two desks for a specific
country. They would unlock the switches that set off a nuclear bomb in

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

15

one or another of its cities.
Built into the wall in front of the room was a six by twelve foot
electronic world map, with China at the center. Twelve red circles
marked the cities already destroyed by hidden nuclear weapons. One
red, pulsing X indicated the bomb had not gone off in Tokyo. Peking
had a blue square around it on the map, as though it were surrounded
by protective iron walls.
Security men, with their square, narrow brimmed hats and red and
blue pinstriped trousers, stood or ambled around the room along with a
supervising general and his aides. Four security men hovered over the
Japan desks as two technicians struggled with their unlocked toggles.
They kept inserting their keys into the locks simultaneously, and pushing their toggle switches back and forth. Suddenly one of them threw
up his hands exuberantly as a row of green lights appeared on his console. He yelled something and everybody stared at the wall map.
In the booth, no one moved. Abul thought he could hear his blood
boiling in horror. Maybe it was someone breathing heavily.
It could not be my son. He has not taken a decent breath in years.
The X over Tokyo disappeared. A minute went by. A red circle
appeared.
General Zunun turned to Turghun and smiled. His chest swelled up
even more, and he stated the obvious: “The second Tokyo bomb
worked.”
Turghun glanced at him, then at his father Abul for the time it takes
to blink, and looked back at the floor below. “Good,” he said, as though
commenting on the fit of his shoes.
I cannot believe Turghun would do this monstrous killing, Abul
thought for the thousandth time. I’m still as sickened by it as when I
first heard about his evil plans. Abul had strongly advised against the
attack. He told Turghun it must not be done this way. His method—of
patience and infiltration and awaiting the right political moment to
strike—would work, as it had in China.
Abul rubbed an arthritic hand over his face, each finger feeling its
own deep wrinkle, and checked the large black and white wall clock
again—9:14 p.m.
Only fourteen minutes have passed.
Further along the observation window, General Zunun’s adjutant,
Colonel Chi An, sat at a gray metal desk. Different colored phones
rested on the desk in front of him. The desk sat on a raised metal platform that allowed Chi An a full view of the floor below.
Abul studied him. Tomorrow Turghun’s ultimatum will be broadcast to the world in my name, despite my protests. Then the world will

16

R.J. Rummel

think I committed this unspeakably horrible act. Whether this ends in
world victory or not, I do not care. This is not God’s way; this is not
the way of Sabah; this is not what I taught my son.
“Your method takes too long,” Turghun had yelled at Abul, waving
his hands as though tormented by flies. “We would all be dead before
the final victory. This way, our victory will be fast and complete. We
will control the world. Sabahism will be universal.”
Abul argued, “Yes, but at what cost? One must kill to take power
and consolidate it, to be sure. But not innocents. Not the masses; they
could not care less who ruled. And not the wealth and history each major city contains. God wishes us to exploit what the centuries have
built, not destroy it. God wants us to educate, convert to the true faith,
and uplift the people in his name. You want to kill them like cockroaches, like pouring gasoline on an ant’s nest and setting it ablaze.”
Turghun had ignored his arguments, and made his preparations. He
had the power.
Abul glanced at the two security officers in the back of the booth.
Both had their eyes on him; they always did, no matter where he went.
Sometimes he felt like pissing on their legs, and excusing himself as an
old man.
He had threatened to go to the people. His name was still the power
among the people and in the mosques. But Turghun had gradually
taken away all his physical authority, all his physical power.
Oh, Abul reflected, I still can make speeches on behalf of God and
the book of Sabah. But I first must ask for use of the appropriate facilities, and I have two of these security brutes always standing nearby. No
security guard would let him enter a radio or television studio without
express permission from his son. He couldn’t even make a tape, since
he had no recording device, and he didn’t know how to use a computer.
But he was secretly learning. Soon he would be able to get the word out
by eletter or over the esystem.
All Abul’s top men were long gone, either dead or transferred out
of his reach. His uncle died decades ago. His son was his only living
male relative. There was not one person he could trust to kill Turghun,
not one person around him who would come to his defense if his son
tried to kill him.
I’m now a paper caliph.
Abul dropped his throbbing head into his hands. Is this all it
means? All my successes, all my triumphs, all my planning for
God, all my teaching? I converted billions to the true God; I
thought my son had learned the way of Sabahism and would carry
on the message of God after me.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

17

I cannot believe how all I have done has ended.

aaa
Uighuristan, 1914, New Universe
On November 16, 1914, soon after Uighuristan became independent of China, Abul took his first breath on the outskirts of Kashgar, in
the small bedroom of a three room, mud-brick home. His mother Niyasam Sabah bore him alone. She cut his umbilical cord after he
arrived. She cleaned up both of them.
His mother told him years later that she was breast-feeding him
when his father Aisha returned from herding his goats and came into
the bedroom. In the dim light from the small window, he glanced at the
afterbirth in a pail, the bloody towels, the wet bed, and finally stared at
the infant. He approached the bed and leaned over for a good look at
his tiny, wrinkled face. He asked gruffly, “Is it a boy?”
“Yes,” Niyasam said proudly.
The hard lines of his father’s face crinkled into a rare smile. Aisha
half bowed and clasped his hands together in momentary prayer,
repeating several times, “God be praised.”
He put his rough hand on Niyasam’s head for a second, nodded,
and turned to leave. As he strutted into the main room he threw over his
shoulder, “You take good care of Abul. That’s what I will name him.”
Abul’s father husbanded and sold livestock, particularly sheep and
goats, and Abul began to learn the trade even as a child. By the age of
seven he regularly helped his father tend his livestock and sell them at
the market. As was traditional in this part of the world, he also learned
from his family about Mohammed and Allah—what Muslims called
God—and the sacred Quran. He bowed in the direction of Mecca and
said a prayer to God five times a day.
In this most conservative Islamic city, his family was one of the
most fundamentalist. They attended the mosque whenever possible and
on all Fridays and religious holidays, his father saved ten percent of the
family income per year in the hope of taking Abul on the pilgrimage to
Mecca, and he enrolled Abul in the Idgah Madrasa, an Islamic religious
school at the famous twelfth century Idgah Mosque.
Now recorded in the holy book called The Sabah by his biographers, what happened to Abul at the age of thirteen would transform
world history. He remembered that time differently, but he knew such
religious myths were important to the faithful.
While on the way home with his father after herding their sheep,

18

R.J. Rummel

Abul fell to the ground with convulsions. His lips turned blue, his forehead oozed sweat, and he foamed about the mouth. Frightened by
Abul’s convulsions and frightening appearance, Aisha tried to pick him
up to rush him home, but his violent shaking made handling him too
difficult to carry.
When Abul’s convulsions stopped, he shuddered briefly. After a
few minutes, he rolled over and pushed himself up to sit on a rock. His
mind was still numb; he felt miserable, and he had a dull headache. It
was minutes before Abul was able to focus on his father. When he did,
he saw that Aisha looked worse than he felt. His father was shaking.
Fear for Abul, his only son, lined his face and filled his eyes.
Abul knew nothing about epileptic fits, and such were unknown to
his father and most people of Kashgar. At the time he thought it was
something he ate, maybe bad lamb.
At thirteen, boyish pranks and jokes, especially on his parents,
came naturally to Abul. It was also the way he relieved his fears and
released tension. He was a believer in Islam, of course. Through his
classes at the madrasa and his father, he was a good Muslim boy. But
he was also questioning and iconoclastic, and his questions at the madrasa and his pranks had caused his father and him some grief.
So as his scared father leaned over him and while Abul’s lower lip
still trembled from the convulsions, Abul joked. That is, he thought he
did at the time. The Sabah has him saying, “Father, I have had a holy
visit. The angel Gabriel came to me. He told me that God wants to
speak to me through him. God said that I would be his prophet. I am in
Mohammed’s image and must go forth and lead all people to Paradise.”
Abul did not talk like that at thirteen. Years later he recalled saying
something like, “Father, I saw the angel Gabriel. He said he speaks to
me for God. He said God wants me as his prophet. He said I should
take people to Paradise.”
Abul’s black hair was long and curly and framed an angelic, sweet face
like a halo. He knew even at his young age that his looks put adults on their
best behavior around him. Other boys teased and taunted him for it.
So, when Abul adopted what should have been a comical, saintly
look and told Aisha, a simple and religious man, of his supposed revelation, his father gaped at him. He fell to his knees and bowed his
forehead to the ground. He surprised Abul by saying, “You are God’s
prophet. God be praised. Lead us, Abul of God. I believe.”
Abul thought his father was also joking, and at any moment would
let out a laugh and kick him in the ass as he did his donkeys. Playing
out the joke with him, Abul stood, asked him to rise, and said in a high-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

19

pitched voice, “Take your prophet home.”
Rather than laughing, Aisha stood, bowed, and said, “Everyone
must hear.”
His father did get the whole family together, to Abul’s further surprise. Almost all came: his married sister and her husband, three
cousins, his in-laws, and two uncles. All crowded into their small home
and gathered before the fireplace to hear about Abul’s “revelation.” His
father described in detail Abul’s convulsions and contortions and the
color of his face and lips, and explained that this was due to the stress
of his communication with an otherworldly being. Then he looked at
Abul reverently.
Abul knew his father had him now. This was his way of being sarcastic. He was going to teach Abul a lesson for making a joke about
God and Gabriel, for blasphemy, and once he repeated his “vision,” his
father would hold him up as a bad example and punish him in front of
everyone. Abul trembled and chewed his nails. He could not look at his
father. He did not intend that things would go this far, but he felt he had
to play it out. He tried to speak in a firm and knowing voice, but it
sounded squeaky when he told them about Gabriel coming before him
in the image of a man, and what he said to Abul.
No one laughed. His sister told him later that it was because his father brought everyone together with the admonition, “My son is
divinely commissioned by God to lead us all.”
But his mother was hearing this from Abul for the first time. Now
she realized why his father had given him special treatment for the two
days before this family meeting. Abul knew she was not dumb. She
asked, “Are you sure you did not have dreams or hallucinations? It was
very hot that day, and you did not eat breakfast.” His sister nodded her
agreement.
If his mother had just said, “You’re joking,” and shook her finger at
him, he would have confessed his joke. But hallucinations or dreams? He
was not going to admit to those. Abul replied, “It had to be a revelation.”
He made a boyish exaggeration. “I saw Gabriel as if he were standing
here. He was so clear to me.” He added what he hoped was his clincher:
“But this was hard on my body. It was painful. Father saw this.”
Most important, Uncle Hasan believed. Abul did not know it at the time
and thought that when everyone went home, that would be the end of it.
But, as an important businessman and contributor to the Idgah Mosque,
Hasan told Molla Abduvahit Ahmedi about Abul’s “visions.” Ahmedi knew
about Abul’s studies at the madrasa and, Hasan told Abul later, was impressed by his seriousness and intelligence. So Ahmedi invited Abul to visit

20

R.J. Rummel

him, and then asked him to describe his “revelation.”
Abul was scared. He could not admit to such a joke before Ahmedi.
Abul was sure Ahmedi would see him as an evil blasphemer, and he
would be kicked out of the madrasa and his family shunned. Stammering, hesitating, face heating up, he retold his story. He did better when
Ahmedi asked him to repeat it, but Abul thought at the time, I sound
like I’ve been caught peeing in the fireplace.
Abul’s uncle told him afterward that Molla Ahmedi was not impressed, that Ahmedi thought Abul’s “intense study of the Quran and
the heat of the day caused him to hallucinate a revelation.” Abul was
only relieved to hear that Ahmedi did not think him a blasphemer.
“Whew,” Abul said to himself. “I accept that.”
That interview was not the end of it, however. Unknown to Abul,
his father and uncle were trying to convert everyone they knew to his
“revelation.” This went slowly at first, with few converts. But this
changed after Abul turned fourteen. While shopping with his mother at
the Alpekin food market, the largest in Kashgar, he dropped to the
rough ground in the midst of the shoppers. As his body convulsed and
contorted in another epileptic fit, a crowd formed a large circle around
him. His mother tried to shield his face from the sun and loosen his cotton shirt.
Many had heard about his “revelation” and it had become a local
joke. No one laughed, however, when they saw his convulsions. When
they ended several minutes later, he lay trembling for a few minutes,
his eyes firmly closed, apparently exhausted.
Someone called out, “He has had another revelation.” Another
yelled, “He has talked to God.” Abul heard and realized he was pinned
down by his joke like a butterfly to a board. He just could not walk
away. He would be the joke of Kashgar for the rest of his life.
Still weak, Abul got to his feet, held out his hands to the crowd, and
in a quavering voice (he was really scared by this public speaking) that
grew gradually firmer, he repeated parts of the sermon the Molla Aitbayev gave some Fridays, leaving out references to Mohammed. Abul
recalled later that he intoned something like, “God has again talked to
me through the angel Gabriel. He said, ‘God is great. You are my
prophet. Lead your people to Paradise. Show them the way. Through
them, lead the world to salvation.’”
Gaining inspiration, Abul pointed with a flourish to a wrinkled,
bearded man in front of the crowd and said, “Gabriel stood before me
like he does. Gabriel told me, ‘I speak to you for God.’”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

21

Not bad for a fourteen-year-old, Abul thought years later.
The crowd was hushed, creating a surreal bubble of silence against
the distant market hubbub.
Abruptly, the old man he had pointed to knelt and bowed; an old
woman followed him, then one person after another until half the
onlookers were on their knees, chanting, “Oh Prophet, lead us.”
Word spread in the market that the Prophet had come to Kashgar,
and was in this very market. People rushed to see Abul Sabah, the supposed prophet, and prostrated themselves. Two men lifted him to stand
on a melon table so that all could see him. As the swelling crowd gathered around, many in the front still on their knees, Abul felt a thrill of
exhilaration. Carried away, he repeated over and over in one combination of words or another, “I am God’s prophet. He asked me to lead you
to Paradise. My pain proves it.”
Finally his voice gave out. Beyond exhaustion, he plopped down on
the table and rolled off to stand unsteadily by his bowing mother. He
put his hand on her shoulder, and when she saw it was Abul’s, she got
to her feet and looked at him in awe. When he croaked, “Home,” she
took his hand and led him through the silent crowd.
From that day on, she gave Abul special treatment at home, including his favorite meals. His father would not let him work with him.
“Prophets do not milk goats,” he told Abul while on his knees, bowing.
Abul now took it all seriously. And well he might. More and
more Uighurs accepted his supposed holy leadership. He had more
public fits, some now contrived, but he knew how to make them
look good. He came to believe that what he had thought was a fit,
and a joke—what he thought of as play-acting—was really God’s
way of communicating his intent while making it easy on him. God
had put the idea of a joke in his mind. Otherwise, he might have
been too scared to speak, or thought he was crazy. God does work in
mysterious ways, he thought, but not so mysterious that his methods
cannot be divined by his prophets.
Abul now preached Sabahism, as his converts now called it, to large
groups that gathered in one rich man’s home after another. He had been
taught about Mohammed and the faith, about God’s teachings. He had
read the holy Quran and interpretations of it. He had heard how the mollas
interpreted God’s words. And it all came together in his head. He just
knew what God wanted him to say: God wants the whole world to follow
His Will—to be Muslim. If non-Muslims do not accept His Will, force is
legitimate to convert those infidels to Islam. Using force to this holy end is

22

R.J. Rummel

an obligation of all faithful Muslims. It is a holy Jihad.
Moreover, all Muslims must be united under one banner, and that is
the banner of Sabahism. In unity there is God. In unity there is paradise. In disunity there is hell. In disunity there is Satan’s work.
Abul encouraged what his Sabahists were calling the Sabah Hanafi
School of Islam. Even though Abul disagreed with the Hanafi School,
it dominated Islamic teaching in Kashgar. He was taught this in the
madrasa, and naturally he hung his preaching on this hook. This was a
practical consideration advised by Uncle Hasan, not a religious one.
Actually, the Hanafi School tolerated different ways of interpreting the
Shari'ah—Islamic divine law. The school taught that law was what legal and religious Muslim scholars established by agreement, and that
agreement was evidence of God’s will.
Abul thought this was all wrong, but he never said so outright. Instead, in boyish words, he claimed that God told him through Gabriel
what this agreement should be and that those clergy who agreed with
him were correct in their interpretation of the Shari'ah.
Abul no longer lived at home, but moved from one rich man’s
house to another. He had all the money he needed, through donations.
He was happy. And he was happier when he discovered another benefit, when beautiful Tillakiz came into his bed for a night, unasked.
From then on, he slept alone only when he wanted to.
In a population of about thirty thousand, Abul had converted about
six thousand people by the age of eighteen, in spite of the best efforts of
the Muslim clerics to counter his teaching. One reason for his attraction
was that he gave voice to what many Uighurs believed. The need for
unity among Islamic tribes and nations was intensely felt, even
preached by the mollas, although none of them claimed they were messengers of God. All of them believed unity was essential against the
hated Chinese, English, and Russians, all former colonists or meddlers
in the region’s affairs. None of them could forget the horrendous murder of hundreds of thousands of Muslims during the Chinese
annexation of their country.
Many of his rich converts financed the Sabah School in 1932, purposely built near the Idgah Mosque, and in which he would give
sermons on the holy task that God had assigned him. His preaching and
his school aroused the hostility of the clerics, especially that of Molla
Bahtiyar Ezim, who believed Abul was a danger to the community and
Islam—so much so that he decided to act against him.
In August 1933 Abul found out that in their forthcoming Friday

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

23

sermons in all Kashgar’s major mosques, the mollas planned to denounce him as a fake, as a false prophet and blasphemer of
Mohammed. He felt helpless. Utterly depressed. There was nothing
he could do.
But, the day before these sermons were to be delivered, Ezim denounced Abul before Mamat Abliz, the Chief of Police, and demanded
that Abliz arrest Abul immediately after the sermon. A fundamentalist
Muslim and friend of Ezim, Abliz gave the order to Captain Abulahat
Khair, and added that Abul should be shot “while trying to escape.”
Khair had attended one of Abul’s sermons at the home of a friend,
and had seen firsthand one of his “God induced” convulsions. He’d become a secret and fervent follower of Sabah. He was an exceptionally
tall and big-boned Uighur, with a barrel chest and a loud, commanding
voice. Although in his mid-thirties and still young for his position, he
had a charismatic presence that demanded obedience from his men.
With Chief Aliz’s order in hand, Khair contacted his friend and fellow
convert, Major Turdi Musa, who was in command of the battalion of
army troops encamped just outside of Kashgar. Together, without a
word to Abul, they made their plans.
Overnight, an army company sealed off the political center of
Kashgar. In the hours before dawn, Captain Khair led a police squad of
selected Sabahs to the homes of Abliz and the mayor, while Major
Musa took care of the seven members of the “advisory” Kashgar Islamic Council. All were summarily shot, including every member of
their families. By early morning, Kashgar was declared “The Holy City
of Sabah.”
Throughout the morning, Sabah volunteers, troops, and police arrested all the writers, teachers, and religious figures who had been
critical of the Sabah School or Abul. They were given two choices—
convert to Sabah or die. Those who would not convert were tortured to
reveal others who plotted against or denied the truth of Abul’s prophecies. All but one of the important clerics were allowed to flee to
Urumqi, the capital.
That morning, Abul was asleep in wealthy Abduhelil Gohar’s
house, where at his invitation Abul had been spending the week. About
8:30 a.m., there was a heavy knock on the bedroom door. Abul covered
his companion for the night, and said, “Come in.”
Captain Khair, Major Musa, and Gohar entered, seeming apologetic. Before saying anything, they looked at his bed, and Khair put his
fingers to his mouth. Abul lifted the cover from over his companion’s

24

R.J. Rummel

head and told her that she would have to leave. Without a word and
with obvious pride, she got out of the bed, threw her clothes on, and,
with a nod toward Abul, walked out the open door.
Captain Khair closed the door behind her, and he and the others got
on their knees and bowed to Abul. Khair intoned, “Oh Prophet Sabah,
you rule Kashgar. Lead us to glory and to paradise.”
Pleased but confused, Abul told them, “Stand up and tell me why
you are here.”
They told him.
He was thunderstruck. He was incredulous. Speechless.
They thought Abul was listening to God.
He thought, I must be God’s prophet. What else can explain that I
now rule Kashgar?
What he didn’t realize at the time was that his life hung on his next
words. Khair and Musa believed in Abul Sabah. They believed they
had done the right thing for Sabah and Sabahism. But if he rebuked
them, if he created doubt in their minds about their actions, they could
have transferred this doubt to his holy authority. At the moment they
were the real rulers of Kashgar, and they could still rule in the name of
Sabah even though Abul had gone to Paradise, killed by a blasphemer.
That might be better, since rule of Kashgar would be without his interference.
Abul was too inexperienced in power to think of this at the time. He
did feel outrage at their murders. He knew many of those they’d killed.
Although he thought Khair and Musa were mistaken about God’s way,
they were good Uighurs. But, had they asked him beforehand, he would
have said, “No killing.”
They had not, and the deed was done. And after all, he was now a
ruler, with great power to spread Sabahism.
None of this ambivalence showed in Abul’s voice when he finally
put his hand on Captain Khair’s shoulder and blessed him and the others: “All be praised. You have done God’s work.”
Major Musa let out his breath with a whoosh, and Khair’s smile
spread across his face his face. Gohar just looked confused. Letting his
own breath out in a gust, Abul thought, Thanks to God, I said the right
words.
Fortunately for the conspirators, few in the outside world or the
democracies knew what happened in Kashgar. Any large-scale mass
murder of this sort, especially of political and religious leaders, normally would have come to their attention, either through their

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

25

diplomats or foreign reporters. Uighuristan, however, was Middle Asia,
deeply recessed from world attention by high mountains and deserts,
and it existed on the remote and little explored peripheries of countries
like China, India, Afghanistan, and Russia.
After the coup in Kashgar, Molla Ahmedi of the Idgah Mosque was
the only important clergyman who remained. Captain Khair and Major
Musa had given Ahmedi the choice between death and conversion, and
he chose God’s Way. They told him what they expected of his Friday
sermon, and he gave it: “Prostrate yourselves before the true Prophet,
for his name is Abul Sabah and he speaks in the name of God.”
With much humility and several bows, Khair also suggested to
Abul what he might do afterward. Khair and Musa had taken the lead;
Abul could do no more than agree.
The sermon over, Abul strode with his Uncle Hasan through prostrating crowds of worshippers to stand on the steps of the Government
Building. He was so nervous, he was afraid his baggy trousers fluttered
as though in a wind.
Hasan stood behind Abul. As planned, Musa and Khair arrived to
stand on each side of him. Then, before an awed crowd of thousands,
Musa declared that Abul Sabah was the Holy Leader of Kashgar. Reverently, Uncle Hasan stepped around Musa and prostrated himself at
Abul’s feet. In a loud voice that carried to many in the crowd, he offered to take over the onerous task of political governance of the city on
the Prophet’s behalf.
I did not know he was going to say that. What could I do? I nodded,
not trusting my voice.
And a huge cheer erupted from the crowd. Uncle Hasan stood up
and, pointing to each of them in turn, appointed Major Musa as General
in charge of all military forces, and Captain Khair as Chief of police
and security.
Hasan turned to the crowd, opened his arms wide, and proclaimed,
“This day is for the celebration of God and his Prophet Abul Sabah.
Henceforth, it will be an annual holiday for prayer and thankfulness.”
Abul heard that, when the expelled mollas reached Urumqi, the
capital of Uighuristan, they told the powerful national Council of Clerics and President Awasy what had happened in Kashgar. Awasy then
ordered police forces to arrest Abul Sabah’s thousand or so followers in
the city, and sent orders out to all army units to prepare to march to
Kashgar to fight the blasphemers.
After his formal investiture of power, General Musa explained to
Abul the military problem Awasy faced. The country’s army units were

26

R.J. Rummel

largely stationed five hundred or more miles east and southeast, along
the border with China. They were far from the axis of approach to
Kashgar, or that between Kashgar and Urumqi. They had never faced in
their lifetime such a rebellion as what now existed.
Musa prepared for battle. Abul had no role in this planning, but he
was asked to speak to God on behalf of the proposed military campaign. Thus, with what he believed was God’s help, he had a fit while
attending prayers at the famous Azna Mosque, with over nine hundred
Muslim men present.
Coming out of his convulsions, he declared, “Gabriel again appeared before me in the shape of a man.” Abul rose and, reaching his
hands out to all there, he proclaimed, “Through Gabriel, God told me
that every Muslim who wants to go to Paradise must fight on his behalf
and unify the faith under Sabah. He told me to preach that the holy duty
of all Muslims is to join in this holy war.”
Volunteers flocked to join his crusade, but there was no time to
train them. Most had ancient rifles, and were no more than ragtag
forces around the core army battalion that had been stationed outside
Kashgar. No matter how ill-trained some under his command were,
General Musa insisted that they must all march to the capital and capture it before the country’s army could pull its units together to attack
Kashgar or protect the capital.
Three days after the celebration, General Musa moved out with a
force of six thousand volunteers and military men on horses, camels,
and on foot. Clothed all in white and riding on a strutting white Arabian
horse, Abul was at his side. Molla Ahmedi rode behind them.
They marched along the historic road toward the Tianshan Mountains. Urumqi lay on the other side. The road skirted the lethal and
desolate Taklamakan Desert, but even so, the heat prevented them from
moving at all during midday. On the way they met small army units at
Akesu, Baicheng, and Kuche, all carrying white flags. Abul never had
to say a word. He sat proudly on his horse while General Musa dictated
terms: “For God, join Sabah’s army or die.” They joined.
At Kurle, about twenty miles before the mountains, General Musa
dispatched assassins near dawn. They sent to paradise its mayor, the
head of the clergy council, and the colonel in charge of the local army
forces. In the resulting chaos, the defending army units surrendered and
enlarged Musa’s forces by about one thousand trained men.
A few miles farther, the small town of Yanqi lay in the foothills,
guarding the pass to Urumqi. When the major in charge of the army

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

27

unit stationed there saw the size of Musa’s forces, he surrendered without a fight. As Musa prepared to enter the pass to Urumqi, he had
nearly eight thousand men.
Then he laid a trap.
Throughout the march, General Musa had sent advance units ahead,
riding Musa’s fastest horses. They killed any couriers they found and
cut all telegraph and phone wires to Urumqi, except for those at Yanqi.
When Musa’s forces reached Yanqi, he had the army telephone operator, under the threat of death to him and his whole family, telephone
army headquarters in Urumqi.
The operator yelled into the phone what Musa had written on a pad
before him: “Alert, alert! A courier from Kuche has just ridden in to
our base to warn us. Sabah forces are on their way and now are only
about one hundred miles away. They have about five thousand men.”
With pistols held to their temples, local army officers were placed
at all available phones to repeat the warning if military headquarters
tried to verify the call.
General Musa now deployed his forces in the mountains in three
places. He put those with modern rifles among the rocks that hung
above a narrow ravine in the pass. At the Yanqi end of the ravine, he
placed his best soldiers. Hidden above the entrance to the ravine were
most of the volunteers, commanded by his best officers.
President Awasy’s army had never fought a modern war and his officers had no more military experience than that gathered while fighting
bandits. Moreover, since no large-scale modern war had been fought
elsewhere using airplanes, they had no example to follow—they never
thought to use the three vintage biplanes still at their small international
airport to reconnoiter ahead of their forces.
When Awasy’s army of nine thousand troops passed through the
ravine in an orderly march, the ambush caught them by surprise. Rifle
fire from the rocks above them decimated their ranks, and when officers ordered their soldiers to rapidly deploy forward, they ran into a
solid wall of fire from Musa’s soldiers, who blocked the ravine. Many
of Awasy’s troops turned and ran, but by that time Musa’s volunteers
had filled the road to their rear, and with guns, knives, sabers, and
pitchforks, butchered almost all of them. No mercy was shown. By the
end of the battle, all but eleven hundred prisoners were dead or
wounded.
Abul was not asked and did not want this, but Musa ordered that all
the officers among the prisoners be killed, and the rest be given the

28

R.J. Rummel

choice of accepting Sabah as their prophet, or death. The remainder of
the day was spent killing the wounded. When Abul found out about
this, he told Musa to save those who were only wounded in the arms or
legs. Musa said that his order had gone out, and it was too late to
change it. He gave all the army weapons and the surviving horses and
camels to the volunteers.
At daybreak the next day, Musa’s army crossed the mountains and
entered a defenseless capital. President Awasy welcomed Abul Sabah
as the Prophet on the steps of the Presidential Palace, but at a word
from Molla Ahmedi to General Musa beside him, the General had his
men grab Awasy and hang him from the balcony outside the President’s third floor office.
Abul, frozen in place, could only gape at the ongoing murder. He
was glad his jaw did not drop, but he thought, This is—was—the President of Uighuristan. This is an internationally recognized country.
Awasy was not a democrat, God forbid, but according to our traditions,
the Council of Islamic Clergy appointed him. He was himself a recognized molla. But there he is, shaking and kicking, being hanged in MY
name.
Without a word to Abul at the time, but acknowledged afterward,
Musa had his men track down the clerics who had been expelled from
Kashgar and execute them for blasphemy. Abul also found out that any
government official, molla, or professional who informers claimed was
involved in anti-Sabah activities, sermons, writing, or teaching, was
also executed.
General Musa and Molla Ahmedi had plans for their first evening in
power. Thousands of people, with cheer leaders scattered among them,
gathered before the Presidential Palace. Some waved their fists, others
waved the flag of Uighuristan, as they all chanted, “There is only one
God, and Sabah is his prophet. Sabah, Sabah, Sabah.”
Abul stood on the presidential balcony from which Awasy had been
hung. Looking over the crowd of thousands, he waved his hand and
hoped he had a look of revelation and prayer on his angelic face, rather
than the disgust he felt.
At the set time, with radio and loudspeaker microphones in front of
him, Abul read words written by Molla Ahmedi on a sheet pinned to a
Chinese elm bench hidden by the balcony.
“Hear me, the great and holy Muslims of Uighuristan. I am your
Prophet of God and I have come directly at His request to unify Islam
and bring all under God. All Muslims everywhere must submit to His
will and live according to the Quran, as your Prophet, with His guid-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

29

ance, has interpreted it. Henceforth, by the will of God, Uighuristan
will be a caliphate and I will be your caliph. General Musa will handle
secular matters and will be my chief advisor. Molla Ahmedi will lead
the Council of Clerics. There is no god but God, and I am His prophet.”
General Musa ordered all army commanders throughout Uighuristan to return their men to their camps, and join him in the capital for a
military meeting. As, in twos and threes, they entered the capital, Musa
greeted them, gave them the best of quarters, and fed them well. Once
the fifty-seven top commanders had all arrived, Musa convened them
for a staff meeting in the auditorium at military headquarters. Before
they entered the auditorium, soldiers disarmed them as “a precaution
against an enemy of Sabah being among them.”
Once all were seated, General Musa came in from a side door. He
was followed by armed men who soon filled the aisle along both sides
of the auditorium and guarded the rear exit. After all his men were in
place, Musa raised his hands to quiet the buzz of alarm. The air was
heavy with the smell of fear.
When he had everyone’s attention, he spoke. “My fellow commanders. You now have the great privilege of joining in God’s great
struggle against blasphemy and the infidels.”
Abul was ready, as Musa had rehearsed him. He entered through a
side door, stopped at the mark taped on the floor in the exact center of
the stage, and, head held high, turned to face them all. He wore a white
shirt hanging over white baggy pants that ended a few inches above his
ankles, so the hems would not get dirty—he could not bow to God in
soiled clothes. A long white cloak was draped over his shoulders. In
place of a turban he wore the traditional Uighur four-cornered hat, but
it was all white rather than multicolored, as was usual. Molla Ahmedi’s
assistants had searched throughout the markets of Urumqi for this outfit. It became his public uniform.
After a few moments General Musa, standing at Abul’s right shoulder, announced, “All of you are Muslims. Some of you are not Uighur,
but that does not matter. What is important is that each of you accepts
Abul Sabah as your Prophet, and pledge your life and that of your soldiers to his mission. Each of you must come onto the stage, bow before
Sabah, and pledge ‘There is one God and Sabah is His Prophet, and I
pledge my life to Sabah.’”
One by one, starting with the commander in the first seat in the first
row, they obeyed. Only eleven commanders refused, and they were
immediately taken out and shot.

30

R.J. Rummel

Abul had just turned twenty. He was undisputed ruler of Uighuristan.
His next step was to make an announcement to the country that
Musa had prepared for him: “My fellow subjects of God. Our holy
country is the home of all Muslims, regardless of whether you are
Uighur, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, Uzbek, Tartar, or Han Chinese. In recognition of this, and through his angel Gabriel, God asked me to change the
name of our holy country to Islamic East Turkistan. Moreover, He has
commanded that all those who refuse to accept Sabah as His messenger
must leave the country within one month, without exception. I, Abul
Sabah, His Prophet, have spoken.”
There followed a mass migration of nearly 250,000 people, mainly
Han Chinese, into China. Finally, word of the events in former Uighuristan reached the outside world. An international relief effort was
undertaken by the democracies for these refugees. Its operations were
limited to China, since Abul would not allow relief workers to cross the
border. His government was criticized by one non-Muslim country after another, and the Prime Minister of China recalled its ambassador
after formally protesting Abul Sabah’s expulsions as “barbaric.” No
other actions were taken. Within a few years a new Prime Minister was
elected in China and diplomatic relations resumed.
Abul had no thought of it at the time, but China would be his next
conquest.

Chapter 3
Lora
October 8, 1994, New Universe

F

or days she could not get beyond the thoughts that kept running
like a video loop in her mind. No one in the democracies would
have guessed. No one could have imagined it. No one was prepared for it. It was the stroke of a monstrous genius.
Now, all knew who did it and why. He told everyone still alive. It
was Abul Sabah, 81-year-old Caliph of Islamic East Turkistan and still
the shadow ruler behind the Muslim Council governing China. The ultimatum he’d issued to the world from Urumqi was short, without
subtlety or diplomatic language. It needed none. A strong voice declared in Uighur, with an over voice translating it into English:
Leaders of the corrupt and Godless democracies. I
speak on behalf of Abul Sabah, Prophet of God, Imam in
Chief of Sabah, and Caliph of Islamic East Turkistan.
We have shown our power with the destruction of your
major cities and political capitals. We have in place
more bombs that we will explode if you launch any attack on China, Islamic East Turkistan, or any other
members of the Islamic Union.
We simply ask that you stand down your military
forces, sign a treaty of nonaggression with the Union
and China, and accept as an advisor at the highest level
an appointee of China’s National Council of Clerics.
If you do not accept our terms by 12:01 a.m., October 12, Greenwich Mean Time, 1994, we will destroy
one of your Godless cities per day until you do. The
Chinese embassy in each of your countries has been authorized to carry out the formal signing ceremony and
the document now awaits your signature.

32

R.J. Rummel

The first time they heard it, Lora was driving. She began to shake
so much that she pulled off the road into a field. She could barely talk.
She woke up Mark by reaching behind the front seat and poking his leg.
“Huh? What?” He rubbed his eyes with one hand, and looked up at
her. Since the ultimatum was being repeated continuously on the radio,
she pointed a shaking finger at it, and let him hear it without a comment
from her. When he heard it all, she almost screamed, “It was Sabah.
Sabah!”
For minutes Mark could only say, “Shit, shit, shit . . . ” Finally he
yelled, “We missed it. Nobody had a clue he’d try to take over the
world like this. Jesus Christ, how could he build all those goddam nuclear weapons and place them in so many cities? And, my God—to set
them off all at the same time . . . ”
Lora trembled. Tears of frustration coursed down her cheeks. She
tried to respond, but her throat felt as though it was in a vise. She tried
to breath deeply, but could only gasp.
Finally, as Mark was about to say something, she blurted, “We
knew about his coups and power plays in Asia and the Islamic world.
We have been fighting him through our Institute.” She felt so miserable; she couldn’t stop herself from getting defensive. “We’ve fought
his fanatical influence and his clergy in Indonesia and Malaysia. We’ve
spent tens of millions trying to save their democratic governments.”
But guilt wrapped her mind like a wet blanket. We didn’t do
enough. We didn’t do all we could. She argued with it out loud. “Okay,
so in Paris, Hamburg, and Milan, suicide murderers killed dozens of
civilians within the last week. But The Righteous Allah claimed credit.
They’re a pro-Sabah terrorist organization, but not Sabah, as far as we
knew. And we certainly couldn’t generalize from that to nuclear attacks
on the world’s major cities. No one could. All the democracies were ill
prepared to counter this.”
She scowled out the windshield and growled, “We should have had
him assassinated.”
Mark nodded. Arms crossed, he stared down at nothing. “In hindsight, yes.”
He sat silent for several moments, his breathing fast, choppy. He
uncrossed his arms and unconsciously combed his hair with his fingers.
The ends of his mouth drooped in a face that suddenly seemed deeply
lined and sunken. His voice came flattened by despair. “Jesus, I can’t
believe it. No major international war in over a hundred years—civil
war, yes, in China and Angola and a few other places, but they were no

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

33

threat to the democracies. Now this. The lack of war is what has done
us in. The democracies let their security services whither to almost
nothing.”
“I know,” Lora groaned. Her heart passed judgment. It was her failure.
Mine.
She tried to fight it. “I don’t know what more I could have done
with our Institute. Damn it, we were already using most of our resources to combat this Sabah crap.”
She put her good hand up to her throbbing temple. “I still can’t believe we didn’t even get a whiff of this coming. Affiliates in thirty-one
major countries gathering information on terrorist organizations—
especially Sabah’s—and we heard nothing, not even from those we
hired who were well connected with the terrorists or the underworld.”
“We even knew who was screwing whom,” Mark agreed sourly.
“Well, whatever we discovered we passed on to the intelligence services of the democracies, and it didn’t do them any good, either.”
“It’s so horrible to have failed. We are . . . were . . . the world’s
largest private institute. We had the huge endowment John left us for
the very purpose of stopping somebody like Sabah. We failed John. We
failed Joy. We failed mankind.” Lora ended in a sob. She put her head
on the steering wheel and cried.
Mark got out of the back and slid into the front seat next to her. He
picked up Spunky, who was trying to climb onto her lap. He let Spunky
lick his face for a moment, then held him out to her. “Here, precious.
He’s concerned about you.”
She waved him off, wiped her face on her damp sleeve, and sat up
straight. She took several deep breaths, leaned over, and rubbed
Spunky’s back with the fingers sticking out of her cast. Mark took her
fingers in his good hand and caressed them with his thumb.
“We knew Sabah threatened us all,” he told her. “But no one could
even come close to imagining how much he really threatened us.”
Lora thought about this for a moment. She centered on it; she tried
to use it to push her emotions down. She weighed Mark’s last sentence
as one would a problem in geometry. It worked. “It’s something that’s
inconceivable before it happens,” she mused in a level voice, “but once
it does, the chain of events, causes, and capabilities are clear. Now, after the fact, how Sabah got nuclear weapons is easy to answer. Before
Sabah’s coup, China was swiftly developing nuclear energy and building large and small nuclear plants—by the time of his coup, China was
getting much of its electricity from nuclear plants, far ahead of the
United States.”

34

R.J. Rummel

Mark seemed startled that she could articulate several complex sentences in a rational statement in spite of her emotional state and, she
suspected, her bag lady appearance. He slid sideways on the seat to get
a better look at her. He gently caressed her tear-damp lips with his fingertips.
Lora sighed. “China had known peace since the downfall of the
Manchu dynasty, and it prospered. By the time of the coup, it was a
rich country.” She tried the impossible. Didn’t work. The smile won’t
come.
Mark mumbled, as though in pain, “I hate to say this, but I think
that peace and our democratic culture—China’s democratic culture before the coup—defeated them, and now us.”
Lora jerked her chin up and gaped at Mark. “Defeated us? What?”
she exploded. “You think the democracies have no choice but to submit
to the ultimatum?”
“Yes, goddam it! Defeated us.” Mark slapped the dashboard hard,
startling Spunky. His face twisted. He added, even louder, “We were
damn stupid. Stupid.”
He handed Spunky to Lora again. She gathered Spunky to her with
her good hand. His tail wagging vigorously, he tried to lick her nose.
She continued to stare at Mark.
With some difficulty, Mark lowered his voice and explained, “The
world is mainly democratic. No major power thought it had need for a
large military force. No democracy thought it needed nuclear weapons
any longer, and what few nuclear bombs we had were disarmed decades ago. Even when the fanatics seized control of what is now Islamic
East Turkistan and created the Islamic Union and took over China, no
democracy thought those crazies would build weapons of mass destruction. We—all of us—were caught in the trap of conventional thought.
Shit. Democracies always tend to think the best of other coun—”
“I know, I know,” Lora interrupted. “We see nondemocracies in our
own image. We see them as equally tolerant of disagreement, willing to
compromise, and rejecting violence as a solution to conflict. But,
sweetheart,” and Lora gripped the steering wheel tightly with her good
hand and twisted her body around to look into Mark’s still angry eyes,
“we can do something about this. And, goddam it, we will.”
Tears began coursing down her face again. “We will. We will. We
can stop him. But we’ve got to survive to do it.”

Chapter 4
Abul Sabah
Peking, October 12, 1994, New Universe

A

bul Sabah’s mind barely worked. He kept losing his thoughts
in a mental mist; he tried to hold onto each of them until they
made sense. I must be present at the conclusion of this. I must witness
what my son has done, what is ultimately my responsibility.
He lifted his heavy eyes and stared at the wall clock until he could
make out the hands. It was 3:21 a.m.—three hours and forty-nine minutes until the ultimatum’s deadline. Nothing seemed to have changed.
Turghun and his fellow blasphemers stood on the same spots, the same
adjutant manned the phones. Even the same security men stood against
the wall behind him.
Abul leaned back and put his head against the headrest. He felt the
air conditioning on his pate that age had rapidly turned bald. He was so
tired, so wearied by it all. He felt as though his life’s energy was pouring into his shoes. No, pouring into the toilet, he thought as his stomach
cramped and the nausea that never went away surged again. Damnable
stomach flu. He closed his eyes, tried to rest.
Turghun had been such a beautiful child, such a joyful boy. So eager to learn, so eager to foster Sabahism, so eager to command. It was
China that subverted him with its unholy ways, violent traditions, and
material customs, despite the Uighur teaching, despite being the son of
God’s Prophet. Had he not been so ambitious for God to bring China
under the rule of Sabah, his son would eventually have taken power
over Islamic East Turkistan and the Islamic Union, and followed God’s
peaceful way for achieving world power.
China! Stupid China.

aaa

36

R.J. Rummel

Uighuristan
1933–1977, New Universe
With Abul Sabah, General Musa, and Molla Ahmedi in full control
of newly named Islamic East Turkistan, Ahmedi imposed a rigid Sabahist interpretation of the Shari'ah. Women had to conform to strict
dress codes, including wearing head coverings, veils, and shapeless,
floor-length body coverings. Education was no longer allowed them
and they could only be seen in public when accompanied by a male
relative.
When Abul found out about these laws, he confronted Ahmedi.
“This is not what I intended. It is not according to my teaching.”
Molla Ahmedi looked sadly at Abul and responded, “Oh Holy
Prophet, these laws are implicit in your teaching and your revelations in
The Sabah. They surely are what God desires. He just did not spell
them out. He must not have thought it necessary for his Prophet, who
divines His thinking.”
Abul was confused.
Ahmedi continued. “If your revelations are in error, it must be a
small human failing. Anyway, if we now change these laws, people
will question whether in fact you are the Prophet. They believe that one
so close to God cannot be in error.”
Abul now realized that Ahmedi was correct, and made no more protests. Nor, he understood, could he protest to Ahmedi or General Musa
the other things the government was doing in his name. What he most
hated were the executions. People were executed for the most trivial
behavior, such as gambling in one’s home or listening to Chinese or
Western music on the radio. One woman was taken to a stadium in
Turpan and, in front of thousands of cheering Muslim men, she was
stoned to death for adultery. In 1938 the prisons were full of those
charged with moral crimes or accused of having “blasphemed” against
Sabah or Sabahism—really no more than criticism of General Musa’s
or Abul’s tyrannical rule. Musa had every one of them hung from balconies, trees, and cranes.
No one asked Abul’s approval; no one consulted him. He heard about
the executions from his aide, after the evil was done. That was the final
bloodletting. It centered his mind more than anything done so far.
Abul excused his aide, went to his office and, alone, he let his control relax and his abhorrence over what was going on fill his mind.
These mass murders were in his name, as were all the new laws. He
thought execution was appropriate for blatant blasphemy, treason, rape,

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

37

and murder, and no more. And no execution should be carried out
without a trial by Sabah judges, unless he, as the Prophet, ordered it.
He could no longer allow this terror. He had to take command. After all, he was Abul Sabah, the Caliph, the Prophet.
He telephoned Uncle Hasan, now the mayor of Urumqi, and asked
Hasan to see him at Abul’s home that evening. He could trust him.
When Uncle Hasan arrived, and Abul had put a glass of haraq in
his hand—the only alcohol Sabahs were allowed to drink—he explained the situation. “Musa and Ahmedi are ruling in my name and
doing things contrary to Sabah. They are the doings of Satan.” He detailed one law after another, and told him of the thousands of
executions done without Abul’s knowledge or consent. “They must be
stopped. I plan to assassinate them,” Abul concluded, his voice firm.
Uncle Hasan slowly put his drink down on the floor and stared at
Abul, his lips a tight line, his eyes narrowed. Abul held his breath. His
heart beat rapidly. He was sweating.
If Hasan will not join me, I know not where to turn. Musa or Ahmedi had appointed all his aides, and he didn’t know which
commanders or security officers he could safely approach. He suspected that they also chose many, if not all of the women who provided
his evening entertainment. If Uncle Hasan now joins Musa and Ahmedi, I am dead. God empowers me to speak His word, but I am
otherwise on my own.
As though a spell had been broken, Abul’s uncle threw himself on
the floor, prostrated himself in front of Abul, and kissed his foot.
“Glory be to God,” he said. “You are his Prophet. I will have what you
wish done tonight. I humbly suggest that you appoint General Abdulrakhim Hamit in Musa’s place. I also suggest that you bring Chief
Abulahat Khair from Kashgar, and put him in charge of national security and rooting out those whose minds have been poisoned by Musa
and Ahmedi.”
Abul put his hand on his uncle’s shoulder and bid him to rise. Then
for an hour they discussed which untainted Sabahs could be put in critical positions. When Uncle Hasan left, Abul heaved a sigh of relief. As
always, it was only one’s blood relatives who could be trusted in
bloody matters.
Before dawn, General Musa and Molla Ahmedi were assassinated
as they slept. Their whole families down to second cousins and twentythree of their closest aides and confidants also were killed. That had to
be done, Abul believed, so there would be no aggrieved relatives or followers to seek vengeance.

38

R.J. Rummel

Uncle Hasan and Chief Khair knew who to trust. They put together
a team that began a systematic purge of those whose loyalty to Abul
was questionable. Only the high officials and commanders were executed. The others were fired or transferred to nonsensitive positions or
to outlying posts. Abul also replaced all his aides, including members
of the Council of Clerics.
In two weeks the job was done. Abul went on national radio and
gave his own speech—his first:
My holy people of Islamic East Turkistan. I am happy
to report that God spoke to me through Gabriel two
weeks ago and informed me that there was a conspiracy
of my close advisors to subvert your Prophet’s power and
act contrary to His Word. I speak of General Musa and
Molla Ahmedi. They have carried out mass executions
against my wishes and made laws contrary to The Sabah.
They and their closest aides have been punished. In
their place I will soon make new appointments, including
new members of the National Council of Clerics.
I am also reviewing all laws to which I have not given
agreement. You can be sure, however, that those laws
forbidding jobs and education to women, those laws that
make them slaves to their husbands and fathers, are contrary to God and will all be cancelled. So will vice laws
forbidding dancing, music, movies, and the like.
Henceforth, all laws and any executions must have
my written approval.
God be praised, for I am His Prophet.
Khair did nothing important without first consulting with Abul and
getting his permission. To be sure, he placed spies among their aides.
One must learn from experience.
The next year Abul took a wife, Ayner Yasin, the daughter of Aisha
Yasin, one of the richest merchants in Urumqi. He thus married to his
secular and religious power that of wealth, and thereby cemented his
power over the country. Although as the Prophet he could fill a harem
with wives, one was sufficient, and she was tolerant of his occasional
evening visits from young Sabahists. She bore him four girls and one
boy. Abul named him Turghun and carefully groomed him to eventually rule and promote Sabah.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

39

To Abul, the word of God applied to all mankind. To Abul God
said, “Go forth and lead all men to His Word and Paradise.” To Abul
the iron logic followed: God meant me to be a Prophet for all mankind.
So, soon after he consolidated power in his country, he began to
promote Sabah in neighboring Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan,
all republics in democratic Russia. But decolonization was proceeding
rapidly, and so was the self-determination of ethnically and culturally
unique regions. He was preparing for their inevitable independence.
Abul invested a considerable portion of his country’s resources in
proselytizing among the dominant Muslim majorities in these countries.
In every one of their major cities, he funded Sabah madrasas. They
taught about Sabah’s—the Prophet’s—call for Muslim unity. And they
conveyed God’s message to convert the infidel, non-Islamic world. This
appealed to the average Muslim. Some of the most powerful mollas who
tried to prevent the spread of Sabah met unfortunate accidents or disappeared. Abul undertook similar proselytization in Afghanistan,
Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and the Muslim states of colonial India.
At the same time, he worked to subvert China. Ordinary rulers
would have thought China much too huge, with relatively few Muslims
for such an ambition. But Abul was God’s Prophet. He was sure God
would lend a hand in spreading His Word.
There were about thirty million Muslims in democratic China, some
in high places in the military, bureaucracy, and politics. A largely Islamic-oriented National Revival Party held twenty-four seats in the
472-seat legislature. And with most Chinese being Taoist or Buddhist,
they tolerated different religious views. They had no built-in resistance
to God’s work.
The intelligence services of China, the United States, and Great
Britain knew nothing about his fostering Sabahism in Middle Asia, nor
of his overall ambitions. Of course, his takeover of Uighuristan was
noticed, although at the time they knew few details, especially about
the mass murders conducted by Musa and Ahmedi. But news that
someone so young had seized power, even in such a remote country,
did become known. His spies informed Abul that democratic leaders
thought him a crackpot fanatic.
Since becoming a caliph, Abul had studied these countries—their
history, governments, beliefs, and so on. One must know one’s enemies.
Without a war among major or middle powers for many decades, the
heart of their intelligence services had atrophied like unused muscles.
When Sabah took power there were only seven embassies and consulates
in his country, the largest an eight-man embassy from China.

40

R.J. Rummel

Regarding his plans for China, he was in no hurry. His allies were
time, patience, and good health. He allowed the natural course of promotions to raise his secret followers to high positions in the Chinese
military, police, and bureaucracy. Bribes, women, quiet threats, and
lethal “accidents” worked to improve their chances at crucial junctures,
but these traditional tools were seldom needed.
He also exploited China’s open borders and welcome mat for professional immigrants. With his country’s wealth, he underwrote the
slow, unobtrusive migration of Sabahist Muslims from his country and
the rest of Middle Asia into China. His indigenous followers found jobs
for the immigrants in the important professions. Although only a few
hundred a month immigrated to China, they became well placed. In
forty years they amounted to over eighty thousand powerfully positioned followers. Some of them became top consultants and advisors to
Chinese legislators and administration leaders, some top generals, some
heads of local security forces.
In the 1950s and ’60s, a long list of states, provinces, and colonies
became politically independent, including Hawaii, Alaska, and California. In Middle Asia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan,
and Punjabistan became independent. Because of his successful proselytization throughout this region, within a year of their independence,
Islamic East Turkistan signed a mutual aid and defense pact with all
these newly independent Islamic countries and set up an Islamic Union
to coordinate their foreign affairs. The first Chairman of the Union was
his Uncle Hasan, who had resigned as mayor of Urumqi.
Within a few years it became clear that these supposedly sovereign
and independent nations were in fact under the political and religious
control of Islamic East Turkistan, and thus of Abul Sabah. All their major schools had adopted the Sabahist reading of Islam and the prayers
of the mollas in all the major mosques preached devotion to Sabah, the
Prophet. This was especially clear when all the armies of these countries were unified under the command of General Amat, General
Khair’s Chief of Staff.
The democracies did not pay much attention to this either. Although
there had been purges throughout the region, they had been done in
small numbers over many years. Although the death toll from these was
actually in the tens of thousands, there was not one huge massacre that
would draw their attention—not that Abul wanted such mass killing.
Moreover, there were no wars in the region and no rebellions.
Throughout these years, Abul realized he was free to go about God’s
work in China. He waited; waited like a spider on her web, watching political events in China. In 1978 they were getting interesting.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

41

Southern and Northern Chinese began a contentious political struggle over control of the national legislature. Since China was a
democratic parliamentary system, the prime minister headed his political party and only held power if his party got a majority of legislative
seats, or if he could knit together a coalition of parties willing to give
him leadership. The Prime Minister Zhu Jiabao, leader of the Democratic Union, was defeated on a vote of no confidence over his plan to
build a dam on the Fenhe River that would displace 230,000 Chinese.
He had to call a new election and in 1979 no party got a majority in the
legislature.
Over the next five years, several parties tried to establish a stable
governing coalition. Two national elections were held and still no party
got a majority control of the legislature. Neither north nor south could
win. Prime Minister Jiabao only held power through a tenuous coalition
of parties, including the National Revival Party led by secret Sabahists.
The democracies, especially the United States and Japan, with their
traditional ties to the country, tried to help. They sent observers and
financed extensive polling, but as long as the fight was democratic,
they kept out of influencing the election.
Rapid inflation and a minor recession hit China at this time. The economic philosophy of Prime Minister Jiabao was socialist. He believed in
using government funds to force industrial development, particularly in
heavy industry, and government power to control wages and profits. So,
shipbuilding, automobiles and trucks, and heavy machinery were subsidized, particularly their exports. To do this Jiabao had to raise taxes, but
when this brought in insufficient revenues, the government’s National
Bank of China increased its printing of new money to support government expenditures. Many Western economists said the result was
predictable. So did Abul’s secret Sabahists in influential positions, and
that is why he commanded them to give it all their support.
As the political paralysis continued, government industrial subsidies for the largest companies began to dry up. In 1982, the China Ship
Building Corporation, China’s largest, filed for bankruptcy. Over
43,500 people were put out of work at its four major yards. Jiabao
wanted to nationalize the corporation, but dare not put it to a legislative
vote. He knew it would become a vote of no confidence, and he would
lose. The bankruptcy immediately affected the economy, causing other
firms to fail and deepening the recession. The National Bank printed
even more money in the hope of turning it around. Hyperinflation resulted. The price of a bag of ordinary rice soared from the equivalent of
$1.23 to $7.68 within six months.

42

R.J. Rummel

All this questioned democracy. More and more editorials, articles,
and politicians called for a strong hand to take charge, even for authoritarian rule, if that would put people back to work, stop inflation, and
end political paralysis. Abul’s Sabahists wrote many of these.
Abul waited patiently. Finally, when the people planned large-scale
antigovernment demonstrations in Peking, when the major unions prepared a national strike at the same time, and when a vote of no
confidence in Jiabao’s government was scheduled, Abul sent out the
order for which he had planned for so long.
On May 26, 1984, at the biannual meeting of top military commanders in Peking, General Hu Jieche, the Commander in Chief of the
Western Region and a secret Sabah, shot the Chiefs of the Army and
Navy, and assumed emergency command over all China’s military
forces. General Jieche claimed that they had attempted a coup. At the
same time, the security forces were similarly taken over by Colonel Jiang Lanqing, another secret Sabahist, at a meeting called in Peking
presumably to deal with upcoming antigovernment demonstrations.
Largely Muslim troops that had gradually been infiltrated into Peking surrounded the legislature, letting no one escape. Special forces
with lists in hand searched through the legislature, killing all top nonMuslim political leaders. Other squads, each with their own list, hunted
through the universities, newspaper offices, and ministries, shooting
those who were known for their strong pro-democratic positions, or
their anti-Islamic writings or speeches.
By nightfall, the coup was complete in the capital. At 7:30 p.m.,
General Jieche went on radio and television. He was a handsome man
in his late forties, with a mixture of Caucasian Turk and Han Chinese
features. Tall, with closely cut black hair, high forehead, and small
eyes, he communicated a sternness appropriate to the three stars on the
shoulders of his general’s uniform. He sat at a marble-topped rosewood
desk flanked by the Chinese flags and spoke into a collection of microphones before him. Two armed guards stood off camera, each holding a
STU machine pistol across his chest. Behind the General was a vividly
colored map of China. His speech was short and to the point, as Abul
had advised:
My fellow Chinese. I am General Hu Jieche, commander of the Western Region. Today the Army and Navy
Chiefs tried to overthrow the government. As part of their
plot, they had plunged the country into chaos and created

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

43

famine in Hunan and Sheshi provinces. They also refused
to allow their military forces to shore up the Yellow River
banks and retaining walls that have been breached by a
vast flood. Their supporters have forced people out of
work and into near starvation. They have put businesses
into bankruptcy. They have caused food prices to soar so
that not even the middle class can afford to buy food.
Your political leaders and politicians did nothing.
They were so absorbed in their petty quarrels that they
ignored what was happening to you, my fellow people of
China. Had my soldiers and I not stepped in to quash this
plot, you would now be living under a repressive and absolutist military dictatorship only interested in power.
Your welfare would be no concern to them, either.
Therefore, reluctantly, I will provide the necessary
leadership to China. This is only temporary, until such
time that we can hold an election of legislators and a
prime minister sympathetic to your true needs. I intend no
dictatorship. I am only a caretaker. I will establish a
Governing Council of representatives from business, the
military, and the professions to govern until such time
that we can hold elections. By noon tomorrow I will announce membership in the Council. In the meantime, I
ask for your patience and support as we bring economic
growth, price stability, and democracy back to China.
The speech worked. It was received with much acclaim, As one
would expect of God’s doing, Abul thought when his intelligence service reported on it.
Jieche already had Sabahists in many positions of high and middle
power throughout the country, and now he had them purge those
thought unreliable, anti-Muslim, or anti-Sabah.
God’s enemies were not long paralyzed. In the south, three military
divisions rebelled against the Sabahist officers who had seized command. Anti-Sabah General Li Tu organized these divisions into an
army and defeated loyal Sabahist forces outside of Anyang and then
Handan.
Abul was worried. A few more such defeats, and Peking and his
rule over China might be lost. War between the Islamic Union and

44

R.J. Rummel

China would only be a matter of time, with his defeat obvious. But God
can see this no less, he thought. He is sure to lead my armies.
General Li Tu consolidated his forces for three weeks before
marching toward Baoding on his way to Peking. This allowed time for
loyal army divisions led by the secret Sabahist General Wang Furong to
organize and integrate Islamic East Turkistan troops that Abul rushed
to him by road and rail. When the two armies met in the famous Battle
of Wangdu, Li Tu was defeated with much bloodshed.
There also were pitched battles between security and army units in
Shanghai, Wuhan, Kunming, and Taijuan. In Shanghai and Kunming,
the enemy forces won and tried to fortify the cities, while calling for
help from the democracies. No democracy had the forces to intervene
and engage in a major war in China, however.
Once General Furong cleared the south of more dissident units, he
entered Shanghai in full force with ten thousand troops, all wearing
green headbands emblazoned with red crescent and star, the symbols of
battle to the death for Sabah, kill or be killed. Furong easily defeated
the rebellious army and security units there. Once he was firmly in control, General Jieche ordered him to make an example of the city to the
rest of China while ridding it of corrupt and evil foreign influences.
General Furong therefore gave his troops his famous Rule of Three—
the city is yours for three days; kill all foreigners; and do not touch
Muslims, mosques, or Muslim religious schools.
The next day, Abul’s chief of intelligence informed him of the resulting atrocities at about the same time foreign news services were
reporting the ugly details. Abul was distressed and outraged by the rape
and mass murder of common people. “This is not God’s way,” he
yelled at his chief.
In the translated foreign news, he read that soldiers raped women
and girls with abandon. Mothers or fathers who objected to the daughters being raped were shot. Those gang raped were often killed
afterward. The soldiers played a game they called Hop Hop: they
would force a boy to rape his sister or mother, a father to rape his
daughter, and pair up father and son, or mother and daughter, to perform sex acts on each other. Once tired of the play, they castrated the
males, forced their genitals into the mouths of the women and girls, and
then shot them all.
No male, no matter how young or old, was exempt from mistreatment, occasional rape, or death. If death came fast, they were lucky.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

45

Some of the soldiers took particular pleasure in killing their victims an
inch at a time with a cut here, another there, and within a few hours,
everywhere.
The first of the three nights was chilly, Abul read with shame and
horror; drunken soldiers dragged nineteen of their foreign captives to
an intersection, tied their hands and feet with wire, and wrapped a long
rope around them all, pressing them together until they could hardly
move. The solders poured oil and gasoline from a nearby service station on them, then lit the mixture. They warmed themselves beside the
resulting fire while making jokes about the screaming, undulating,
quivering mass of bodies.
Captured Americans were tied or nailed to a tree or post and
skinned alive. American and other foreign women and girls were
stripped, tied or fastened spread-eagled to walls or wagons, and left for
any passing soldier to take his pleasure. Abul did understand that soldiers hated Godless Americans the most, but he detested how they were
treated.
After he read about the Rule of Three, Abul called General Furong
directly and commanded in the name of God that he stop it. Furong issued the order and his officers tried to impose discipline on their
soldiers and remove them from the city, allowing newly appointed security and police units to take over. In some cases soldiers drunk with
power or heavy with loot refused to leave and had to be driven at bayonet-point to the army trucks. Some had to be shot.
There was no complete accounting of the dead. General Jieche said
only that an uprising in the city had been successfully defeated with
much loss of life. The Chinese Red Cross estimated that the rampaging
soldiers had killed 367,000 Chinese and foreigners.
This would not happen again, by Abul’s orders. What they had
done to the people proved that Generals Jieche and Furong were not
true Sabahists, and in time they would be removed.
Meanwhile, with the example of the Rape of Shanghai, no security
police or army units in or around any other city put up resistance to
government forces. There were sporadic and largely individual clashes
and firefights throughout China, but General Jieche was in firm control.
Within a year, the country seemed at peace and normal economic and
social activity resumed. One year after the coup, General Jieche died in
a helicopter crash; a month later, General Furong died, reportedly from
a heart attack. A Sabah-controlled Government Council “regretfully”
assumed power.

46

R.J. Rummel

Abul continued to rule China through the Council. He made one official visit to China as a head of state, several informal visits, and
numerous secret visits. As happened many times in China’s history
with the Mongols, Manchus, and Uighurs, the heart of China was now
in the control of foreigners.
Abul was smart about his exercise of power. He made no sudden attempt to convert all of China to Islam. Nor did he make any radical
change in China’s laws. Gradualness was his power principle. A
slightly different law here, another one there, and slow, legal, step-bystep Islamic—Sabah—law took over China. He insisted, however, that
capital punishment remain limited to the usual severe crimes, adding to
those excessive blasphemy of Mohammed, Sabah, and God, as interpreted by a court of Muslim clerics.
In the areas of journalism, the arts, and entertainment, the Council
moved carefully also. After all, China had been a democracy and people were used to free expression. The Council therefore initiated a
nation-wide debate on the role of violence and sex in television programs and the movies, and especially their impact on children. As
though related, the Council also showed concern over lies and distortions of history and current events that misled or exploited people.
With Abul’s hidden manipulation, a national consensus emerged,
asking for action. The Council then passed several laws that set up in
every city and town a “Children’s Welfare Association” to which complaints about the content of newspaper articles, television programs,
movies, speeches, and the like could be submitted by any citizen. The
Association then had the legal right to sue in court whomever violated
public or children’s morals.
The Council insisted that this was not government censorship, since
the membership of the Association was picked at large from local citizens and all those accused had their day in court. The effect of these
new laws, as Abul planned, went beyond chilling criticism and dissent.
When court cases against high profile critics of the government ended
in their imprisonment, they froze it.
Within three years, the military forces of China and the Islamic
Union held joint war games in Islamic East Turkistan, and Abul created a Joint Military Council to integrate their different strategies
and tactics, and to work toward making their weapons compatible
and interchangeable.
By 1991, he was seventy-six years old and ready to retire as anything but the final authority on the most general policy. His son

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

47

Turghun already had been involved in the day-by-day affairs of ruling
East Turkistan for a decade when Abul had reached fifty-four, and in
the last five years, he’d been involved in China as well. Abul had
turned all but the most Sabahist-related policies over to him. Turghun
was a militant Sabah, and Abul had trained and educated him for
power. His holy task was to lead the rest of the world to Sabahism and
Paradise, and if not achieved under him, to train his sons to this holy
end. In this Abul had pressed upon him God’s Way: patience, gradualness, accommodation, and alertness to the right moment to seize power.
With all his experience with power, Abul did not recognize that his
son was impatient, hungry for more and more power, and eager for the
final victory of Sabahism, which he would inherit or seize.
Abul remained in Urumqi as Turghun secretly ruled from Peking.
With Abul’s approval, he had ordered the extraction of plutonium from
nuclear energy fuel rods to make nuclear bombs. Abul had thought a
small number of bombs would be necessary in case the infidel democracies made war on them. The bombs were meant to be defensive
weapons, a deterrent. He’d seen what happened during the secret test of
the first nuclear weapon in the Taklamakan desert, and he could not
conceive of using one against a city.
Such mass murder would be infinitely worse than the Rape of
Shanghai, he had thought. It would be a bloody butchering of God’s
Way.
But without his knowledge, his son had secretly built up a much
larger stockpile, and by 1994 he had the nuclear bombs hidden in major
cities around the world.

aaa
Imam Ch’en Hsun
Peking, October 12, 1994
HE EXPLODED THEM IN CITIES. Abul’s hand was so heavy he
could hardly raise it to put his face into it. I must now be the most
hated, most despised, most loathed man in the world.
He could barely focus. An incredible weight crushed his mind. So a
world victory, swimming in the blood of mankind, will come to
Turghun. But it will not be the victory of Sabah. Not of God. Only of an
evil man.
I am ashamed I ever had a fit; I am ashamed I ever heard God’s
message; I am ashamed He did not pick a more worthy Prophet.
I am . . . .

48

R.J. Rummel

aaa
Turghun coolly turned from the observation window to look at
General Mirzat Zunun. “One more hour, General,” he commented in an
emotionless voice. He raised it to give the expected order: “If we do not
hear from the democracies, Chicago is to be destroyed at precisely
7:02, our time.”
General Zunun strode the few steps to his adjutant and relayed the
order. The adjutant licked his lips and picked up his green phone. He
glanced through the large window at the American desks on the floor
below, punched a combination of buttons on his phone, and reached a
specific technician at one of the two Chicago desks. The technician had
already made preliminary preparations, and the adjutant watched
closely as he and the technician at the other American desk inserted
their keys, unlocked, and toggled all but one of the switches. They removed their keys and waited for one minute before the deadline, when
they would reinsert their keys and unlock the final switch. Two security
men well familiar with the procedures stood at their elbows; the supervising general hovered nearby.
Looking concerned about the lack of response to the ultimatum,
Turghun glanced back at his father. He was slouched in the plush cushion of his rattan rocker, his head lolling to one side, his eyes closed.
He was too still.
Imam Ch’en Hsun stared down at the activity on the floor below,
his face so placid that he seemed lost in contemplation of God. Turghun
tapped him on the arm and nodded toward his father.
Ch’en looked around at Abul. Hiding a grin, he walked back to him,
bent down, and looked at him carefully. He lifted Abul’s wrist, seeming
to seek his pulse. After a few minutes, he looked back at Turghun and
shook his head. “He is dead.”
Turghun stood rock still and stared at his father’s body.
Ch’en took the few steps back to him and whispered, “Did you do
this?”
“No,” Turghun finally said. “But I am glad he is gone. He no longer
spoke for God; he no longer was a true Sabah. No matter how deprived
of physical power he was, he still had spiritual power, and would have
been a constant danger to the new world. As his son, I’m sorry to see
his death. And I will grieve when the day is done.”
Ch’en bowed and said, “I am sorry about his death. My sincerest
condolences. We have been honored and humbled to know the world’s

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

49

greatest man, God’s greatest prophet.” He was afraid his eyes would
give him away, and turned to look unseeingly through the window. And
by the same slow-acting thallium, you soon will join him.

Chapter 5
Lora
1994, New Universe

“Y

es,” Lora repeated to herself, “the lives of billions, and the
freedom of billions more, depends on our survival.” It had
become her mantra.
As they drove toward Santa Barbara they tried to avoid all large
cities, but sometimes this had its own risks. On October 11, that most
crucial day in all of world history—the ultimatum’s deadline in their
time zone—her mind seemed in a state of suspended animation and her
body drove by habit. At one intersection outside of Kansas City, Lora
slowed to a crawl to make a sharp left turn onto a two-lane connecting
route. She hardly noticed the four men and a girl standing at the intersection, watching traffic.
The girl, no more that thirteen or fourteen years old, had brown hair
chopped short around her head. She wore a dirty gray t-shirt hanging
loosely over a tight denim dress that barely hid her panties. She had
rolled the shirtsleeves up over her bony shoulders, revealing tattoos of
scaly dragons that swept down her upper arms and threw red-orange
flames along her elbows.
Two of the men were dressed in tight faded denims and t-shirts.
One had a skull and crossbones on his shirt and wore a black headband
around dirty black hair that cascaded in rivulets down his back. Another had his shirtsleeves cut off and so many tattoos covering his arms,
they looked like abstractions by Jackson Pollock. A third was bearded
and wore a tank top over a bulbous stomach that drooped over his belt.
The fourth man was middle-aged and neatly dressed.
As Lora slowly rounded the corner, she saw Neat Dresser nod when
the girl glanced at him. Then she pointed in Lora’s direction. Two of
the men immediately jumped in front of the car and forced Lora to hit
her brakes to avoid hitting them.
Lora quickly locked her door, but the man with the tattoos broke the
door’s window with a spiked metal bar. Leering at Lora, he reached in
with stinking hands to unlock the door and pull her out. She had no

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

51

doubt what he and the others intended to do. She opened her left hand
and put her right into it, cast and all, and used the power of both arms
and her right shoulder to ram her left elbow into his throat, gasping
from the pain as her broken arm bones ground against each other. With
a strangled squeal, the punk disappeared beneath her broken window.
A second threw open the unlocked passenger door—Stupid us, she
thought reflexively—and Spunky started barking and growling at the
strange smell and noise. The man hesitated, looked at Lora with a face
frozen in a mirthless grin, then leaned in and faked a thrust at Spunky
with one thick hand, not knowing he was blind. At the same time, he
reached out to get a grip on the dog’s fur with the other, obviously intending to throw the terrier from the car.
Lora was angling her body to smack him in the face with her cast
when Mark reared up from the back seat where he had been sleeping.
With his pistol butt, he whacked the intruder in the nose and there was
a crunch followed by a gurgling scream as the man gripped his face
with both hands and fell backwards out of the car.
Hoping that Spunky would not fall out of the flapping passenger
door, Lora ground the gear into first and accelerated, knocking one of
the men flying with her fender and just missing the girl as Neat Dresser
pulled her out of the way. Lora burned rubber spinning around the corner, threw the gear into second, third, and sped down the road.
Safe, her pinpoint focus relaxed, and her post-fight adrenaline withdrawal began. The agony in her abused broken arm overwhelmed her.
She gasped, and couldn’t get her fingers to work through the pain to
shift into higher gear. A mile down the road, she pulled over and just
let the car stall and her body slump against the steering wheel while she
panted for breath.
No one had said a word; not the girl, not any of the punks. A chill
went up her spine and she could feel the hair on her arms stand out. She
shivered. Too close—it was too close.
Minutes went by before she could move and let Mark take her place
behind the wheel. It was longer before either of them could speak. Or
before Spunky stopped trembling. He didn’t need sight to sense there
had been great danger.
At Lawrence, the next large town, they looked for and found a Lux
car dealer and asked him to replace their broken car window. Their Lux
was one year old and the dealer had no replacement window. But he
had the same model on the lot. So Lora showed him her universal ITU
bank machine card, and Mark asked him to transfer its window to their

52

R.J. Rummel

car. She didn’t think he would have accepted the card of a New York
bank. He made the transfer for an even $3,000, finishing the job at almost 5:00, slightly over two hours before Sabah’s deadline.
They decided to go on the road and then park somewhere near
deadline time. At 5:50 p.m. they parked outside of Junction City. Both
were so anxious, they could drive no farther. There’d been no word on
the radio yet.
Hardly any cars and few pedestrians were on the streets. The parking lot of a nearby shopping center was almost empty. Most people
must be waiting for the announcement.
The clock showed 5:55. Nothing.
Lora’s mind, her whole body, was on minimal life support. Lora existed nowhere. Nothing existed. Only the car’s digital clock and the
radio. They filtered out all the chatter of experts over what to expect,
and they trembled, waiting for that special announcement.
5:58
She knew she was not breathing. She saw nothing beyond the digits
on the dashboard clock.
5:59
It came: “This is a Public Broadcasting Network news special from
the temporary capitol of Philadelphia. President Peabody has announced that the United States has signed a Treaty of Nonaggression
with the Islamic Union and China, and will accept the ‘advisor’ from
China’s College of Clerics. Senator Wells, the temporary Democratic
leader of the Senate now meeting at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland, has assured the country that the treaty will be put on a fast track to
approval and that a quorum of Senators will be present so that it can be
voted upon. President Peabody is scheduled to make a national speech
from Andrews at—”
Lora took a shuddering breath and let it out as a sob. She knew what
to expect. It had happened. It was real. Freedom ended; Sabah ruled.
As though from a great distance, Mark’s sad voice broke into her
mind. “No goddam alternative. The democracies have a few bombers,
some warships, and a small army, but nothing that could cause the level
of destruction in Urumqi alone that would come close to what Sabah
did to just New York. The bombers couldn’t even make the long oneway flight there over hostile countries. Shit!”
Mark stared at the radio and pounded the steering wheel with his
good hand. “Jesus, Lora, I never dreamed in my worst nightmares that
this could happen.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

53

“I know, but it’s clear that Sabah’s threat is a realistic one. Already
he’s shown he’s willing and able to destroy major capitals. But we
know the hidden democratic agenda, don’t we? Government officials
and the bureaucracy will use the techniques all politicians and bureaucrats learn in a democracy. They will obfuscate, delay, deny, change
the subject, misunderstand, seem to agree, and fulfill partially.” Lora
shook her head. “Works if your opponents are democrats. But not if
they shoot you for as little as mismatched socks.”
Mark nodded. “Yeah. Well, I’m sure the democracies will set up
secret labs to build nuclear weapons, and carry out covert action, especially toward assassinating Sabah and his successor son. And they’ll
secretly search for the remaining nuclear bombs, if any, that Sabah
claims to have hidden in major cities. Of course, the only ones he had
hidden could have been those he exploded, but it’s too dangerous to try
to test his claim.”
Mark calmed down sufficiently to wipe his face with the Softies she
gave him and resume driving. Soon, after the news special concluded,
PBN put on a panel of weapons and security experts who speculated on
how Sabah had hidden the nuclear bombs he had exploded. A retired
director of the American Security Group argued, “Sabah smuggled
them into the cities in crates, probably routed through such innocuous
countries as Indonesia and Alger—”
A retired Air Force General interrupted with, “By the 1990s we became too damn complacent and too damn open in a world where twothirds of the countries were democracies, and we were no threat to each
other. All passports had been eliminated among democracies and customs checks at the border were cursory. And trade among the
democracies was almost completely free and unregulated. Some crazy
could have smuggled an elephant into the country in a crate leaking its
urine and feces, stinking to hell, and still managed to hide it in a major
city.”
Lora leaned her head back against the headrest, closed her wet eyes,
and stroked Spunky. “Now that we’ve accepted a dictator, we will soon
be an occupied country with Sabah’s security forces and resident Sabah
supporters rooting around for people like us, and we and our institutes
were not secret or hidden.”
Mark hunched over the wheel and kept his eyes on the road. “Yeah,
but the Republic of California is still too small for Sabah’s secret police
to be interested in it. In time, though, the scientific and engineering
center of Santa Barbara will attract their attention.”

54

R.J. Rummel

Lora still had trouble controlling her voice and spoke much louder
than she intended. “We’ve time, thank God. I’m sure California, like
the United States, will be preparing for a covert war against Sabah.
There’ll be secret collaboration and organization among businesses,
scientific and technological centers, and universities to hide much of
the their scientific secrets and equipment in underground sites—
perhaps abandoned gold and silver mines.”
Lora hesitated, looking mournfully out the window. “No matter.
Sabah’s people will eventually uncover it all. Everything now depends
on our getting to Santa Barbara and having time.”

aaa
Day after day, night after night, they drove on, keeping their doors
locked and windows up, traveling on major highways between cities
and back roads around them. After three days of such driving, they approached the Republic of California’s border. They passed miles of
cars, motor homes, recreation vehicles, trailers, and trucks scattered in
the fields, under trees, and along the side of the road. Tents had sprung
up, smoke drifted from fires, and people milled about. The air smelled
of too many people, too many cars and trucks.
Before they got to the border, Nevada State troopers stopped them
at a roadblock. One checked their identity and let them move on to the
California border only when Lora showed her California registration
documents for her Institute’s Santa Barbara affiliate. She asked about
all the vehicles scattered around, and the trooper waved her hand at the
them, frowned, and replied, “California won’t let them in.”
When they got to the border, they also presented their documents to
the well-armed border guards. The guards studied their pictures, their
faces, and sullenly waved them around the roadblock. They were in
California.
At Stovepipe Wells near the border, Lora called their Institute’s affiliate so they would be ready for their arrival. She explained what she
wanted done. But whether the car could make it the whole way was in
question. They’d been unable to find any gas being sold for the last two
hundred miles, and within two days of the nuclear attack, California
initiated gas rationing available only to those with California driver’s
licenses. When they hit the intersection for the route to Santa Barbara,
Lora called the Institute again, told them what route they were taking,
and told them that if they weren’t there in two hours, to send a pickup
truck after them.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

55

The naked sun was high and a light breeze blew off the Pacific as
they drove down De La Vina Street on gas fumes. Stately royal palms
lined the street and mottled isolated patches of asphalt with their stingy
shade. When Lora caught sight of the affiliate, she felt like cheering
that they had made it and crying with sorrow that the affiliate was all
that remained of Joy and John’s mission.
“We’re here,” Lora said with a heavy sigh. “Now the real hard
work begins.” She picked up Spunky, who had been sleeping, his paws
twitching as he dreamed. She felt the tension drain from her, leaving
behind a deep weariness.
The trip had taken seven days.
The affiliate was a beautiful rose pink two-story building done in
the local Spanish style. To the casual observer, it looked like the
sprawling, airy home of a very rich family, rather than the location of
scientific laboratories. As they pulled into the parking lot, a crowd
waiting in front of the building broke and ran toward their car. Lora
recognized the affiliate’s staff—all had come out to greet them.
Sybil Bazyan, the Palestinian president of their affiliate, ran toward
the car with her purse flapping. She reached the car door and clapped
on it. The others caught up to her, shouting welcomes, and surrounded
the car except for a space they left open in front. Mark stopped the car
without trying to park.
Even before the car stopped, Sybil started crying. She tried to open
the locked door, and waited while Lora maneuvered her body around to
unlock it. Then she leaned in and hugged Lora’s head, crying out, as if
Lora hadn’t called her on the telephone, “You and Mark are alive. God
be praised, I was so worried.” She kissed Lora’s cheek, then backed up
and ran over to the other side to hug Mark as he emerged from the car,
not even caring about the cast and not knowing about his ribs. Tears
flowing, she kept saying, “Thank God, thank God, you’re alive.”
With more restrained enthusiasm, their chief scientists welcomed
them with brief hugs and left-handed handshakes; many of the assistants, technologists, and other specialists greeted them happily as well,
although when they saw the couple’s injuries, they did so with more
consideration and concern. The mood soon turned somber as they all
recognized that Lora and Mark were the only survivors of all their
friends and colleagues at the Institute.
Although standing slouched with fatigue, Lora told Sybil to assemble her department heads for the immediate meeting she had asked her
to arrange. As she shuffled in the front door of the Institute with

56

R.J. Rummel

Spunky cradled in her arm, she had to pass him to Mark and vomit
again, as they both had been doing frequently. “You know,” she commented to Mark, twitching her nose at the odor of the three of them,
“Spunky also seems unable to hold any of his food down. I think he
lost weight during our drive here. I know we did. After the horror
we’ve gone through, it’s certainly understandable.”
Mark and Lora had known what to do about Sabah even before
their trip began, and had the whole drive to think about it and work out
the details. As soon as all department heads were at their first meeting,
Lora said, “Let us join hands and bow our heads in a minute of silent
remembrance of all our dead, our friends and colleagues, our fellow
Americans, and our fellow human beings throughout the democracies.”
Mark and Lora removed their slings so that they could touch the
hands of those on both sides of them. Afterward, she said, “We will
remember them more properly later, and also try to help all their
surviving loved ones as best we can. We will also hold a memorial
service for them all as soon as we get settled and organized. That will
be the time for tears. Now, we have a job to do.
“Most important things first. You all know about the old time machine we had kept hidden in a vault in our New York Institute until we
transferred our scientific research here. We had the machine freighted
here too, years ago. You’ve been all over it since then, trying to figure
out how it worked. As I understand it, your problem is that we have Joy
and John’s time capsule without the external electronics and laser
equipment that made it operational. It’s like trying to figure out how a
car works, when the motor is missing. Although we have had no immediate need to operate a time machine, given our Institute’s goals to
promote democracy and prevent war and democide, I nonetheless insisted that you all work on it anyway, just in case we might need it.
Now we do.”
Lora looked from one face to another. “So, what’s possible?”
Sybil answered, “We carried out several tests. We know that we can
send back in time a small capsule. So far we have not been able to increase its size or successfully send a living thing back in time without it
being killed.”
Looking at the bearded man on her left, Sybil asked, “Jack, tell us
what we now can and cannot do.”
At that moment, Mark held up his hand, excused the interruption,
and said, “I have to use my room, be back in a minute.” He rushed out.
“‘My room,’ Lora?” Sybil asked, her eyebrows arched.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

57

Lora couldn’t even grin. “He means the john. With everybody but
us in the Institute, he uses his middle name. As some of you know, his
father Dolphy named him in remembrance of John Banks. Anyway,
we’ve both had diarrhea.”
Then it struck her. There is something funny about this. But I don’t
want to think about that now.
Once Mark returned, Jack told them in detail about what they could
now do, how far back they could go, and other limitations. “In short,”
he finished, “we can send back a small inanimate package no bigger
than two packs of cards, and we are limited to twenty years in time
travel.”
Lora tried to sit up straight. Looking around the table, she said in a
firm voice, “Okay, this is what we absolutely must do, within weeks.
We must be able to send back in time a metal box weighing no more
than two pounds and perhaps half the size of a shoebox. It must go to a
precise location. Your absolute error margins are days in time, and no
more than an inch in space. I will give you the four dimensional coordinates when your tests show you’re ready.”
During the trip, Mark and Lora had discussed how much they could
reveal about the purpose of the time travel they planned. She’d explained then, “These are loyal scientists, but scientific activity on this
scale can’t take place without a platoon of assistants, secretaries, mechanics, and so on. There are too many possible sources of leaks, and
just one could end the project and possibly everyone’s lives—and the
only hope of mankind. I don’t doubt the local police and security officials soon will be under orders from some Sabah henchmen.”
Mark had nodded. “The scientists especially won’t like it, but
we’ve no choice. We can’t even connect this time travel to the attacks
on the democracies—that might leak out and bring the security forces
or police down on everyone. But we have to tell Sybil. If the research is
to be done well, she must know.”
Lora agreed.
Now, at the meeting, she tried to make sure everyone understood the
importance of this project. “This is a Priority One project. You must work
on this as though your life and those of your loved ones depend on it.”
George, a quantum physicist said, “It would be helpful if we knew
why this is so important.”
Before she could answer, her head involuntarily jerked toward the
floor and she spewed a grayish liquid, all that remained in her stomach.
She saw flecks of blood in it.

58

R.J. Rummel

Mark leaned over and whispered, “Are you okay, precious?”
Lora felt exhausted. She tried to put her hand on his shoulder, but
her cast got in the way. Sitting up, she wiped her mouth on her sleeve,
and gasped, “I think we’d better see a doctor.”
Mark took over the meeting. Ignoring George’s suggestion, he told
them, “You all know what Lora wants.” He looked from one to another.
“Can it be done within a few weeks?”
Sybil answered for the scientists, “We’ve been working overtime to
get our equipment and material ready for movement into a secret cavern in the Kilten Mine complex. We’ll now do that only as time is
available from work on the time machine.”
One of the department heads, a thin, short, brown-skinned man with
a mustache that seemed to hang from his large nose, put up his hand.
Nodding at him, Sybil said, “Go ahead, Harry.”
“I think we almost can to do it. The problem lies in the energy
needed. We are reducing this by fiddling with the quantum foam. The
worm hole across the space-time dimensions is set, however, and all we
need to do is increase its size and stabilize its other end at the precise
coordinates you define. This is ultimately a matter of laser power. As it
is now, we can lay additional cables to tap into another electrical transformer station half a mile away, and through it tap into the California
grid, but we will probably cause a citywide blackout for several hours.
I’m sure the cause would be tracked down to the local transformers and
the repairmen will not miss our taps. In the present national emergency,
this may attract the police or even the secret security teams.” He ended
with his hands palm up in front of his chest.
Mark answered, “We need to do this only once. And we have to
chance discovery. Forget about the fiddling. Plan on going full blast.
Any more questions?”
Helen, head of the computer department, put up her hand. When
Mark looked at her, she asked, “Does anybody here know how Sabah
developed the bombs?”
Sybil responded, “China has been far advanced in the development
of nuclear energy. They have forty-three nuclear reactors hooked into
their national electrical grid. Sabah had his scientists extract plutonium
from the spent fuel rods from their reactors. By our calculations, he
could extract an average of one to eight kilograms of plutonium per
plant per year. He only needed something like eight kilograms of plutonium for each bomb like the one that exploded in New York. Sabah
has had the plutonium and time to build hundreds of such bombs. Re-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

59

member that two years after his coup in China, there was a massive explosion in the Taklamakan desert. We think now it was the first nuclear
bomb test. The nuclear bombs that Sabah exploded in New York and
elsewhere were not very large, given what he could have done with all
that plutonium. They were the equivalent of about fifty thousand tons
of TNT.”
Lora’s heart was racing. She blurted out what she feared asking.
“The New York bomb was exploded in the middle of Manhattan at a
time when most people were on the street or at work.” She hesitated
and took a deep, tremulous breath. “This means that the number killed
must be astronomical. From what you know about the bomb and the
urban populations it was exploded among, what is your best guess . . .
as to . . . the human . . . toll?” The last words came out as squeal, as
though Lora were trying to brake her words to a stop before the awful
question was completed.
Sybil stared down at the table for a moment. Then she slid her conference chair back and stood. She slouched, her head hunched into her
shoulders, the suit padding on her shoulders thrust out at the edges. She
continued to stare down at the table for a long minute, brow furrowed,
lips pinched. Her finger moved idly over the table’s surface. She
seemed to be gathering emotional strength. A tear crept halfway down
one cheek.
Lora had never seen her like this before.
The soft swishing of the air conditioning and the wheezing of one
of the scientists combined into what seemed a modern musical parody
of Sybil’s anguish.
Some of the scientists looked down at the table in front of them,
some stared at the wall. Two of them wiped their eyes.
They all must know the estimates.
Sybil finally looked at Lora, her black eyes narrowed and wet with
her misery, the skin at the corners of her mouth folded into deep
creases. She forced the words out, and each one stood alone, as though
a separate tombstone. “About fifty thousand dead . . . 250,000 missing
in New York. In all the cities attacked . . .there may be . . . 1.75 to two
billion . . . human beings killed . . . or missing.”
Sybil pulled her chair under her and plopped down with a thump.
She gazed down at the teardrops splattered on the table in front of her
as another tear marked a fresh path on her cheek.
Lora was stunned. The hairs on her arms and legs stood out from
goose bumps as a polar breeze worked down her spine. Almost two bil-

60

R.J. Rummel

lion human beings wiped off the face of the earth in seconds? That
many? Lora’s mouth hung open. Her stomach knotted as her mind
warped around the indigestible numbers.
A sound pierced her whirling mind. Mark was speaking. She jerked
her head to look at him, and struggled to push that impossible death toll
into a corner of her mind. It would never leave her mind. She would
now live with it, as though it were a metal rod that had been thrust
through her brain.
Mark’s face was gray. He was stammering out a conclusion to the
meeting. “. . . for your help during this most terrible time.” He stopped
and inhaled a deep breath. He held it. And let it out in a whoosh. “Our
sincerest sympathies for all the friends and colleagues each of you have
lost in the despicable attacks on the democracies. Thank you all.”
Lora could not speak. She put her hand on Mark’s shoulder and her
head on top of that and cried.
Others cried with them, and soon people got up, said a few words to
each other, and left. Some came over to them, patted or stroked their
backs briefly, and expressed their personal regrets and sympathy over
the destruction of their New York Institute and all those inside. Sybil
hung back until all the others had left. Her eyes were red and puffy.
Lora felt even sicker. She continued to lean on Mark, even after
they stood up. Mark said to Sybil in a tremulous voice, “Above all,
even if we sacrifice our Institute and our lives, we’ve got to send that
box back in time.”
“Amen,” Sybil sighed.
Mark suddenly looked as tired as Lora felt. He leaned on the table
with his good arm as he told Sybil, “Beyond our injuries, something is
wrong with us. You’d better get us to a doctor.”
Wasting no time, Sybil wiped the tears from her face with both
hands and took Lora’s good arm in hers. She walked them out of the
Institute to her car. Lora remembered Spunky, and once Sybil made
sure they were comfortable in her car, she retrieved him from the care
of her secretary. Lora took him from Sybil and whispered, “Hi little
boy,” and he showed his happiness at hearing her voice by weakly
barking his greeting and trying to lick her hand when she put him on
her lap. He seemed unusually weary.
While Sybil drove them to a nearby hospital emergency room, Lora
told her why they were sending a box back in time. Sybil’s only response was, “I thought so. We’ll do it, Lora. While there is a spark of
life in all of us, we’ll do it.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

61

At the emergency room, Sybil got them immediate attention while
she held Spunky for them. Lora tried to explain their symptoms to a
doctor, but she was having trouble with the words. Sybil took over, and
once she explained that they had been near the nuclear bomb explosion
in New York, they became the center of attention of a squad of doctors.
None of them knew at first what to make of their tests. They conducted more, called in several specialists, and made numerous calls.
The doctors finally told Lora and Mark that they should be hospitalized
for observation, but the couple refused. Early that evening they left the
hospital, with Spunky tucked into Lora’s arm.
Sybil had rented a furnished apartment for them as soon as she
knew they were coming. She drove them there, then took their car keys
so someone could gas up their car and bring it by the next day. All Lora
and Mark could do was say thanks and give her a kiss on the cheek and
an affectionate one-armed hug.
Lora put a bath towel on the end of the bed for Spunky. She gently
placed him on it, and made sure he had water nearby in case he got
thirsty. Then she dropped onto a bed for the first time in weeks, put her
head on Mark’s chest with a sigh, and fell instantly asleep. They slept
for about twelve hours.
Strange, Lora realized when she slid out of bed and staggered into
the living room, I feel no stronger after that long rest than I did before
going to bed.
There was a message waiting on their answering machine from Dr.
Chang, the doctor in charge of their tests. When she returned his call,
the conversation was short: “Are you at the apartment address that Miss
Bazyan gave me?”
“Yes.”
“May I come over now?”
“Please do.”
“Will be there as soon as possible.” He hung up.
When Lora returned to the bedroom she found Mark awake. She
noticed the stench in the room for the first time and went to Spunky,
still at the end of the bed. He lay unmoving. His eyes were closed. A
yellow, mucus-like substance had drained onto the towel from his nose,
and blood-flecked diarrhea stained the towel. She put her hand on him;
he was hot. He opened his eyes a slit, tried to lick her hand, and gave
up. She realized that he was near death.
Lora dropped to her knees at the end of the bed and cried as she
gently stroked Spunky’s head. Tears ran down Mark’s cheeks as he

62

R.J. Rummel

smoothed Spunky’s fur. They were still there when the doctor knocked
on their door.
She kissed Spunky on the head and all he could do was half-open
his sightless eyes. She didn’t think he could smell her anymore.
Dr. Chang had called Sybil to join him and they met at the door.
They came in together when Mark answered the knock. Chang wore a
somber expression and Lora knew that his news would not be good.
Mark and Lora sat on the plush sofa while Sybil sat on the armrest by
Lora. Chang sat on the edge of an ottoman across from them.
Mark asked, “Well?”
Chang rubbed his hand over his balding head, leaned toward them
with his elbows on his knees, and clasped his hands. “I’m very sorry I
have to tell you this, and you have my greatest sympathy. The tests
we’ve done show that you both have lethal radiation poisoning. There
is nothing we can do about its finality. We can, however, ease your suffering and help you avoid a painful end.”
That was it. He was direct. He was honest. They had to know. They
now did.
Lora had suspected as much, and had made her peace with death.
All that concerned her now was the time machine. Her mind exploded
with one thought: We’ve got to succeed. We must. The words almost
stuck in her throat, but she had to know. “How long?”
“You two are in your forties, I know. The older you are, the faster
the poisoning acts. Maybe a month. Three at most.”
Mark was not surprised. He cleared his throat and asked, “Is there
anything we can take to keep our minds clear until the end, no matter
the deterioration of our bodies?”
“Yes. I’ve checked with the radiologists on this, and there is a cocktail of drugs that I can give you that will help keep your mind as clear
as possible and slow the effect of the radiation. I have the drugs with
me.”
Mark twisted his body toward Lora so that he could hold her hand
in his good one, and asked, “When we’ve completed what we must and
we are obviously near the end, we would like to take something so that
we can both go together. You understand?”
Tears had been streaming down Sybil’s face. Now she let out a
mournful sob and buried her head in her hands. Chang’s own eyes were
moist, and he just nodded. After a moment, in a controlled voice, he
told them, “In a few days, I’ll give you pills that will do it. It’ll be just
like going to sleep. You can take them together when you’re ready.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

63

He opened his medical case and handed them over a dozen bottles
of pills, and a list of instructions for taking them. He took out two hypodermics and gave them several shots. Afterward, he gave them his
home number and told them, “Please call me at any time for any reason.” With their thanks, he let himself out.
Sobbing even more, Sybil came around the sofa, knelt down on the
floor in front of them, and stretched out her arms to both. They all cried
together—for humanity, for democracy, for the United States, for
themselves. After a while Lora rose and went to check on Spunky. He
was dead.

Chapter 6
Joy
Silicon Valley, 2002, Old Universe

I

n the midst of Joy Phim and John Bank’s training by the Survivors’
Benevolent Society for their travel back in time to 1906 and their
mission, the FBI raided their building in Silicone Valley. Word had
leaked out about the possibility of a time machine and under the excuse
that there were unregistered weapons and drugs on the site, a SWAT
team burst in, weapons drawn, looking for it. Only the guards in the
building were armed, and they were not about to fight the FBI.
Joy’s mother, Tor, rushed them to the time machine and they hurried through their final goodbyes. As Tor pushed her into the time
machine capsule with John, Joy frantically brushed her hands over her
mother’s shoulders and cheeks. Just before the door closed on them
forever, Joy screamed to her, “Good-bye, Mom, I will never forget you.
I love you!”
Joy would never forget the agony on her mother’s face as she
yelled, “Safe journey, my dearest,” and slammed the capsule door.
Tor had been her greatest love, her life, until John. Tor had adopted
her when she was nothing at the age of four and had, in her love and
teaching, created the woman Joy had become. More, Joy had a deep
empathy for Tor’s deep humanity, and her suffering under the Cambodian Khmer Rouge, who murdered her husband. For virtually Joy’s
whole life, Tor had been her model of love and goodness, and now she
would never see her again. She would never know what happened to
her mother. She would never again share her thoughts or know her feelings. And she would never be able to speak to her mother’s worry
about Joy and her fear of the failure of their mission. Tor had invested
her life in Joy and the mission. Now, she would never know if Joy lived
or died, or if the mission succeeded or failed.
So Joy broke down, devastated, in the time capsule once the door
was slammed shut. In her mind and heart she saw her mother’s loving
face. She felt her fingers as they stroked her cheeks. She felt her arms
and body as she hugged Joy to her. She heard Tor’s sweet voice comforting her when she was hurt or sad.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

65

And the sobs came from deep within Joy and rushed to the surface,
emerging in a passionate howl. She sobbed out her heart.
Gripped within her grief, Joy did not even know they had traveled
through time. She heard nothing, although John told her later that the
capsule made a sound like a sports car starting up. Much later, when
her rationality returned, she could see it now in her mind’s eye, as the
calendar pages flipped backwards and then whole calendars, the moon
reversed its course, and the sun spun from west to east. They finally did
arrive in San Francisco, precisely as their scientists had calculated: November 14, 1906, 2:51 am.
But at that moment Joy did not know it and did not care.
The capsule was cramped for both of them, but that didn’t stop
John. He squirmed around, knelt in front of her, hugged her, stroked
her back, and just held her while she cried. Between body-shaking
sobs, she managed to whimper, “I knew . . . I knew . . . I would lose her
forever . . . . I knew it would be like . . . death between us. I had prepared myself. But, I . . . didn’t know . . . I didn’t know it would . . .
really feel like this.”
Joy slowly cried out her grief, and when her sobs subsided into
sniffling she finally sat up, still in John’s arms. Her face was wet with
tears and they had soaked the front of his pants. He wiped her face and
eyes with the sleeve of his uwagi—karate shirt—and she managed to
ask if they had arrived.
“Yes,” he murmured, his face overflowing with compassion. He released her from his arms and as she was standing up, he looked down at
the floor. His brow furrowed. He squeezed down, picked up a golden
locket, and handed it to her. She guessed that Tor had thrown it into the
capsule for her just before she slammed the door shut.
Joy’s hands were shaking as she took it from him and held it over
her heart for a precious moment. Even without opening it, she felt her
mother in it. She felt her love.
She opened it and saw a picture of Tor smiling, and sending her a
kiss with her hand. On the other side of the locket was a group picture
of the Survivors’ Benevolent Society members who had planned this
mission for years, had prepared them for it, and invested all their
wealth in it. Tor was in the middle of the group, and Gu, her godmother
from China whose husband also had been murdered by the communists,
stood next to her. At the bottom Tor had written, Our love goes with
you. Good luck.
Joy kissed both pictures, closed the locket, kissed it, pressed it to
both her cheeks, and put it around her neck. It hung over her heart.

66

R.J. Rummel

Joy was ready to step into a the new universe they would create—
live or die, succeed or fail.

aaa
Not in their wildest imaginings could they have guessed what they
would find in the first few minutes in their new universe.
John carefully opened the capsule door. As planned, they were in
a large, empty warehouse. A slightly sour, burnt smell, like a fire
doused with water, still hung in the air, although it had been seven
months since the San Francisco fire. The odor was especially unpleasant when mixed with the moldy smell and stuffiness of the
warehouse. Joy sneezed several times until her nose adjusted to it.
The air seemed to cling uncomfortably and coldly to her damp
cheeks. I wanna go home was her spontaneous reaction, but she
shoved the thought back into her unconscious. She didn’t think it
would stay there long.
They stepped out, swinging their flashlight beams through the
darkness of the warehouse until they located the supply and equipment
capsules that had been sent ahead of them.
Before they did anything, John thought they had better test their
communication system. Doctor Laurent Nkongoli, a Rwandan member
of the Society, had surgically implanted small transmitters in their
necks near their throats, and a small receiver behind each one’s left ear.
Their bodies acted as aerials, and their communications could reach
over thousands of miles. By sub-vocalizing “KK,” they could toggle it
on or off. But before John activated his, Joy had already noticed a beeping in hers.
“Is there something wrong with my receiver?” she asked. “I’m getting a beeping sound, even though we haven’t activated it yet.”
“I’m hearing that too,” he replied, looking puzzled. “I don’t think
this was caused by our time travel, or that the receivers are defective.
Maybe it’s coming from somewhere in here.”
John began to stride around the warehouse, leaving behind him a
small cloud of dust. He soon noticed that the beeping grew stronger or
weaker depending on the direction he took. By pacing back and forth
and then moving in a steadily decreasing circle, he homed in on the
source. Finally he stopped and pointed the flashlight down at the
wooden floorboards. “It’s coming from there. Get me something to pry
up the floorboards.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

67

While he stood on the spot, Joy rushed over to their supply and
equipment capsules and only then noticed that there were boxes, broken
chairs, empty bottles, garbage, and a spindly table by the capsules.
Someone had occupied the warehouse.
But first things first.
The capsules were shaped like large residential gas tanks and made
of dull gray titanium. About five feet high and seven feet long, they sat
on runners attached to their bottoms. They contained everything the
Society calculated they would or might need—all the clothing, supplies, equipment, weapons, and financial assets amounting to two
billion 2002 dollars in gold, gems, and real and counterfeit currency.
Joy sought out the supply capsule that she knew contained an axe
and crowbar and pressed down hard on the left corner of an almost invisible plate in its side. When the plate loosened, she pushed it in and
sideways to reveal a keypad and punched in the code to open the capsule door. When it swung upward, she reached into a recess to one side
of the open door and switched off the self-destruct mechanism, then
studied the map of the capsule’s contents mounted on the door. She
found the tools she wanted, and took them to John.
He used the edge of the axe to create an opening for the crowbar, inserted the crowbar, and pried up one floorboard at a time. Dust kicked up
in a low cloud that looked like ground fog in the flashlight beam.
“You know, dearest,” Joy said, “the second thing I want, when we
get a chance, is a bath.”
“Oh?” John responded. “What’s the first thing?”
“Something to drink. This air has made my throat dry and I don’t
think we’ve had anything to drink since well before we started your
training this afternoon.”
“Is that all,” he replied, sounding disappointed.
Two layers of hardwood boards were crisscrossed for strength, and
he had a hard time working his way through them. Breathing hard, he
commented, “No wonder this warehouse survived the earthquake. Being all wood sure helped.”
“I’m surprised it didn’t burn down in the fire, then,” Joy replied,
doing a fast scan of the warehouse with her flashlight.
“Hey,” John exclaimed, “keep the light on the hole.” She jerked the
light back.
“The warehouse is far enough south to have avoided completely
the fire that burned down the downtown and commercial districts,” he
pointed out. “No sparks even came this way. And the ground didn’t
flow or settle under it during the earthquake, either.”

68

R.J. Rummel

Finally John created a large enough hole to look underneath with
his flashlight. The bottom layer of boards rested on wooden beams
about a foot apart, and poles driven into the earth supported these. The
warehouse floor had been constructed to support heavy weight.
Beneath the beams, a bright yellow metal box about the size of a
hardcover book lay on the bare clay of the ground about two feet down.
John got down on his stomach, lifted out the box, and placed it on the
floor next to Joy. She focused her flashlight on it. John sat up, picked
up the box, and twisted it around in his hands, looking for some clue as
to what it was. There was no icon nor anything printed on it, but there
was a recessed keypad similar to that on a cell phone.
“Obviously, we should punch in some code, but what?” Joy said.
“Let’s do something fast—that beeping in my ear has gotten irritating.”
“This keypad looks like something from our time and the electronic
beeping confirms it. I bet this was sent through time for us. Maybe it’ll
open with our cell phone numbers.”
John punched in her number, and when nothing happened, he tried
his own. Nothing.
“Try our phone numbers,” she suggested.
John did, and nothing.
He tried their first names, their last names, and their full names.
Nothing.
He was clearly frustrated. “If it weren’t for that damn beeping, we
could leave this until later, when we’re settled. It would be fun trying to
decode this thing when we had the time.”
“Try my mother’s name,” Joy suggested, with little hope.
Nothing.
John sat back and put the box on his lap. “Okay. Let’s relax, try to
ignore the beeping, and just let our minds play with this. We’re in no
hurry, right? Nothing’s at stake. We’re under no pressure, except for
the beeping. And we’ve this puzzle. If this were sent to us, and it had to
be, we should be able to open it. The code can’t be anything strange. It
should be something that only we know.”
Joy sat back as well, and tried to relax and ignore the beeping, the
unpleasant odors, and the cold chill in the air. She set the flashlight on
its bottom and it lit up the ceiling beams high above them. John did the
same with his and they sat quietly in the dust and dim reflected light,
thinking. Still feeling emotionally drained, Joy reached over and took
his hand, and they sat holding hands. The warmth and firmness of his
hand in hers helped her emotionally refocus from the mother she had
lost to what would now be.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

69

She slid closer to John, put her arm through his, and rested her head
on his shoulder. His closeness and vibrancy were just what she needed.
She didn’t doubt that only harmonically tuned lovers like them could
find this situation at all romantic. What a strange and completely unanticipated way to begin their life in the new universe.
Then she had it.
She raised her head and looked at John, and he wore the same
“eureka” expression that must have been on her face. John released her
hand, and she picked up her flashlight and focused it again on the box.
Smiling, he keyed in the code they used for their supply capsules. With
an audible, metallic click, the top of the box was released and the beeping stopped.
“How can we be so dumb?” he asked, raising the top and looking
for a self-destruct switch. There was none. Both of them looked inside.
Nothing was the same after they opened that box. Not their lives,
not their world, not the universe. The new universe they’d just begun,
that branched off from the parallel old universe from which they had
traveled through time, now itself branched into another. Unknowingly,
they had initiated a Third Universe.
John opened the lid of the box wide and Joy focused her flashlight inside. They could see a small electronic device that must
have been the source of the beeping, the electronic locking
mechanism, and two CDs and a DVD in plastic cases, carefully
buttressed against shock. There was a handwritten note on the top
of the CDs:
For Joy Phim and John Banks from your new universe, 1994.
Please read CD #1 as soon as you can.
All our love and very best wishes,
Lora Joy Reeves
Mark John Docker
Joy Phim Democratic Peace Institute.
Joy was more than surprised. Stunned, was more like it. This was
so unexpected and the note so laden with meaning that she suddenly
drew in her breath and it felt like minutes before she released it. Her
hand holding the light shook. She couldn’t have been more taken aback
if a dead relative sat up in their coffin.

70

R.J. Rummel

Joy’s mind would not work at first. And then thoughts suddenly
flooded it, as though from a burst dam. Here they’d just arrived in
1906, ready to foster democracy and intervene around the world to prevent major wars and democide. They were trying to be gods. Such
grandiose ambition might easily and most likely would fail. They both
knew it. There was a good chance one or both of them would be killed.
They both know that too, but they hoped for at least some success beforehand.
Now, within an hour of stepping out of their time machine with a
new universe of possibilities and dangers before them, they’d found a
message—a message!—sent to them from the far future. Not from the
universe they left, but incredibly, the very new universe they were here
to create—that they will have created.
And the message implied that they survived long enough to become
known. And Joy would be successful enough to have an institute
named after her, although she was beginning to worry whether that
meant John died or was killed well before her.
Her mind was swamped with questions, but it centered on one
thing: I’ve got to read these CDs immediately.
Apparently, John thought the same thing. He slapped back the
floorboards and made them secure, then rushed with the small box to
their supply capsules. Joy beat him there. She found in one her laptop
computer while he found his 1905 Hamilton pocket watch and her open
faced purse watch styled for the same year in another.
It was 3:30 a.m.; they had some time before morning light. Joy
wanted to just sit down on the floor, open the laptop, and start reading
the CDs, but John insisted that they make themselves a little more comfortable. While she waited impatiently, he took out a backpack tent for
two and an automatically inflatable air mattress and set them up on the
floor. He got blankets to put around them and hung a bright lantern inside.
Joy was the computer expert, and put everything together in the tent
so they could view the CD. They had two super long lasting batteries in
the laptop, and a transformer to enable them to recharge the batteries on
the variable electricity of this age. Once ready, she inserted the CD, and
when it opened she saw that it contained documents compatible with
the system, word processor, spreadsheet, and browser she had on the
laptop. Of course. Those who made it must have known what kind of
computer and operating system she had.
Joy opened the first “Read me” file.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

71

Joy and John, this and the other CD contain the following:
CD #1
Our letter to you
Why we are sending you all this
Institute background on Uighuristan
Sabah’s seizure of Uighuristan
Sabah’s takeover of China
CD #2
The daily closing of the New York Stock Exchange, November, 1906, to October 12, 1994;
commodity market, funds rate; and daily currency
exchange. (This will enable you to compare and
plot the new universe changes from the old universe financial statistics you have brought with
you.)
The most important world events, 1906 - October, 1994, New Universe.
DVD: Scenes of nuclear destruction in New York.
“I’ll be damned,” John exclaimed, slapping his forehead. “This is
incredible. Hours ago you were teaching me karate, and now we’re not
only back in time, but we have a history of what we did in this new
universe on a CD.”
“I don’t think this is good news, dearest,” she told him as she
opened the CD’s letter to them.
December 2, 1994
Joy Phim Democratic Peace Institute
Santa Barbara Affiliate
Our Dearest Joy and John:
We hope that you don’t mind our being so personal.
You have been part of our lives since we were born, and
as close to us as our own parents. Before I continue with
what has happened, I should explain about our names.
You see, in honor of both of you, who meant so much to
our grandfathers, our parents gave us your names. As

72

R.J. Rummel

you now know, I am Lora Joy Reeves, and my assistant,
translator, and husband is Mark John Docker (they followed your example—as Joy was John’s assistant and
translator, Mark is the same to me. When we think about
it, it gives us a moment of humor.)
Until now, we have tried to continue your mission. We
succeeded in this only up to the last horrible months.
Since then, we have spent all our available resources and
time trying to get this message to you. We hope with all
our hearts that once you realize what happened and have
the record of relevant events, you and your successors
will be able to prevent it.
Before sending you on to our “Why” document, one
warning: you will have three early morning intruders in
your warehouse. You will tame them and they eventually
will become your greatest supporters and executives in
your company, and two of them will be Mark’s and my
grandfathers. You will come to love them as we did.
We so wish we could have met you both in person. In
love and in remembrance of your great work, with all our
hopes for your success,
Lora Joy Reeves
President, Joy Phim
Democratic Peace Institute
Mark John Docker
Assistant, Translator, Husband
Surprised and worried by this bad news, Joy looked over at John.
He looked like someone facing a snake and unable to tell whether it
was poisonous or not. She told him, “We’ve got to read what happened
right away. I won’t be able to sleep, otherwise. I’m going to open the
‘Why’ document.”
“Wait,” John said. “Since we’re going to meet our future helpers, I
want to be sure we see them when they come in. When I was looking
around with the flashlight, I saw that the front entrance to the warehouse is barricaded and that the only entrance is the side door. Let’s
turn the tent and mattress so that we can watch that entrance as we
read.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

73

They did that, wrapped the blankets around themselves, and settled
in for a long read. Joy brought up the “Why we are sending this”
document on the laptop screen, and they started reading.
What no one foresaw in the old universe was the
development of a radical antidemocratic Islamic fundamentalism called Sabahism . . .
It went on to explain the nature of Islam and its relationship to the
growth of democracy. Then they read:
Many mullahs and imams taught this tolerance and
peaceful coexistence up to the 1960s. Besides, much of
this world had become democratic. The Joy Phim Institute you set up, John, and of which my grandfather Hands
Reeves became first president, also saw no reason to believe otherwise.
Joy felt warm inside at reading that. “How sweet, darling. You set
up an institute in my name to continue our mission.” She leaned over
and kissed John on the cheek. This was the only happy moment for her
since they’d arrived. They returned to reading.
What was little noted by either of you during your
creation of the new universe was what went on in a remote region of the world. In Middle Asia, specifically in
what was at one time or another called East Turkistan,
Sinkiang, Uighuristan and, in its latest incarnation, Islamic East Turkistan. Ever since the tragic events that
caused this message to you, we have asked ourselves how
you two, Hands, and we could have missed what happened in what was known at the time as Uighuristan. You
had no company offices in the region, and neither did we
have institute offices or affiliates there. Our closest offices were in Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Peking. We did
have an affiliate institute in New Delhi, but this was on
the other side of the Karakorem Mountains. In short,
none of us had the intelligence we needed, and we were
caught by surprise by what subsequently happened there,
in China, and to us. We didn’t stretch our thinking
enough. We never dreamed that such tragedy would be-

74

R.J. Rummel

fall China, and have such horrible ultimate consequences
for us.
So far I have given you no basis for intervention and
changing the history of the new universe you are creating. Now I will. Since time presses on us, I leave the
background to “The History and Geography of Uighuristan” included in this CD, and the two reports on Abul
Sabah.
Sybil Bazyan, president of our Santa Barbara affiliate, will prepare a detailed chronology of events and
people to put on the second CD.
Please read the two reports on Sabah, and then I will
have some comments on them. In the reports you will
read about what we all now agree was the most monstrously evil man to have ever existed.
John and Joy read that Abul was born in 1914, New Universe,
and used his epileptic fits to create a fundamentalist Islamic sect
that would eventually take over the country of Uighuristan, with
himself as caliph, and that following that he gradually subverted
and seized China in a coup he masterminded. It was an unbelievable story, worthy of the emperors and kings of ancient times.
The conclusion of the report was chilling:
In short, by 1994, with his hidden nuclear weapons
and in control of the most populous country in the
world, he was the most powerful ruler ever seen in history.
He was ready to take over the world.
When they finished reading this, Joy noticed that John’s brow was
deeply furrowed, his lips pulled down at both ends. She asked him, “Do
you have any knowledge about those events in Uighuristan?”
He didn’t raise his eyes from the screen. “No, and the report even
used the word ‘horrible.’ I have no idea what went on.”
They now turned to Lora’s conclusion on the reports:
From these reports, what do I conclude about Abul
Sabah that may guide your relations with him or strategy

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

75

toward him? He is ruthless. He is patient. He is brilliant.
He is supremely capable. He is charismatic. He is ambitious for power. And he has inspired the dedicated loyalty
of those around him.
“What time is it?” Joy asked.
John looked at his pocket watch and replied, “It’s 5:38. We’ve got
time before we see our visitors. What do you think of our clever young
boy, Abul Sabah?”
Joy thought for a moment before replying. “He is amazing. We’ve
seen other men in the twentieth century with that kind of ability to move
masses, although not by using epileptic fits and hallucinations, if that’s
what they were. Hitler and Lenin had that ability and charisma, for example, as did Juan Peron of Argentina, and Mahatma Gandhi of India.
You know, in our history of the old universe, I don’t remember this Sabah existing. What say you, my historian? Had you heard of him?”
Dumb question, she realized. This is not a happy moment for my
historian.
“Let’s see,” John replied, thinking aloud, “I must say that, like most
Western historians, I don’t know much about Middle Asia, or Sinkiang
of China. With Sun Yat-sen’s revolution in 1911, Sinkiang, or what I
knew as East Turkistan, did achieve autonomy, if not in practice independence, and set up their own republic in 1920. Twice the Nationalist
government of China under Chiang Kai-shek tried to subdue them but
failed. After the Nationalists lost the mainland to the communists under
Mao Tse-tung in 1949, Mao sent a huge army into Sinkiang and reannexed the country. The communists renamed it the Xinjiang Uygur
Autonomous Region.”
“Wow, I’m impressed,” Joy exclaimed with a smile.
Ignoring her, John continued. “There was nothing autonomous
about it, of course. The Uighurs continued to rebel against the Chinese
up to the time we left the old universe, and there were frequent massacres carried out there by the Chinese as a result.”
“So, love, I guess he must have been born and had his fits in the old
universe as well, but they either amounted to nothing or he was killed
under the different political and religious conditions. Yes, I guess
whatever we did in this new universe made it possible for him to live,
proselytize, and capture a country. We are going to have to study all
this once we get settled.”
John was quick to respond with, “Well, we don’t need to study

76

R.J. Rummel

more to know one thing: democracies cannot ever let down their guard
when there are tyrants around.”
He thought for a moment. “You know, these events probably will
take place after we have died of old age, or are too frail to do anything.
This is now 1906; I’m twenty-six to your twenty-five. By 1960 we will
be about eighty years old. We’ve got to deal with this while we are still
young and healthy, and leave this message to our successors.”
Again their situation hit her. “I can’t believe that 2002, the year that
we left just a few hours ago—a few hours, darling!—is so incredibly
far in the future that we won’t even live to see that year again.”
“I haven’t absorbed it either,” John replied. “Maybe when we get
out on the street and see the horses and all the buggies, and the women
with long dresses and corsets, and men wearing Derby or Fedora hats,
we’ll feel more like we’re here. Let’s continue reading the message.”
As we watched from afar, Joy and John, you can easily guess what we intended to do. We were by this time
the largest privately funded institute in the world. We
were richer than all but the top nineteen countries in the
world. And through our secret conversion of the 2002
technology you left us, we were always developing new
technology for the 1970s, ’80s and ’90s that would bring
in new funds. Our game plan was your game plan.
We tried to use our funds at first to help those committed to returning democracy to China, but many
democratic leaders had been arrested and the rest were
scared and dispirited. So we tried to determine who the
pivot figures were at the middle levels of the regime, particularly those in the security police and military, that we
could subvert. We made several such contacts, and successfully recruited a few agents whose own contacts
reached high up among the ruling echelons. But this was
slow, and our major difficulty was that we had no road
map of who would do what to whom, and when, as you
had with your Old Universe chronology.
All this is introduction. The rest is so evil that it
dwarfs any other historical evil as a massacre of thousands does a single murder.
On October 10, 1994, we decided to sleep in before
heading to our Institute in downtown Manhattan. After
we got up, we had made . . .

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

77

Joy and John were so utterly focused on the laptop screen, an elephant could have walked by the tent at that moment and they would not
have noticed. Unconsciously, Joy leaned forward to read.
. . . . We found out later that not only were Manhattan
and our Institute destroyed by a nuclear bomb, but Washington, D.C. was also obliterated. Central London,
Berlin, Paris, and Moscow were similarly wiped out,
along with our affiliated institutes in each city.
Joy jerked her hand to her mouth and screamed through it, “Oh my
God, I don’t believe it! Nuclear bombs in so many cities? My God, it’s
like our old universe. No. It’s worse. While atomic bombs were
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki during world War II, that was it.
No nuclear bombs were ever exploded in or above a city again.” Her
voice trailed off. “Never . . . again . . . .”
John sat staring at the screen in disbelief. He looked nauseated. He
pounded his fist on his knee, his face lined with emotional pain.
Joy’s thoughts writhed with the horrible scale of this human catastrophe. She trembled all over. But like John, she couldn’t take her eyes
away from the screen. Like a drug addict that must have more, ever
more, no matter the physical cost and pain, she was driven to read on.
They soon got to the part where Sybil estimated that 1.75 to two
billion people were killed or went missing in the nuclear attacks.
“Oh God,” Joy moaned. She finally was able to rip her eyes from
the screen. She put a shaking hand on John’s shoulder and cried, “My
God, John, all those poor people. I can’t believe it. That’s more killed
than in all the wars, democides, and famines in the twentieth century of
our old universe. In all history.”
John covered his eyes with his hand. He twisted away from the
screen, dropped his hand and stared down at it as though it had turned
into a rotting fish. His face looked sallow in the suffused light from the
screen and lantern. His lips trembled. Joy could smell his sweat even
over the stench in the warehouse. “Holy Mother of God.” His voice
broke. “I can’t believe this either. All those people murdered by the decision of one man.”
Joy’s face contorted; her lips were barely able to twist around the
words: “I don’t have words for this evil.” She tasted blood where she
had bitten her inner lip.
The deadly understanding of what this all meant slowly loosened
the paralysis grief held on her mind, and the words exploded out of her

78

R.J. Rummel

mouth. “We came here to carry out our great mission to foster democracy and intervene to prevent war and democide.” Each word felt like a
knife thrust into her emotions. “We failed. Utterly. We—I—created a
world worse than what we left.”
Her voice rose to a wail. “I gave up my mother to come to this
primitive year to . . . fail.”
As they sat in the dark warehouse next to their supply and equipment capsules, Joy began to shake even more. She remembered her
mother’s anguished face as she pushed them into the capsule to be gone
from her forever. Just a few hours ago. For nothing. And there was no
way back. They were stuck here.
She couldn’t stand the sense of failure. She didn’t want this world now.
I am ashamed of what we—I—did . . . No, what I will do.
So ashamed that she began to sweat. Each beat of her heart shook
her body and pounded in her ears like a drum. Her emotions beat on her
thoughts and they submitted. She was a perfectly trained warrior and,
when threatened by stress or danger, she could control and calm herself. But not now. Not when faced with such humiliation and disgrace.
She threw off the blanket, rolled out of the tent, and stood, shuddering and swaying, breathing heavily. Shame made her reel. Her head
pounded with a tension headache and she tasted vomit. Somehow, the
deep, unconscious part of her mind instructed her body what to do, and
then it disengaged itself. It knew it was gone forever.
Her body straightened. It moved toward the weapons capsule and
automatically keyed in the code, opened the door, thumbed off the selfdestruct mechanism, and reached for her tactical knife. It felt good in
her hand—just right, the perfect answer. It would end dishonor.
She couldn’t wait. She raised it to her throat to slice her carotid artery open. It was the female warrior’s way, the Heavenly Cut.
Joy was almost knocked off her feet as a rough hand grabbed her
arm and another the hand holding the knife. Reflexively, she lowered
her body, got her legs into the proper center of gravity, seized the arm,
rotated to her left, and threw the assailant over her shoulder. He landed
hard on the floor as she twisted the knife from his grip.
She straightened, ready again to do what she must.
“JOY! No!” John screamed at her from the floor. “No, Joy. Don’t.
There’s a way out. You can beat it.”
From somewhere deeper than her trained instincts, something
gained enough control of her mouth to spit back at him, “We failed.
The Society failed. The Institute failed. I failed. I can’t stand it.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

79

Devastating images flooded her mind—cities wiped out by nuclear
bombs; horribly mutilated bodies; the wounded and dying; the hopeless
refugees. Her body allowed a single thought: All this was our—my—
creation in this new universe!
Her mouth shrieked, “I wanna die.”
“Baby, listen,” John pleaded as she raised the knife one last time to
make the cut. Then he bellowed with all the power of his lungs,
“LISTEN TO ME, GODDAM IT.”
No one had ever yelled at her like that. Never. She hesitated with
the knife near her neck. Her mind was stirring again. But it was not
enough.
In a voice intermixed with love and panic, John threw words at her
in a jumble. “WE change it. The future. We created Lora’s future. We
didn’t know about Sabah. Now, now we do! We can save all those
lives. We create a third universe. Think, Joy. A third universe.”
In a voice so miserable Joy didn’t recognize it as her own, her
tongue countered with, “How can we fight Sabah, with all his power?
Just you and me?”
“We kill him when he’s a baby or a little boy. We kill him before
he has any power. Before anyone but his parents care.”
He couldn’t reach her dead mind.
She held the knife almost touching her pulsing artery. She wanted
the bliss of death—the escape from shame, just a second away. There
was a ritual to this, and her warrior instincts demanded that she do it
just right. She properly oriented the blade for the cut.
John had to know he could never take a knife away from her. But
as broken up as Joy was, he did the perfect thing. In one motion, so
fast he caught her by surprise, he leaped up and slapped her face so
hard he knocked her head to the side—away from the blade. She almost fell.
John was a kind and decent man, she believed in her heart. He
would never strike a woman, or anyone for that matter, unless defending himself. That he would hit her, and so hard, shocked her to the core,
to her innermost love for him. He shocked her mind into working
again.
Joy’s body must have known she needed it, for it didn’t reflexively
strike a defensive chop or kick back at him.
Joy’s cheek smarted, and her eyes teared from the slap. She stood
with her hands hanging loosely, one now barely holding onto the knife.
She felt as if an hour had passed, but it must have been no more than
seconds. She slowly turned her head to look at John, and brought her

80

R.J. Rummel

free hand up to touch her hot and swelling cheek.
John stared at her, his eyes pleading, tears coursing down his
checks.
And as her mind began to work, he gently took the knife from her
hand and threw it into the capsule. He put his arms around her and held her
hard against his body. Slowly, as if coming out of a long sleep, she put her
arms around him. They held each other tight, their heads on each other’s
shoulders, and John started to sob with what only could be relief.
She was still too devastated to cry. Although functioning again, her
mind felt weighed down with lead. It was still overwhelmed, in the eye
of an emotional storm she could not release.
She whispered huskily, “Let’s simply do nothing and make a good
life for ourselves. Let’s get married and adopt children. We’d never
have to work, with the money we have, and we could buy a nice house
and travel the world and . . . ” She was babbling.
John stopped sobbing, drew in several deep breaths, rubbed the
tears from his face onto her shoulder, and gently pushed her away. He
held her by the shoulders at an arms’ distance, looking into her eyes. In
a voice filled love and compassion, he said, “Sweetheart, baby, we can
do it. We can prevent this. Together. It has to be you and me. I can’t do
it alone.”
He did it! she realized suddenly. Her mind was functioning again.
Her heart seemed to stop for seconds as she looked at him, staggered by
the thought. She grabbed it with her mental hands and squeezed it to
her. She centered on it, as though it were a lifeboat in a storm-tossed
sea. “Of course, we’ve got the power. We don’t have to fail. Yes,
you’re right.”
Joy let out a long, tremulous breath. Her mind cleared, as a fresh
breeze clears away a fog. She thrust out her chin and stood straighter.
Yes, yes, of course. My shame is now a challenge. We can do it. This is
a fight worthy of a warrior and her partner. And my love has saved my
life and my soul.
She threw herself into his arms and kissed his lips, his wet eyes, his
hands. Suddenly she stopped as she realized again the awful immensity
of their new task. “We can do it. Yes, we can. We must. Even if it
means our deaths.”
She took several more deep breaths and exhaled slowly to calm herself. Now it worked. She was back in control. She took his hand in hers
and kissed it again, then led him back to the laptop screen. She was
emotionally and physically exhausted by all that had transpired since
their training session only hours ago, a universe away, and two life-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

81

times in the future. But still, she had to keep reading. It was impossible
not to.
They cried all over again when they read about Lora and Mark’s
terminal radiation poisoning. And then they came to the end of Lora’s
message.
You now have it all. Obviously, we succeeded in getting this information to you. So, our darling Joy and
John, our very best wishes and all our hopes are now
with you. We know you won’t fail.
We have lived a good life and have no personal regrets about our coming deaths. Like yours, our lives have
been a meld of our deepest love for each other and our
duty to mankind. We gain solace from the knowledge that
we will die together hand in hand, and so travel as one to
whatever future the universe holds for us after death. We
hope that Spunky will be with us. We knew the little blind
boy for such a short time.
Our deepest sympathies go out to all the millions already dead in this war, and we are profoundly sad over
what may well be the end of this Institute and your legacy. We hope and pray that you can prevent this from
happening in a third universe.
With our deepest love
Lora Joy and Mark John
February 11, 1995
Note from Sybil Bazyan:
I am adding this note to the CD just before sending
this capsule to you. Had you known Lora and Mark, you
would have loved them, and shared my pride in them. Although they never met you, they studied all they could
about you, and heard fabulous stories about you at their
grandfathers’ knees. They truly loved you both.
They died in each other’s arms two weeks ago, as
they wanted. We know that, hand in hand, they have now
gone on to whatever heaven awaits them.
They died without knowing that we had finally perfected our time machine so that we could send this
capsule to you, although just before their deaths, we as-

82

R.J. Rummel

sured them we would be able to do so.
We have been warned by our contacts that, at the orders of the local Chinese “ambassador” in Los Angeles,
state police are headed for our Institute in order to take it
over and prevent the destruction of any equipment or scientific documents. We have been unable to hide more
than a small amount of our equipment, and nothing regarding our time machine. As soon as we send this, we
will set the timer on explosives placed throughout the Institute and evacuate it before setting them off.
I join Lora and Mark in praying for your success.
God be with you.
It is my lifelong regret that I never met you, but I
know with all my heart that I still can say sincerely,
With my love,
Sybil
Joy went through the motions without thinking. She ejected the CD
and carefully put it into its case, and put the case in the small capsule.
She turned off the laptop computer and closed the lid. She sat there
looking down at the laptop, not seeing it, overwhelmed by what she had
read, still utterly exhausted by her near suicide. She could not move or
cry any longer. She could not even look at John, whose heavy breathing
was the only sound in the warehouse. She didn’t know how long they
sat there, trying to absorb and digest all they had read. Occasionally,
she rubbed her cheek, still smarting from his slap. Idly, she hoped he’d
left a mark.
I will bear it proudly, as a sign of his love and our new mission.
Finally John said, almost in a growl, “Now we have work to do.”
That broke her spell. “It will be light outside soon,” she responded.
“I’m so drained by all that’s happened that I have to sleep. But we were
told we’ll soon have visitors. Can you believe it, dearest? Two of them
will be the grandfathers of Lora and Mark. Will you wake me up when
they come? I’m exhausted.”
She didn’t fall asleep right away. She heard John making a noise by
the back door of the warehouse. He soon put another blanket over her
and squeezed in beside her. Judging by his breathing, he actually fell
asleep before she did.
Her last thought was, When our visitors wake us up, it will be a
third universe.

Chapter 7
Joy
November 14, 1906, Third Universe

S

ome noise disturbed her sleep, and Joy woke with a start. She felt
John close to her, as usual, since she had moved into his room at
the Society’s scientific headquarters. It had all been a nightmare,
a god-awful nightmare stemming, she knew, from her basic fear of
shame.
“Phew,” Joy sighed with relief, and started to stretch.
She realized suddenly that they were in a tent, and the air stank. Joy
looked around. Damn, it wasn’t a dream.
The sound she had heard was falling bottles. John had piled them
on the empty boxes he stacked against the back door, so they would be
alerted when their three visitors entered.
John also had been awakened, and they both looked out of the tent.
Yes, it was the visitors they’d been promised.
Three young men carrying boxes looked in bewilderment at the
fallen bottles as they came in. Then they saw the tent. They stopped in
surprise, and seemed even more amazed when John crawled out of the
tent. While they talked excitedly among themselves, Joy climbed out of
the tent and stood next to John. Her body had needed that nap; she felt
better. She was still dressed in her karate practice clothes, with her hair
in a pigtail and her red headband across her forehead.
After several minutes, the three guys slowly approached them, the
tall man in the lead.
“What are you doing here?” he asked them. He didn’t sound
friendly.
John answered, “This is our warehouse. What are you doing here?”
“You own this?” the guy asked, still sounding a little belligerent.
“Yes,” John replied in pleasant voice.
“I don’t believe you,” one of the men who had been hanging back
challenged.
John looked at them calmly. Waving at the capsules behind him, he

84

R.J. Rummel

said, “I bet you tried to get into our capsules. I’ll tell you what. Will you
believe me if I open a capsule and thus show you that they are ours?”
The third man, who had yet to speak, pointed out, “We took a
sledgehammer to them and didn’t make a dent. Tried everything.”
Joy watched the men closely, just in case they thought of attacking.
John went over to the nearest capsule and, with his back to the strangers, punched in the code, opened the door, and deactivated the selfdestruct mechanism. Among other things, this capsule contained some
of their money, which had been divided up among all the capsules for
safety. With his back still to the men, John took out a roll of money and
put it in his pocket. He turned around and looked at the surprised faces
of the three men.
“Now,” John said, “you are in our warehouse. Have you been living
here?”
“Yes,” the big man admitted. “We’re sorry to trespass in your
place. We’ve no jobs and no place to live, since the fire.”
John asked for their names. They were Adolph Docker—“Folks call
me Dolphy”—Sal Garcia, and the tall man was Hands (Alex) Reeves.
John asked the three of them a number of questions about their backgrounds and then, after a brief description of the Tor Import and Export
Company John said he was setting up in San Francisco, he surprised
them by offering them jobs for a good wage: two dollars per eight-hour
day, which was about thirty-eight dollars a day in year 2002 money,
and higher than the average wage for the time, considering the norm
was a ten-hour day. They accepted, of course.
They had yet to say something to Joy, although she kept getting
glances from them. While John was talking to Sal, she caught Dolphy
staring at her, open-mouthed. Finally Dolphy pointed his thumb at her
and asked John, “Who’s the Chink?”
Before John could say a word, Joy lost it. The accumulated stress of
losing her mother, what they had gone through to get here, reading
about the nuclear horror suffered by Lora and Mark and the democracies, and her near suicide made her snap. She reached Dolphy in three
steps, grabbed his shirt, and threw him to the floor. As he lay there,
dumbfounded, she put her foot on his chest and said sweetly, “Move,
and I’ll break your arm.”
John was about to step over to Joy to protect her back, but she motioned for him to stop. She placed her hands on her hips, put her weight
on her foot as she leaned over Dolphy, and asked even more sweetly,
“What did you call me?”
“You’re a Chink, ain’t you?”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

85

“Now you know, Mr. Docker, where I come from, that is a very bad
word. You have insulted me. You are now working for Mr. Banks’
company, as I am, and you will apologize. You will call me Miss Phim.
Let me hear it.”
John’s eyes were twinkling. The other two guys smirked.
“The hell I will,” Dolphy said, and tried to push Joy’s foot off his
chest with his hand.
Joy stood back and let him get up, and offered amiably, “If I throw
you three times in a row, will you apologize and call me Miss Phim?
And if you throw me even once, well, you can call me what you like.
Okay?”
Dolphy eyed her up and down, looking as if he’d been offered sex
if he could answer whether a dog or a cat barked. His face cleared, and
he shook his head. “Nah, you’re a woman. I don’t want to hurt you. It
ain’t right.” He looked sad at the lost opportunity, however.
Joy took two steps over to him and pushed him hard on the shoulder. “Coward, eh? Afraid of little me?” She pushed his shoulder again.
“Don’t want your friends see you lose, huh? What a coward. I bet
you’re not afraid to take on little boys, howev—”
Grunting, he leaped at her, his arms reaching out to grasp her and
throw her down. Joy just twisted inside his right arm, jerked his arm in
his direction of motion, hooked her foot around his ankle, and friend
gravity did the rest.
Dolphy rolled to a standing position more easily than she thought
he could, and better than John had, for the first month of his training.
Furious, he yelled, “Oh no, that doesn’t count. You tripped me.”
“Fine,” she replied.
His anger didn’t get in the way of his new caution. He assumed a
wrestler’s crouch and circled her, arms bent toward her as though circling a barrel. It didn’t matter. She’d been taught how to handle this
approach even before she was a teenager. She did a side snap kick with
her right foot to his chest, and he flew backwards. He couldn’t roll so
easily out of that one, but he still was able to do a flip jump to regain
his feet.
His anger was gone. She thought at first he was grimacing. No, he
was smiling.
As he adopted a hunched-over stance, almost hugging the floor with
his hands out about a foot in front of his chest, she kept her eyes on his—
eyes are the message board of a fighter—and used her peripheral vision.
He was waiting for Joy to attack this time.

86

R.J. Rummel

So she stood facing him, her left leg slightly in front, looking relaxed in her unorthodox hour glass stance, her hands loosely at her side,
as though waiting in line for a movie ticket. She read the confusion in
his eyes and, faster than his brain could track, she faked left and right at
an angle toward him and left to his side to get a wrist lock and took him
down backwards.
No one made a sound as he slowly rose, holding his wrist, obviously in some pain. With surprising graciousness, he tilted his head
toward her, and said. “I did some wrestling for money. You’re good.
Are you really a woman? I don’t believe it.”
Sal smiled broadly. “I want proof.”
John chuckled and Dolphy and Hands reddened.
Joy was happy with the outcome. She held out her right hand to
Dolphy, and at first he didn’t know what to do with it. Women of this
age did not shake hands.
“She wants to shake your hand,” John gently pointed out.
Dolphy smiled, rubbed his hand on his trousers, and firmly shook
her hand while telling her, “I’m sorry I called you . . . that, Miss Phim.
I’m glad to meetcha.”
“My pleasure,” she said, truly pleased.
John came over and put his hand on her shoulder. He said loud
enough for all three of the guys to hear, “Miss Phim is my assistant and
translator. I will attest to her womanhood.” When they smirked and Joy
glared at him, John reddened and blurted, “I mean to say that I have
seen her in dresses. You are to treat her with the same respect you treat
me. Otherwise,” and he chuckled, “she’ll break your arms.”
The three guys smiled at this, even Dolphy, who was rubbing his
aching shoulder.
Joy stepped close to John and whispered that she wanted a private
word with him.
“Sit down and relax for a few minutes while we get some stuff from
our capsules,” he told the guys, then led Joy over to the nearest capsule
and asked her, “Is this the woodshed, where I’m going to be spanked
for my slip?”
She laughed. “No, dearest. What they don’t find out now about us,
they’ll find out soon enough. Anyway, if they know we’re lovers, it
will save me from their advances.” And I won’t have to suffer your
jealousy, she thought, then added, “Anyway, what I wanted to ask was
whether you think we can trust them. I know things worked out with
them in the Second Universe, since Lora and Mark were the grandchil-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

87

dren of Dolphy and Hands. But right now they are untamed, so to
speak. They have no home, no close relatives, and they’ve been stealing to live. We don’t know if they’re presently dangerous when our
backs are turned. Not even I can always be prepared for a knife in the
back.” She smiled demurely.
“Well, what choice do we have?”
She made her suggestion to him, and he agreed, and they looked for
the medical supplies in the capsule next to them. When she had everything prepared, they returned to the guys, who were watching curiously.
“Fellows,” John said, “you’re now working for us, and I have to
protect the health of all our employees. So, my assistant will have to
inoculate you for several diseases.”
“Like what?” Sal asked.
Joy lied, “Diphtheria and small pox.” She had no idea what one
could inoculate against in 1906.
She approached them holding in one hand three swipe pads dampened with alcohol and three hypodermic needles, and in the other a
syringe filled with a harmless sterile solution. She inserted a new needle into the syringe, wiped a spot sterile on Dolphy’s arm, and plunged
the needle into his arm. Carefully changing the needle each time, she
repeated the procedure with Hands and Sal.
“Now,” John said, “listen to me carefully. Miss Phim has given
each of you a slow-acting poison. You’ll be protected against it if we
give you an antidote once a month. Each antidote will have a new infusion of poison, for which you will need another antidote the next
month. This is a special poison made in China. It is unknown here, so
don’t bother searching for the antidote.”
The guys looked sick. Hands yelled, “Why did you do this? We
didn’t do anything to you.”
John answered, “It’s simply to keep you honest while you work for
us. Anytime you want to quit, or you get fired, we will give you the antidote without any new poison. You understand?”
They looked very unhappy, but nodded.
“When you’ve proven your loyalty, I end the poison.”
John looked at his pocket watch and saw that it was mid-morning.
“Okay, fellows,” he said, “Now you start earning your income. We
came straight here from the train station, and don’t even have a place to
live. How about taking us to a hotel where we can get rooms? But
first,” he added, “we have to get into some decent clothes. Turn around,
relax, and look at the opposite wall while we change.”
Joy and John retrieved from the appropriate capsule their period

88

R.J. Rummel

clothes, and the toiletry bags that the Society had thoughtfully prepared
for them. They went behind the capsule to change.
John put on all-wool, gray, pinstripe pants, black boots, and a longsleeved, white madras shirt with separate linen collar. Shaking his head,
he put the fashionable maroon bow tie around the collar. He added a
blue, diagonally worsted coat, and pulled a cocky looking Fedora down
over his carrot-colored hair. Unruly wisps of orange hair stuck out from
beneath the hat, contrasting with its gray felt—no two colors an artist
would put next to each other, except with a gun to his head.
As Joy dressed she kept chuckling at the way John looked, and had
to hold back her laughter. She had to wear what was called a “lady’s”
white satin waist, really a shirt, with wide collars held tight at the throat
with an imitation silk bow. She tucked the shirt into a blue “short
lady’s” mixed cotton and wool walking skirt with flounced bottom. It
ended just above her awful, she thought, pointed, flat-heeled shoes. No
corset. She would go naked first.
She asked John to hold the mirror from their capsule for her as she
undid her pigtail and, with a dozen pins, redid her hair into a large bun
on top of her head. She put on a lady’s cloth cape and finally, the pièce
de résistance—a wide-brimmed hat with folded lace, imitation flowers,
and white egret feathers sticking out at the side. What astounded her
about all these clothes was that the whole outfit would have cost about
$6.00, and marked her as middle class.
Finally she dabbed some stylish light red lipstick on—for decades
“decent” women had worn no makeup, but that was now changing—
and heavily powdered the scar that ran from her cheek to her chin. It
was still noticeable, but not as stark against her light olive skin.
John put the mirror away. He avoided looking at her. He tried to
whistle some off-key tune, but his red face gave him away.
“You find something funny, John?”
She shouldn’t have asked. Like water suddenly bursting through a
dam, a loud guffaw burst out of him, followed by a few cackling chuckles. She had been holding in her own laughter about the way he looked,
and finally laughed with him.
When they regained their composure, Joy pointed out, “The guys
will know we saw each other undressing. So your slip will be verified
in their minds.”
He shrugged. “They’ll just have to envy me, that’s all.”
Before they stepped out from behind the capsule, John gave her a

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

89

final look over, idly pointed down at her stomach with bent wrist, and
asked, “Where’s your corset? Do you want your stomach bouncing indecently around like shaken Jell-O?”
Joy just put her hand on her hip, tilted her head, and glared askance
at him. It didn’t work. Her towering hat started to slide off her head and
she had to put up one hand to hold it in place. It ruined the effect.
“My God, “ he exclaimed, “I love that . . . look.”
“What look?” she asked as she punched him in the shoulder. She
wagged her finger. “One more comment like that about a corset, and
you’ll have to cut a hole in your hat to eat.”
John leaned away in mock fright and put up his hands as if to ward
her off. She had to smile with him.
Joy was happy to return to their usual banter. And they’d had their
first laughs since their arrival. She felt better. Much better. She was
ready for . . . their third universe. Thanks, my love, she thought. I owe
you so much.
Even fully dressed in his suit, John shivered in the damp San Francisco air. He pulled his Oxford gray wool topcoat out of the capsule,
and asked Joy, “Aren’t you cold?”
“What? In all these stupid clothes? Anyway, everybody knows men
are the weaker sex.”
John poked her in the stomach. “It’s all due to the tons of female
fat,” he said.
“You have a death wish, John?” she responded, laughing, as she
pulled out a beige, double-breasted box coat to hold over her arm.
For the moment, they forgot the horror they’d learned of in the
message, and the possibly lethal challenge of their mission. They nodded to each other, grinning, and nonchalantly stepped from behind the
capsule to rejoin the guys, who still had their backs turned. They were
talking about what they were going to do with their sudden income.
“We’re here,” John said.
The guys stopped talking, turned around, and after a glance at John,
they stared at Joy.
Finally she had to wave her hand in front of them and say, “Hello,
there. Is my ankle showing?”
Three faces reddened, and Hands stuttered, “You’re beautiful.”
“Thanks,” she responded, happy that someone liked her outfit. She
was going to say, “That’s nice of you,” when John rudely interrupted to
insist they get going.
Dolphy looked sharply at him, then asked, “Where are we going?”

90

R.J. Rummel

John replied, “You guys are going to find us a hotel room. That’s
your first job for us.”
“What kind of hotel do you want?” Hands asked.
“Middle expensive. Someplace where small businessmen stay when
they come here for a short while.”
“Ah. How about the Fairfax?” Dolphy asked, looking at Hands.
Hands answered, “When I was playing minor-league baseball for
the San Francisco Seals, that’s one of the hotels where I stayed. It’s
okay. It’s four dollars a night. That alright?”
“Let’s go,” John replied.
“Wait a moment,” Joy said, “I think we need to take some stuff
with us.”
John looked at her a moment, then his brows rose as he remembered. He went to the supply capsule, reopened it, and brought out a
large briefcase; he also took out more money, she guessed. He clambered into the tent and put their laptop computer, notepaper, the two
CDs, and the DVD into the briefcase, then came out and motioned to
the warehouse’s side entrance. “All set.”
As Joy walked toward the door, she could not help thinking, It’s
amazing how much we filled our first morning here—sobbing hysterics,
horrible discoveries, near suicide, humor and smiles, and a taste of
John’s jealousy. I can’t imagine what more is to come before this day is
done.
They stepped out into the alley next to the warehouse and walked
down it to 8th Street. The stench of horse manure and urine immediately struck Joy, and pesky flies were everywhere.
There was not much traffic. The street seemed to be used mainly by
commercial traffic from the southern Potrero, Excelsior, and Bayview
districts on their way via Hooper and 7th Streets to the downtown financial and market center of the city. Nonetheless, horses and wagons
had left 8th Street rutted and potholed. A team of two horses pulling a
wagon piled high with covered goods passed another one with a similar
team pulling a lumber wagon in the opposite direction. A raised boardwalk ran along both sides of the street. It was in sad condition, with
broken and rotted boards; here and there, pieces of the broken boards
stuck up out of the earth below.
Joy was surprised. Apparently there is no such thing as suing the
city government for injury in this age. Pity. But, maybe not.
Hands led them south to Wisconsin Street on the decrepit boardwalk, past a building partly destroyed by the great San Francisco
earthquake, and over another two blocks west on 16th Street. They fi-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

91

nally came to a concrete sidewalk and, another block over, they arrived
at a three-story hotel near the intersection with Rhode Island Street.
The hotel had a large marquee in front with a vertical sign reading
Fairfax Hotel.
They entered through the hotel’s two large front doors, and stepped
into a spacious, traditional Victorian lobby with all its gaudy decorations, colors, artificial plants, cushiony blue velvets and Versailles
chairs—even two spittoons: one by the foot railing at the registration
desk, and the other underneath a potted MacArthur palm. A case of
complimentary cigars rested at one end of the desk. The place smelled
stuffy, heavy with dust, engrained cigar smoke, and something else Joy
recognized with surprise—unwashed bodies.
Joy immediately attracted attention. Two older gentlemen sitting in
the easy chairs put down their newspapers and stared at her. A furcollared woman standing with a bearded man near the heavily carpeted
stairs gave her a dirty look.
Twitching his nose, John, with Joy beside him, strolled up to the reception desk. He asked for two rooms next to each other.
Clearly from central casting, the man behind the desk could never
be mistaken for anything but a hotel receptionist. He asked, “For whom
are these rooms . . . ” He added a belated “sir?” that made it sound like
a slur.
“For my assistant and me,” John responded, waving his hand in
Joy’s direction.
Arrogantly, the clerk pointed out, “We don’t rent rooms to Orientals.”
Joy was ready to walk out and find a hotel where she would be accepted, when Hands, who had remained close by, leaned over the
counter, grabbed the clerk by the shirt, and hissed, “You will now. She
is a friend of ours.”
John gently removed Hand’s hand from the clerks’ shirt, and asked
the thoroughly frightened man, “Is this hotel policy?”
He squeaked, “It’s the rule. I only work here.”
Still calm, John asked, “Where is your boss?”
“That’s Mr. Foster. He owns the hotel. He’s in the office,” the
clerk stammered, pointing to the rear.
John changed his tone. He now commanded, “Take me to him.”
Enough, Joy immediately thought. She didn’t want John beating up
on somebody, their first day here. She put her hand on his arm and said,
“This isn’t necessary. We can just go to another hotel.”
He didn’t respond. He disappeared into the back with the clerk, who
returned alone a few moments later. Joy and the guys waited.

92

R.J. Rummel

Fifteen minutes passed.
Joy just stood where she was, although she was dying to get her
ugly pointed shoes off her feet, or at least sit down. One skinny old
man with a ruddy complexion and a goatee who was obviously color
blind—he wore a yellow silk coat with green pants—approached her
and asked, smiling, “Hello chickie, are you waiting for someone to
come along?”
A dozen clever answers jumbled in Joy’s mind, but before she
could unscramble them and pick the best, she realized that he was simply doing what came naturally for men of this age and place when he
saw a young Asian woman standing alone in a hotel lobby.
She didn’t have to say anything. Sal rushed up with the other guys
behind him. He jabbed his finger at the old man’s chest and told him,
“Leave her alone. She is a decent lady.”
The man bowed to Joy and said, “I’m terribly sorry. Forgive me.”
At her nod, he hastened out of the hotel.
More minutes went by and still John didn’t return. The three guys
were getting restless. Joy thought she soon would have to restrain them
from going into the rear to see if he needed help. Finally John emerged
from the office with Foster, a middle-aged, bulbous nosed, heavyset
man who was constantly moving his hands.
Foster strode up to the clerk and, waving his hand at John, told him,
“Meet your new boss. He now owns the hotel. I’m your new manager.”
John stepped up to the clerk and said evenly, “I have changed hotel
policy. You now accept Orientals.” Joy was sure his eyes twinkled.
John stepped around the counter to rejoin Joy, and asked the clerk, “Do
you have two rooms side by side for my assistant and me?”
Looking like he was about to faint, the clerk responded, “Yes sir.
Do you want the six or the four dollar rooms?”
Foster waved his hands at the clerk and whispered, “He now owns
the hotel, you idiot.”
Without another word, the clerk reached into the narrow mail slots
behind him and pulled out the keys to two rooms and gave them to
John. He shoved the register in his direction. The manager formed rapid
circles and figure eights in the air with his hands and barked, “He
doesn’t have to register. Don’t you get it yet? He owns the hotel.”
All this time, the three guys just stood by as though watching some
strange African dance. Now, when John turned to them with the keys in
his hand, they looked at him in amazement.
“Oh, I forgot,” John said. “You three don’t have a place to live.” He
turned back to the clerk and said with a smile, “Please put my three
employees up in your best rooms.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

93

The clerk quickly twisted around and again reached into the mailboxes. He pulled out three keys, which he handed to John. In turn, John
handed them to Hands, Dolphy, and Sal, and said, “Here, the rooms are
free. Please meet us in the hotel dining room for dinner at 6 p.m.”
As the guys turned to go up the stairs, Hands gave John a little salute.
John and Joy also headed for the stairs. Joy hadn’t said a word and
didn’t until they climbed the one flight of stairs and entered John’s
room. She turned to face him and waved her finger under his nose for
emphasis as she asked, “What are you doing?” Her voice rose ten decibels on the last word.
She told him what he was doing. “That was a total waste of money
for no good purpose. Prejudice like that exists everywhere in this age.
Just roll with it, John. We could have found another hotel that would
have accepted me.”
John opened his mouth to defend himself, but she was not to be
stopped. “We have more important things to do than buy hotels on a
whim. Jesus, all that money so that we could have two rooms.” She was
running down. He just waited. “How much did you pay for this hotel?”
“Sixty-nine thousand dollars.”
“What? You spent $69,000 to get two rooms for maybe a week or
so? I read that a good house only costs about $4,500. Let me see . . . ”
She took out of her purse her pocket calculator shaped like a bracelet
and opened a little display and numerical pad with her thumb. “Holy
Christ, John, that’s about 1.3 million 2002 dollars. That’s stupid. You
were robbed.”
Joy put both hands on her hips and leaned forward to stare up at
him. Not easy, since she had to tip the brim of her hat back to look up
at his four additional inches. She suspected she looked comical. No
matter. This is truth to height.
Like a truck rolling downhill without its brakes, she rattled on.
“Isn’t that a little bit expensive? We’re going to run into this prejudice
wherever we go in this age. You’ve got to get used to it. Think of us as
being on a safari into the most primitive past.”
John did not respond. She rolled to a stop. She clamped her hands
down harder on her hips and almost yelled, “Well?”
John hadn’t moved and just looked at her with those little tolerant
dimples at the corners of his mouth. She’d warned him she was going
to surgically remove them with her fingernails someday. After a few
moments of silence, he said, “Yes, my beautiful Chink.”
Joy’s mouth dropped open in shock. She was just about to turn him

94

R.J. Rummel

into an instant block of ice with her stare when she remembered that
was what Dolphy had called her. He was playing with her. She broke
up. She doubled over in laughter, her towering hat tumbling to the
floor. She managed to make it to the bed and fell onto it, holding her
stomach. “Bastard.” She could hardly get the word out as he fell laughing next to her.
Once he got his breath back, and with Joy now calmed down and
chuckling, he pointed out, “We will need a hotel for our visitors. Remember, we will be running a new import and export company and will
have many tradesmen coming here to do business with us. It will be
convenient to have a hotel of our own to put them in for a couple of
days. Also, it already has been useful as a temporary place for our new
employees to sleep. Consider it our first company purchase.” He gave
her his “ain’t I clever” smile and added, “I paid Foster with our counterfeit money, which nobody will ever be able to detect without twentyfirst century equipment. And in no time, we’ll make it up with real
money on the stock market.”
What, is this so I’ll absorb some of his cleverness through osmosis?
Joy thought as he hugged her tight. “You stink,” she exclaimed. “Let’s
take a bath. You haven’t bathed since . . . yesterday? Let’s see. We got
up at 5:30, bathed, did our jog and weights, ate, I valiantly tried to
teach you karate, we got the emergency warning, were shoved into the
time capsule about 10:30 a.m., got here about 2:30 a.m. local time
without any real difference for us in body time, and it is now about
10:00 a.m. locally. That means we’ve been up twelve or thirteen hours.
And you without a bath, with all we’ve gone through in all that time.
No wonder you smell.”
John looked at her, surprised. “That’s all? Twelve hours? Incredible. I get up looking forward to a day of training in February, 2002, and
here I am the same day—as far as my body is concerned—in a San
Francisco hotel in 1906.”
“Yes, and body-wise, you still smell.”
He lifted her arm and stuck his nose into the pit of her underarm.
He pulled back, wearing a gargoyle-like face. “Smells like a football
locker room a month into summer practice.”
Joy kicked him off the bed. With a laugh, he got up and looked
around the room. It was large, with a little alcove containing a stonetopped side table with a drawer and a large Imperial parlor lamp on top.
A dark brown armchair sat nearby. A window hung with heavy reef
curtains and a roller shade overlooked the marquee. Through it, John
could see San Francisco Bay in the distance.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

95

Joy was sprawled across the room’s French double bed. Above it
hung a large painting of a three-masted barque on a rough sea. Next to
the bed was a two-drawer side table with another Imperial lamp. The
usual chest of drawers was against one wall. Above it was a painting of
San Francisco Bay with the fog rolling in. The room was surprisingly
similar to hotel rooms in their old universe.
“You know, “ he said, “maybe there is a time independent mold in
which all hotel rooms are made. But two exceptions. There is that old
wooden telephone box on the wall next to the door. And there is no
bathroom that I can see.”
He went out the door and down the hallway. He came back smiling.
“At the end of the hall there is a bathroom, bathtub, and hot water. Is
that a miracle, or what? Shall we?”
Joy undressed, impatient at the time and wiggling it took, and found
bath towels in the closet. She was just about to head out the door when
he yelled at her, “You’re naked!”
“I’m glad you still notice,” she said, smiling. “And how come you
ain’t?”
“Here, put this around you.” He tossed her an extra blanket. He finished undressing, except for his shirt, which he let hang over his thighs.
They headed down the hallway and into the bathroom. It was a
large room with a high ceiling and a small, claw-footed, porcelainover-sheet-metal bathtub, hardly big enough for both of them. The hot
water took a long time to arrive, accompanied by thumps and gurgles in
the pipes, and it ran rust-colored in the beginning, but once it was clear
John let it begin to fill the tub.
They quickly forgot about it. John obviously got aroused as she
stood naked before him, waiting for the tub to fill, and that turned her
on. They made love on the bath mat. No tricks, nothing extraordinary
sexually, just slow, loving, and very fulfilling lovemaking. Their kisses
and caresses were very special for Joy. She recognized them as their
inauguration into this new world, and they helped clear away the residual horror from earlier in the morning. Somehow, somewhere in the
middle of it, John remembered to turn off the water.
Their bathwater had cooled and they had to reheat it when they
were finally ready for their bath. While they waited, they sat on the
edge of the tub, just hugging and immersing themselves in each other’s
presence. Joy almost regretted washing off the residue of their lovemaking, but as they washed each other’s bodies, she got aroused once
more, and easily put John in the mood with her lips. Even as limber as

96

R.J. Rummel

she was, lovemaking in the tub was a logistics challenge, and even
slower and more satisfying than it had been on the rug.
Not since the first day they had made love on the gym mat during a
training session, back in their old universe, had their lovemaking been
so satisfying. In spite of the environment, it had the flavor of a fully
romantic evening. After everything that had happened during their first
morning in this universe, she felt reborn in a way, and their lovemaking
reflected that.
Joy could see from John’s face and his unusual gentleness that he
felt this also. She knew this as a woman comes to know her man intimately, although all he could say was, “I hope all that water spilled on
the floor doesn’t leak downstairs.”
They dried each other off and Joy undid her hair so that she could
fluff it dry with a towel. When she’d finished, without thinking, she
opened the door and started down the hallway to John’s room. He made
a grab for her, but too late—she was already out the door when a
young, well-dressed couple reached the top of the stairs, led by the hotel’s one bellhop, carrying their suitcase.
Joy’s long hair covered part of her breasts, but she was bare everywhere else. The woman’s eyes opened wide and her hand flew to her
mouth, unsuccessfully stifling a gasp. Her face turned sports car red.
The man with her smiled and, tipping his hat, said, “Hello,” emphasizing the last syllable, and, “Good morning,” also stressing the last
word. Joy was sure he would have some explaining to do to his companion for the next week.
“Good morning, sir,” Joy chirped as she passed.
Behind her, a semi-naked John stumbled as he tried to get his towel
around his waist. The bellhop disappeared at that point, and she didn’t
know whether he fell down the stairs, fainted, or had gone in search of
something to drink.
When she got to John’s room, she flopped onto the bed howling
with laughter, while he stood by her shaking feet, looking at her as
though she were a spoiled child. But soon he couldn’t help laughing,
and joined her on the bed. He pulled her to him and they lay there
chuckling until the exhaustion they had been ignoring caught up to
them, and they fell asleep in each other’s arms.
Joy woke up briefly when he got up and covered her with a blanket
and slid under it himself. She sighed. What a day, and it’s not even
over yet. Afternoon, here we come, the force of two.
She laughed herself back to sleep.

Chapter 8
Hu Mingsheng
Sacramento, 1995, New Universe

S

o much for the water treatment, thought Major Hu Mingsheng as
he tossed the wet towel into a nearby pail. She wants pain, she
will get pain.
Hu bent over the middle-aged American woman whose hands, legs,
and head were strapped to the steel chair, and gripped her long index
fingernail with his flat-nosed pliers. He watched her face as he pulled
evenly and slowly. The woman screamed so shrilly that Major Hu
thanked the noise plugs in each of his ears. When the nail came completely out, leaving a bloody trail and a flap of skin, the woman started
keening. Her face was as white as plaster and twisted into such anguish
that it tore at her facial muscles. Blood trickled down her chin from
where she had bitten through her lip.
He dropped the painted fingernail into a pail, gripped another fingernail with the pliers, and waited. Soon she stopped keening, and
quaked against the straps holding her as she sobbed.
Hu pushed a little button on his right earplug to open it to middle
range frequencies while still filtering the high ones. He pulled open the
woman’s tightly clenched eyelid with his finger so that she could see
him. He raised his eyebrows questioningly.
She screamed, “I don’t know. You have the wrong person. Please,
no more. Please. Let me go. I’ll do anything . . .” And she broke down
in uncontrollable sobs, trying to get the words out: “I don’t know anything about terrorism.”
Well, maybe not, Hu thought, but why was she running from the explosion at the Sabah Mosque?
He felt his special cell phone vibrate. He’d got one designed for the
deaf, since in his line of work he was often unable to hear the buzzing
of a normal phone. He pulled it from a pocket of his coveralls and
looked at its little message window: Colonel Chin Baojia wants you
immediately.

98

R.J. Rummel

He put the pliers on the black table against the wall, and stood up.
He looked down at the woman with a sad expression. “I must leave you
for a while. Don’t get into trouble while I’m gone.”
Major Hu closed the heavy metal door behind him and took the elevator from the basement’s second level to the fourth floor of
Sacramento Security Headquarters. It opened onto a reception area furnished with a black leather sofa, two black leather easy chairs, and
photographs of the newly named Ch’en Mosque of the Three Pillars in
Peking, taken from different angles. Hu nodded to the armed receptionist, who pressed a button on his desk when he recognized Hu.
After knocking on the plain oak door, Major Hu waited until the
light above it turned green, and entered the office.
Colonel Chin sat at his ordinary, ship-gray metal desk in a common, middle-official, government office. Hu was always surprised to
see it this way. Other than an American calendar displaying an autumn
scene on the wall on one side of the desk, the light blue walls were unadorned. A metal file cabinet within reach of the desk was near the
other wall. In front of the drawn, green twill window curtains, a gray
metal credenza held two computer monitors, a keyboard, and a mouse;
a Chinese Cheng computer was tucked underneath.
The only light in the office came from the monitors and a fluorescent lamp on the desk. There were two ordinary, stiff-backed, armless
office chairs in front of the desk. And on the floor, out of the way of
visitors so that they would not step on it, was an Uighur prayer rug,
now the rage in Muslim China. The room was dim, dreary, and smelled
musty, the victim of excessive cigarette smoke. It matched Colonel
Chin, who, it was said, wouldn’t care if he conducted business in a shit
house. He was as informal as his office was dreary.
Colonel Chin sat behind the desk on a triple cushioned swivel chair
specially built for his three-foot-two height. A step stool beside his
chair enabled him to climb into it. The light from the desk lamp reflected off the papers on his desk but didn’t reach his eyes, which were
in deep shadow.
After waving Hu into one of the chairs, Chin took out an Enlai cigarette and lit it with a match that he then blew out and tossed onto a pile
of used matches next to his granite ashtray. He leaned forward, put his
elbows on the desk, and tried to push enough air through his shrunken
vocal cords to be heard. When he got excited he sounded like air escaping from a balloon. In Chinese, he managed to say, “Turghun Sabah
died yesterday of diphtheria. Imam Ch’en Hsun, at the direction of the
Governing Council, has taken temporary power.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

99

Major Hu’s eyes widened at the news, but he quickly forced them
to relax. He started to respond with the expected lamentation: “I’m very
sorry—”
“As to General Mirzat Zunun, he was arrested for plotting against
the Council. Under Imam Ch’en, I am sure that Sabah still rules. He is a
dedicated man of the Sabah and I do not see that anything regarding our
work for Sabah will change.”
Hu tried again. “God be praised for—”
“That is not why I called you here. I have a job for you . . . . ”
Hu leaned forward, trying to catch Chen’s words as his voice
seemed to fizzle out. “I’m going deaf from the screams,” Hu said. “An
occupational hazard. I did not hear you.”
The Colonel took a deep drag on his cigarette, held it, and puffed it
out in a swirl of smoke. He wheezed louder, “I said, there is something
for you to do in Santa Barbara. You are one of my best interrogators
and you also have a scientific background.”
He stopped and raised his eyebrows. When Hu nodded to indicate
that he could hear him, Chin continued. “I believe that there is scientific information of the highest importance for you to uncover. I will
only sketch the details. Full details will be in a report I will give you.
“Have you heard of the Santa Barbara Scientific Institute, an affiliate to the Joy Phim Democratic Peace Institute that existed in New
York—Manhattan?” He smiled knowingly with mention of New York.
Hu was happy to change the subject. “Yes. Everyone in security
knows about it. Their scientists blew up the whole affiliate. They must
have known about our discovery that they had blacked out Santa Barbara for over ten hours to conduct an experiment. Our people in Santa
Barbara are investigating, I’ve heard.”
Chin leaned back, sending his face deeper into shadow. He puffed
on his cigarette, creating an eerie halo of smoke that slowly rose into
invisibility in the darkness above. “They must have been doing very
useful research, to justify destroying the whole Institute when they
feared discovery. They were probably working on a new weapon. And .
. . ” His voice disappeared into a rasping hiss again.
Major Hu pointed to his ear and looked apologetic.
Chin crushed out his cigarette in the ashtray, climbed down from
his chair, and waddled around the desk to Hu. Looking up at him, he
ordered, “Pick me up and put me on the edge of the desk next to you.”
Hu did so.
Chin crossed his legs and leaned on his hand until his mouth was
only inches away from Hu. He said, “I want you to find out what that

R.J. Rummel

100

Institute was working on. We are detaining three scientists from the
Institute, and their wives and children. They were easy to locate—
Americans keep good records for everything. Do you know how Security found them?
Hu had to smile to himself. There is not a visit to his office in which
he doesn’t test me.
He answered, “Security checked the city government records regarding the Institute’s registration and job classifications and
designated payments for unemployment and health insurance, with a
cross-check of the names against driver’s license records and city property taxes. Finally, you had people check the state income tax records
here in Sacramento. If any questions remain, there is the Central Credit
Bureau in Santa Barbara. I’m sure that Security has already interrogated secretaries and janitors just for verification of the identities and
the importance of those three scientists. Were there only three?”
Chin leaned back for his pack of cigarettes, took a match out of his
top pocket, and lit another cigarette. He took a puff and blew the smoke
away from Hu’s face. His breath stank of tobacco smoke when he answered, “No. All the others have disappeared and we have notified
Californian and American Federal Police of their identities.”
He pointed at Hu with his cigarette and ordered, “Go to Santa Barbara. Find out what you can. This has top priority and you have full
power to draw on Security’s resources.” Waving one hand in dismissal,
he ended with, “Keep me informed.”
Major Hu got up and turned to leave, and heard a whistling screech.
“Forget something?”
He turned and saw Colonel Chin pointing first to himself, then to
the floor. Hu bowed and apologized. He reached for Chin and lifted
him down.

aaa
Santa Barbara
Major Hu looked over the room he had remodeled in the last week.
In its center, two stainless steel chairs were bolted to the floor. Each
had built-in head, wrist, leg, and ankle clamps and straps. Tall, mobile
flood lamps stood next to each chair. A metal worktable sat against a
wall, with obvious torture devices arranged on its top; a stainless steel
work stool was pushed halfway under it. Against another wall was a

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

101

long, narrow, steel table with clamps for head and waist; clamps for
wrists and ankles swung out from the table and locked. A large, square,
stainless steel laundry tub was mounted against a third wall.
The walls were padded, the floor tiled and slightly off level so fluids would run to a drain in the middle. The ceiling was soundproofed.
Hooks hung from the ceiling in three places, each with a looped and
knotted rope. Three more hooks protruded from the walls. The chairs,
tables, and walls were painted blood red, while the floor and ceiling
were black.
The heavy, prepared acidic smell of the room was almost sickening.
It came from two large pails, one containing rotting pork, and the other
pig’s blood.
Major Hu wore black work dungarees.
Perfect, he thought. The scientists will shit in their pants when they
are brought in here, and will be disposed immediately to tell me all
they know.
He pressed the black one in a row of colored buttons on his worktable, turning on the microphones that would record all sound in the
room. With one last look around, he pressed the green button and
looked expectantly toward the soundproofed door.
Two guards led a heavyset man into the room. As soon as he entered he stopped dead and gaped. His nose twitched at the smell. He
jerked his head around, looking at one frightening object after another.
As Hu watched, he turned pale.
Hu pointed to one of the chairs, and the guards half-dragged the
scientist to it and forced him to sit down. At Hu’s shake of the head,
they left the scientist unbound. They departed, locking the door from
the outside. Hu had no fear of the scientist attacking him. Like all security officers, he was well trained in self-defense.
He pulled the stool from under the table and over the tile floor with
a clatter, and sat down facing the scientist. “You are Peter Hayward?”
Hayward’s eyes were wide with fright. He was trembling so much
he couldn’t get a word out. He jiggled his head in a nod.
“You are a quantum physicist?”
Another, less jerky, nod.
Hu picked up his clipboard and looked at the top page. “You
worked in the Department of Applied Physics of the Santa Barbara affiliate of the former New York Joy Phim Democratic Peace Institute?”
“Y-yes,” Hayward stammered
Hu watched the process that he’d grown so familiar with, after so
many interrogations. He could see the gradual transformation on Hay-

102

R.J. Rummel

ward’s face as he gained control and steeled himself for the pain he expected. At this moment, Hu knew that Hayward was saying to himself,
I’m a dead man. But I will die with dignity and impress him with my
resistance. He’s not going to get any secrets from me.
Hu asked, “Do you have any complaint about the way you’ve been
treated?” He had ordered that the scientists and their families be kept
together, fed well, and given comfortable rooms with radio, television,
and whatever reading matter they requested.
Hayward shook his head. His face was now hard-set, but he
couldn’t control the sweat rolling down his face and the tremor in his
hands. Almost with the boredom of repetition, Hu observed again all
the signs he knew so well.
After waiting several minutes to allow Hayward’s fear to season,
Hu said, “Here is what I know about you,” and he ticked off the facts
accumulated from city and state archives, and the interrogation of secretaries and janitors.
Hayward’s lips parted and his eyes twitched wide for a moment before he resumed his steely expression.
Hu noted it and knew that it was time to get serious. “Here are the
two things I want to know. What were you working on that required so
much power that Santa Barbara was blacked out? Why was the Institute
destroyed?”
When Hayward answered in a shaking voice, he clearly took such
care with his words that Hu knew he was telling a story he and his colleagues had concocted in case of capture and interrogation.
“We were working on molecular dynamics—really the control of
molecular reactions,” Hayward said. “We used a battery of lasers to
control nuclear transitions. There is debate over hidden variables and
how complete quantum mechanics is. So we were doing a test of the
Bell inequalities—”
“Enough, my good doctor. It’s all a lie. For one, your Institute was
not involved in fundamental scientific research. That we know. Its purpose was practical, commercial. For another, we have two other
scientists from the Institute and what they say contradicts you. And,
even with the destruction of the Institute,” Hu smiled as though catching a student getting a total of five for two plus two, “enough of the
machinery and equipment remained that we know that is not what you
were doing.”
Hu let that sink in for some seconds. Then softly, almost intimately,
Hu said, “Here is what I will do to extract the truth, Dr. Hayward. You

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

103

see all this equipment around here?” Hu waved at the various torture
devices. “These are not for you. But more on that in a moment. Instead,
I am going to use on you the number one torture method: a wet towel
over your face that will prevent you from breathing until I take it away.
If, after longer and longer applications of the towel, you refuse to truthfully answer my questions, nothing more will be done to you. All these
devices here are for your twelve-year-old daughter.”
More seconds of silence, while Hayward’s steely face collapsed. Hu
watched the transformation with a professional eye.
“I will bring her in here and use one device after another on her, until you tell us the truth. I will not begin with a wet cloth, for that is not
crude enough. I will strip her, strap her on the table you see over there,”
and Hu pointed, “and spread her legs. You see those cables near the
table that are attached to that battery? I will clip the hot one with the
rotary switch to her clitoris, and juice her in steps. I assure you that her
screams will rise in crescendo with each step. I will add her nipple in
good time.”
Hayward’s eyes were bugging out, and his face had turned gray. He
was shaking, his lips trembling. He started gagging.
Gently, Hu pointed out the obvious. “You may not want to save yourself, but why subject your little daughter to such indignity and pain? Even
if she survives because you decide to tell us the truth, once I start on her,
she still will be dead psychologically. Is your secret worth that?”
Hayward leaned over and vomited on the floor. Hu handed him a
towel he had ready, and Hayward wiped his mouth and put his head in
both hands.
“Oh God!” Hayward let out heavy sigh. His voice almost a whisper,
he gave up. “I’ll tell you all I know.”
Hu crossed his legs, clasped his hands around his knee, and waited.
After several silent moments, Hayward began to describe his incidental work on the Institute’s time capsule. “It was a secret project and
there were many rumors as to how the Institute got a hold of it. I was
not a department head and the other scientists and I were not told where
the time machine came from or who developed it. We all assumed it
was covert government work. This would explain our secret background check and the legally enforceable contract we had to sign about
keeping everything we worked on confidential.
“With the destruction of the New York Institute and the arrival of
Lora Reeves, the president and director of the Institute, work on the
time machine took top priority.”

104

R.J. Rummel

Hayward described in scientific terms what his work involved, and
that, “We were successful in achieving what Lora wanted—to send a
small box back in time to 1906 San Francisco.” His voice shaking,
Hayward concluded, “Soon after Reeves died, we sent the box. I must
assume. This caused the citywide Santa Barbara blackout.”
Hayward stopped, tears running down his brown cheeks.
Hu waited for more. There was no more.
“Time travel? You were working on time travel? I’m also a scientist, Doctor, and not as ignorant as you think. Time travel is impossible.
You lie. You were working on a weapon. But let me see how good your
lie is. Why, Doctor, why? You say you sent only a small box. What
was in it? Whom was it sent to?”
Hayward almost screamed, “I don’t know. Nobody told us. We just
assumed the Institute sent it to a time traveler in San Francisco. But
who or why, I don’t know. All of us scientists were intensely curious.
This time machine was the greatest invention of our lives. In history.
We wanted to know what we were doing with it. But for every one of
the days we worked so hard on it, there was a new rumor. The secret
was kept too well.”
He paused, tried to calm himself, and continued. “We didn’t even
know the space-time coordinates, but I had a friend whose wife worked
on them and told me they were for San Francisco, 1906, and I’m guessing that it was being sent to a time traveler. Otherwise, it wouldn’t
make sense.” Hayward sighed. He looked relieved.
“You lie. You worked in a private institute, not a military lab. Private American scientific centers do not operate that way. You know
and refuse to tell me.”
Hayward screamed it this time: “Nooo! I don’t know any more.”
“Your choice.” Hu pressed the green button on the worktable, and
when the two guards came in, he told them to clasp Hayward’s arms,
legs, and head to the chair.
Hayward fought them to no avail. When the guards finished and
left, Hu checked with his finger the band around Hayward’s forehead,
to make sure that it held his head tightly against the chair back.
Hayward struggled. He kept yelling that he didn’t know any more.
He gagged on the vomit he spewed into his lap and down his legs. He
shook against the straps, his breath coming in gasps. “No . . . no . . . ” is
all he could get out, as he soiled his pants.
Hu was used to all the ugly smells a terrified human body could
produce. He breathed through his mouth until his nose adjusted to

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

105

them. He waited until Hayward quieted, then half-filled a red pail at the
sink and put it on the floor in Hayward’s view. He stuck a towel into
the water, sloshed it around, and pulled it out. Holding it over the
bucket, he loosely wrung the excess water out. Holding it in front of
Hayward’s face, he waited.
Only Hayward’s panicked gasps and whimpers could be heard.
Hu waited a full minute.
And covered Hayward’s tightly closed eyes, flaring nostrils, and
clenched lips with the wet towel and held it tightly against his face with
an open hand.

aaa
Sacramento
Major Hu waited for the light above the door to turn green, and
when it did he entered the musty office, the air even heavier with cigarette smoke this time. Colonel Chin waved him to a chair without
looking up from what he was reading. A cigarette dangled from his
mouth, and Chin unconsciously tilted his eyes away from the smoke.
Hu was beginning to taste the smoke on his lips. He hated the
smell, but Chin would not take well to a display of his irritation. He
watched the smoke tendrils as he waited, imagining turning a fan on
them and happily watching the noxious fumes disappear toward the far
wall.
Suddenly remembering, he moved his uncomfortable chair as close
to the desk as he could by shoving both his knees sideways. He leaned
over the desk on his elbows, but he didn’t know what to do with his
hands. After clasping them at first, he finally folded his lower arms
across each other.
“Very interesting,” Chin hissed out with the billowing cigarette
smoke, and looked up at Hu. “You have one scientist that went insane
when his daughter died under interrogation, another scientist without
relatives who died keeping his secrets to himself, and another who with
his wife survived interrogation. And his story is the same as that of the
one who went insane. This is what you have found out.” Chin let his
cigarette hang from the right side of his mouth, squinting his right eye
from the smoke, and ticked the findings off on his nicotine stained fingers:
“One, they were working on time travel.

106

R.J. Rummel

“Two, the laser power they needed to send a small box back in time
blacked out the city.
“Three, the scientists did not know what the box contained or why
it was sent.
“And four, the box was sent to an unknown time traveler in San
Francisco in 1906.”
Colonel Chin stopped and gave Major Hu a hard look. He wheezed,
“Do you believe this?”
Hu had waited for this. “I did not believed it at first. But at the end I
am sure the two scientists believed what they said. Either they were
themselves duped, or this really happened. After I sent you the report, I
did some research on the North American ecomm-net. Some physicists
do believe this is possible. And there are rumors—nothing concrete—
about two people sent back in time. Nobody believes that is possible.
One time traveler, a small one, maybe; two is impossible, especially
since two would have been sent without testing the system with one
traveler beforehand. Science develops in small stages, not one big leap.
There is supposed to be a document one of them wrote about his time
travel experience; just in case, I talked to our archivist in Peking, and
he put a team to work on it. I got a call yesterday. Nothing.”
Chin rasped, “And your speculation?”
“If the Institute’s scientists sent such a box back in time, it was sent
about two months after Sabah’s Great Victory. They knew the associated electrical blackout of Santa Barbara would alert us. They
destroyed the Institute so that we would not discover their time machine and duplicate it. They can have only one reason for sending this
box. Sabah was born in 1914. I believe they sent a message to the possible time traveler, warning him about Sabah’s victory. What he then
would do is obvious—he would kill Sabah after he is born, or kill his
parents beforehand.”
Chin leaned into the fluorescent lamplight. “And the prob . . . ” His
voice disappeared into the smoke.
But Hu knew what he was asking. “As a scientist myself, this is all
new to me. I do not know how to assess its probability.”
Chin pointed his cigarette. “Give me a number, Major.”
“About point six, to quantify the subjective.”
Chin crushed out the cigarette in his ashtray, and fiddled with his
cigarette pack for a few moments while he thought. He took another
one out and lit it. He watched the match flame and extinguished it just
before it burned his fingers. He puffed on the cigarette and let the

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

107

smoke drift out of his mouth. Finally, he waved the cigarette, creating a
spiral of smoke, and wheezed, “Even if the probability were point two,
we would have to turn the world upside down . . . prevent it. I will pass
this . . . ”
Hu put his hands on the desk and leaned on them to get closer to
Chin. He heard the rest.
“That terrorist woman you left unfinished has been waiting in her
cell for you to return. Take a couple of days off. I am sure she will be
happy to see you again afterward.”

aaa
Imam Ch’en
Peking, 1995, New Universe
“Kill him. How many times must I say this? Kill him!”
Cao Mingsheng, Chief of Chinese Security, and Dr. Ouyang Bohao,
the Minister of Science and Technology, had prostrated themselves before Imam Ch’en.
Minister Ouyang continued to whine, “We have no time machine. I
have discussed it with our top physicists. They say it is all fantasy.”
Ch’en picked up the report he had received from Security on what
they were now calling the Santa Barbara machine and threw it at them,
causing his white robe to swish over their heads. “It doesn’t matter if it
takes ten years or a hundred years. We can always send the time machine back to the same year to intercept this creature of Satan. If the
scientists don’t succeed in creating a time machine after a thousand
years, then we will know it’s fantasy. Not until then.
“Get off the floor, you two. I want to see your eyes.”
When they were standing rigidly before him, Ch’en glared at Ouyang to make sure the minister understood how serious this was. He
ordered him, “Set up a Chinese project comprising our best scientists
whose specialties are most related to time travel. Make sure that the
scientist in charge is a Sabah. Spare no resources.”
He turned to stare at Minister Cao. He pointed his finger at him and
said coldly, “These are to be top secret projects. You are to assure that.”
“What are we to send back in time?” Ouyang asked.
Keeping his eyes on Cao, Ch’en responded, “Give me the capability to send someone back to 1906 to kill that infidel American
time traveler.”

108

R.J. Rummel

Cao blurted, “But we don’t know his name or where he is in San
Francisco, assuming he stayed there after he got the Santa Barbara
message. We don’t even know if he exists.”
Ch’en’s gaze became deadlier. “You are the chief of the world’s
most powerful security service. You have resources undreamed of by
any previous security forces. Can’t you and your people devise some
way for our time traveler to find and kill the American?”
He let that ripen. After twenty seconds, he yelled, “Out. Get to
work. And I want a progress report from both of you every week. That
American must be killed.”

Chapter 9
Captain Khoo Jy-ying
Tianjin, 2001, New Universe

S

hu Kuo lay on top of Khoo Jy-ying for a moment, panting and
sweating even in the air conditioning. “Whew,” he exclaimed,
and gasped, as usual, “I came inside out.”
Jy-ying could not complain. Kuo knew what he was doing and she
usually had her own orgasm. But this time she was distracted. She had
been preparing their confrontation for a week, and unless handled carefully, it could mean her death. This was the best time to make her
demand.
She wiped him and herself, threw the tissue in the wastebasket he
kept nearby, and rolled over on her side. She played with his nipple as
she whispered, “I have a favor to ask.”
He was getting his breath back. He turned his face toward her, his
bold masculine features lined with suspicion. “You know I can’t get
you another promotion. You are already the highest ranking security
officer for your age.”
“No, that’s not it. I hear from my people that you have duplicated
your successful test on a prisoner.”
“That’s supposed to be top secret.”
“Not from me. I am the Chief Assistant of Security for your lab, you
know. You sent him back one year and recovered him alive yesterday.”
Kuo sighed. “It’s not enough. We want to send back two men, but
every time we try it with two prisoners, both die. Chief Scientist Liu Bihai
doesn’t know what the problem is. The last time, he loaded the two prisoners with every kind of monitor, but they showed nothing strange. He
now insists that the rumor about two being sent back in time from the
United States is ridiculous. I am about ready to go with one, which is consistent with the information we got from Santa Barbara.”
Jy-ying kissed his nipple and rubbed her breasts against him. Always ask for the impossible first, she thought. “I want to be the one that
goes when all of these experiments are done and all is ready.”

110

R.J. Rummel

Kuo jerked away, turned on his side, and looked at her as though
she had asked him to leave his wife. “No, Jy-ying. Impossible. You are
a woman. You are not trained for this. Why do you ask for such a stupid thing again?”
She held her temper, but she couldn’t help the aggrieved sound of
her voice. “You know that I beat Ma Dehua and Kong Qingguo in the
physical competition. You know that I beat both of them at weapons.
You know that I was able to take both of them down in martial arts and
could have killed them if I wanted. You know,” and she could not hold
the anger in anymore, “I placed first in all the intelligence, English, and
history tests. But Ma was selected to go, and Kong second. I’m not
even on the list of alternates.”
“I had no choice, Jy-ying. The National Governing Council would
have replaced me if I selected you for this.” Now Kuo was getting irritated at her. He rubbed his hand through his full head of graying hair,
and by habit pulled on his black beard. “You know that. How many
times have we gone over this?”
“Then make me the alternate in place of Kong. As project director,
you have the power, Kuo, and I’m sure you can make up something
with the Council to justify it.”
He got up on one elbow, grabbed her crotch with his other hand,
and shook it. “Woman. You are a woman. Even if I want to send you,
the Council believes that God would not understand sending a woman
to do a man’s work.”
Jy-ying knew he was lying. Her agents had told her otherwise. He just
loves my ass and wants to keep it here, she thought. She couldn’t help
glaring at him. “Then why did they allow me into the competition?”
“They couldn’t believe you would win. Anyway, I don’t understand
why you are so insistent on going.” He sat up, looked into the middle
distance, and waved one hand. His narrow eyes widened in puzzlement.
“It’s a one way trip, Jy-ying. One way. You are well respected here;
you have a good future in Security. You have my secret support. I still
don’t understand. Tell me again why you want to leave all this forever.”
Calmly, Jy-ying answered, “How many times have I explained this
to you? Both my parents were Sabah agents and died in his cause. I am
a Sabah and will do everything in my power to spread and protect
God’s way. While I have a breath in me, I cannot allow the assassination of Sabah that American time traveler may be planning. This is
what you are trying to prevent, Kuo, isn’t it?”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

111

Jy-ying sat up on the bed, turned her body, and looked at him. “You
know Ma and Kong as well as I do. You know, while they believe in
Sabah, their beliefs are no deeper than habit and convention. They
would kill the time traveler out of loyalty, because they were ordered,
and because of the excitement of it. But because their beliefs are shallow, they may be subverted. Not me. I would travel only for the reason
that I want to save Sabah. I would be God’s hand.
“You know that because of my education at the California Institute
of Technology, I speak better English; that because of this time spent in
California, I am more familiar with the customs; that I am more skilled
at weapons and the martial arts; and that I know more. I proved it in the
tests.”
Kuo crossed his arms over his chest and shrugged.
Just what I expected. Now that I have that laid down, I can get serious. He is unaware that I had his shoes bugged.
“And you know, Kuo, that I have no relatives or anyone else keeping me here.” Jy-ying smiled, her voice dripping honey. “I know you
are interested in another mistress, but want to keep me nearby for your
occasional pleasure.”
She enjoyed watching his face. He now had both hands on his
knees, gripping them. His muscles had tensed, his eyes narrowed.
“The replacement you have in mind is nurse Lee Lifhang, whom
you met when you went into the hospital for your annual medical
checkup. You have already taken her to bed once. She is much more
amenable than I—you find me bossy, and my greater physical ability
and skills and my performance on your tests threatens you. You bedded
me for my looks and body. The rest gets in the way, and you regret it.”
She could see he was about to lash out at her verbally. He wouldn’t
dare try to hit me—I would break his arm. She put up her hand. “Is my
replacing Ma still out of the question?”
“No matter what you say, Jy-ying, it is out of the question.”
Jy-ying got up and stepped over to her briefcase resting on his
beautiful shingtao marble table. Hiding her movements with her body,
she took a letter from a secret compartment. She returned to Kuo,
handed it to him, and sat on the edge of the low bed.
He started reading it immediately. His expression crumpled into an
angry glower. His penis, which had been partly erect as he watched her
nakedness, shrank into a small mound of flesh.
“You will notice,” she said nicely, “that it is addressed to Chief of
Security Tao Zedong.”

112

R.J. Rummel

She gave him time to finish reading. He did, and looked up at her
with an expression that clearly threatened an accident for her in the
near future.
“You no doubt can see that I report our little biweekly gettogethers, and I will include a tape of our bedtime chatter, during which
you say some choice things about Imam Ch’en. Also, I am sure that
they will be interested in your relationship with me, one of your security officers.”
She pointed to the letter. “That is a copy. The original is in the
hands of someone I can trust, who will send it to Tao if anything—
anything—happens to me, with the exception of time travel.”
His fiery eyes bored into hers. Fury contorted his face.
Jy-ying told him, “I will give you a week. What I am asking for is
first slot on the time travel.”
Kuo stared at her for a moment, then spit out his answer. “I can’t,
even if my life is at stake. I repeat, the Council will not allow a woman
to do this. The clerics oppose it. I can’t do anything about it.”
She had expected that answer. “I will send that letter you have in
your hand, unless I get a chance to go. I am sure you will spend happy
days in Deyang Prison, while I will disappear into China’s vastness. I
can serve God’s Prophet Sabah in other ways.”
She watched him for a moment, then said, “I will settle on first alternate. I go if Ma Dehua cannot.”
Kuo leaned back, his face softening. He idly rubbed his knee with
his hand. “I still can’t justify that.” He gave it some more thought, and
his face relaxed, even though, Jy-ying thought, he still looked like he
was chewing on a Szechwan hot pepper.
Jy-ying took a last look around at this beautiful room. There was an
Empress screen against the wall, and alongside that a carved chest of
drawers, each drawer itself a montage of carvings of landscapes, sailboats, ports, old buildings, and people in ancient clothes—a vision of
history and nature. There were yellow pillows, trimmed in white lace,
on the floor surrounding a lacquered Kang table. A soft, braided mat
covered the floor. One brown lacquered horseshoe chair sat in the corner. Wide French doors, framed by heavy, rose-colored satin curtains,
opened onto a balcony overlooking downtown Tianjin. No one was in
the nearby buildings at this twenty-story height, so there was no danger
of anyone seeing their activities. A Majolica-style lamp in deep amber
sat on a black wood and marble side table next to the bed. The walls
were papered in an old Chinese landscape design complete with steep

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

113

mountain cliffs, a few tree limbs in the foreground, and dominating
mist. It gave the room a gentle, outdoor feeling.
She would never see it again.
Kuo spoke firmly, interrupting her final look around. He said what
she’d expected. “No, absolutely, the Council would not accept that, regardless of my arguments.”
She waited, both eyebrows raised and her lips slightly parted. She
saw the conclusion to this as inevitable.
He acted as though she were pulling his next words out with pliers,
which in a way she was. “But I can offer you as another alternate. I can
justify this on the grounds that you would never get the chance to go
anyway, and that it would be a costless sop to female scientists and
other professionals who have been complaining about second-class
citizenship. It would also meet the criticism of Chief of Security Tao
Zedong who, unlike the clergy, has put less emphasis on gender than on
performance and capability. He would be pleased by your selection.
“Yes, Khoo Jy-ying. I will make you second alternate.”
Yes, Director Shu Kuo, as I had planned.

aaa
When Shu Kuo called Jy-ying into his private office to tell her the
news, his face was unreadable. That was the only face he had shown
her since their “little discussion” three months before.
“You know about Ma’s strange sickness, of course. Now, I know
you won’t be unhappy about the latest. Kong Qingguo has been hospitalized with heart disease.” He gave her a long stare. “I am now
formally informing you to prepare yourself for time travel to 1906.”
Jy-ying couldn’t conceal her smile.
He looked into her eyes and saw her pleasure. “You haven’t left
yet, and if I find out that you are responsible for the disqualification of
Ma and Kong—”
She calmly interrupted. “Don’t make threats you will not carry
out.”
She let that fill the space between them for a few seconds. Finally
she said, “I have always been your best choice for this operation. Shall
we get on with it, and try to make it successful?”
He nodded, and described the latest test data that had just come in.
Still showing no emotion, he told her, “The last test using a prisoner
concluded successfully.”

114

R.J. Rummel

Jy-ying was unclear which test, of the three they had conducted in
the last week, he meant. “Is this the time capsule constructed and
painted to look like an ice rock that you sent to an isolated area a few
kilometers from the south pole?”
“Yes. The prisoner was warmly clothed, fed intravenously, and his
physical and mental functions monitored for a week before he was
killed by injection, and an air vent timed to open let the cold inside. A
revolving camera placed on the top of the capsule took photographs of
the stars during the polar nights. And our instruments took daily magnetic and gravitational readings. We have just finished the calculations
on the data. The capsule landed within a meter of where it should have,
and within three weeks of its target date in 1906.
“The other experiment had again involved sending two prisoners
back, this time only for a week. No good. Both died in transit. Chief
Scientist Liu is now positive that the rumors about two Americans being sent back in time is impossible—a legend.”
Kuo’s gaze seemed to assess her. “Doctor Sima says that you are in
excellent shape for the time travel, and I know that you have been honing your martial arts and weapons skills, and studying the San
Francisco of 1906. I think you are as ready as you can be, and we are
about ready to send you.”
A smile overrode her serious expression, and Kuo studied it for a
moment. “To tell you the truth, Jy-ying, I will miss you. I have missed
you.” His sad grin came and went. He claimed, lamely, “You didn’t
have to threaten me. You would have been my choice for this trip anyway, when Ma and Kong were unable to go.”
He made Jy-ying uncomfortable. She changed the subject. “Because of my studies and my time spent in America, I have been
involved in the planning for the capsule’s landing in San Francisco, and
the supplies the time traveler will need. We have agreed, subject to
your approval, that we have a large time window. The message from
Santa Barbara went back to 1906. We must assume it contained information on Sabah’s Great Victory and the suggestion that the
recipient—and I am also sure that it is only one person—kill Sabah after he is born, or prevent his birth by killing his parents. So going back
to Kashgar at a time near Sabah’s birth to protect him or his parents
will not work.
“Our time traveler—now me—could only do so much to protect
Sabah, even if I carried baby Sabah around in my arms, or became a
servant in his house. Instead, I must catch the killer as close to his arri-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

115

val in 1906 as possible. But when in 1906 did he arrive? There was the
earthquake and fire of April that destroyed so much of San Francisco—
it would not be practical for him to arrive too close to that. So, we suspect October was his best choice, and we fixed on that month in 1906
as my arrival time.”
Kuo listened carefully. “I have not been involved in all these discussions, but Liu has kept me generally informed. I agree to the date
and the argument for choosing it. Have you agreed on a landing site?”
“This has been the most difficult decision,” she replied. “We have
old maps of San Francisco and many photographs of the city before and
immediately after its earthquake and fire. Unfortunately, the business
and government center of the city suffered the most, and many records
were destroyed.
“As you know, our Security Ministry has been fully involved in
this. Six months ago, they sent ten agents to San Francisco to search
through museums, libraries, and government documents for what might
be identified as a safe landing site. We know that the person the Americans sent back had to have found a secure place to land. It would be . . .
convenient if we found a different place.”
Kuo did smile at that, and Jy-ying returned it. He put his hand on
her arm. She left it there.
“Well?” he asked.
“There has to be room for error. I don’t want to land in a wall or in
the middle of a well traveled street.”
“Well?”
“We found a building that was once used for making wagons, carriages, carts, and the like. The owner sold it to a company that turned it
into a warehouse. The plan we have shows a strong, reinforced wooden
floor and a high roof. The company that bought it could not make its payments on the mortgage after the fire, and went bankrupt. The bank that
held the mortgage foreclosed on it, put the warehouse up for sale, and it
was sold in March 1907. It is in the Potrero District, the southern part of
San Francisco, what was south of the fire, and it is my destination.”
“Good. We are preparing an equipment container to send before
you go. It will have your weapons, explosives, electronics, and all else
we can stuff into it, including jewels and counterfeit American hundred
dollar bills. You will be a very rich woman. Oh yes—it will also contain your laptop and CDs containing the front pages of local
newspapers, November 1906 to December 1915, along with as detailed
a chronology of world events for those years that we could prepare.”

116

R.J. Rummel

Jy-ying gave that some thought. “If I’m successful, I may live until
. . . oh, 1960 or so. So extend the chronology to 1960. Also, I must
have some way of renewing my funds, if necessary. The best legal way
would be through the stock exchanges. Please also include the daily
New York Stock quotes in The Wall Street Journal, January 1907 to
1960.”
“I had not thought of that.”
“It comes of having lived in American for a while,” Jy-ying explained with a small grin.
Kuo squeezed Jy-ying’s arm and said, “I have advised Liu that you
should also carry as much as you can in your time machine, including a
good supply of money, weapons for your defense, water and food, and
whatever you may immediately need, just in case the equipment does
not arrive as planned, or in case you land in a place other than your destination.”
She nodded, and added, “Security has counterfeited for me an
American birth certificate giving my birth year as 1882, which would
make my age in 1906 twenty-five, my true age.”
Kuo looked at Jy-ying, smiled, and said, “It could have been 1885,
the way you look.”
How stupid. Jy-ying could not help a little smile anyway, before
continuing.
“The second identity will be as Princess Tz’u Li Poh of the Empress’s side of the royal family. This high aristocratic position should
get me the cooperation of any Chinese official with whom I must deal.
I will also use that identity to mix with higher society in San Francisco.
For all other purposes, my real name should suffice.”
Shu Kuo moved his hand to Jy-ying’s leg. It felt hot and she began
to get a warm, fuzzy feeling. He was always able to do that to her. She
had not contrived their first lovemaking; she had wanted him. The old
feeling she had for him, that she’d thought gone forever, was returning.
She put her hand on top of his.
He hesitated and looked at her with pleasure and anticipation. Then
he said, “I know that you have been discussing with your security colleagues how to find the American time traveler. Any ideas so far?”
“It’s detective work. We have come up with a number of possibilities. Can we discuss this at another time?” She was aroused and wet.
She took his hand and placed it on her crotch.
He got up and made sure the door to his office was locked, and they
undressed each other. They made love on his black lacquered desk. She

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

117

knew it was the last time in this world for them. She realized she would
miss him. She made it last.

aaa
He came to say goodbye. Jy-ying had not seen him alone since their
office passion six months prior. He stood near the door of the time machine as she fitted herself in among the weapons; a leather briefcase
containing money, an American birth certificate, and college transcript;
a small suitcase with a change of clothes and toiletries; and other things
the scientists and Kuo thought she might need immediately. Everything
was clamped in place or pushed into crevasses. She was dressed uncomfortably in a checked gingham jumper—ordinary clothing for a
lower middle class woman of 1906.
The countdown had begun, and Jy-ying had thirty minutes to go.
She had to shut and lock the time machine door at minus five minutes.
Scientists were intent at their consoles. A crowd of assistants, associates, and administrators stood in a crowd behind them. Security
allowed only a few close to the capsule, which included Shu Kuo and
his aide and Chief Scientist Liu Bihai
Imam Ch’en Hsun strode into the lab and right up to the capsule.
He stood for a minute looking at Jy-ying. He got down on his knees on
the dirty floor, white robe and all, and prostrated himself toward her.
He began his prayer with, “La E Laaha Il Lal Laa Sabahdur Rasul Lullah—There is no God besides Allah, and Sabah, peace be upon him, the
messenger of God.”
He concluded with, “O Creator of all creations, as this holy duty to
protect Your Prophet Abul Sabah begins, we all beseech and implore
You alone to give guidance, encouragement, strength, and determination to Khoo Jy-ying, Your servant. It is only with Your help and
support that Captain Khoo Jy-ying will succeed in this holiest of holy
duties. Eyyaaka Na`Budu, Wa Eyyaaka Nasta`Een—You alone we
worship; You alone we ask for help. Subhaana Rabbiyal A`laa—Glory
be to God, the most high.”
She felt humbled as a servant of God and His Prophet Sabah. She
bowed as best she could in the confines of the capsule, and returned the
prayer. “Bismil Laahir Rahmaanir Raheem—In the name of God, most
gracious, most merciful.” She ended as the Imam had.
Ch’en stood, fixed her with a long look, bowed slightly, nodded,
and walked to Liu’s console to watch from there.

R.J. Rummel

118

Finally, at minus six minutes, Kuo took the few steps to close the
capsule door. Looking at Jy-ying proudly, he said, “May fate treat you
well, Khoo Jy-ying.” He bowed deeply, as did his aide and the scientists nearby. He took hold of the capsule door, and whispered, “Have a
long and successful life, Jy-ying. I will miss you.”
She bowed in return, and answered, “May your life be full of sunshine. I will miss you also.”
He shut the door on her. She turned and looked at the digital chronometer: 4:43:07 p.m., March 23, 2002. She watched it and waited for
her life in a new world—or her death.

aaa
Imam Ch’en Hsun
Peking
As soon as he saw the time capsule waver, gradually grow indistinct, and disappear with a loud hum, Imam Ch’en Hsun returned to
Peking in his official jet, Sabah One. When he reached his capital office, he found a message and two documents waiting on his desk. His
clergy spies had reported on their findings in San Francisco.
Three months ago, Security had heard again the rumor that one of
the time travelers had written a journal or biography. Coupling this
with what the two Santa Barbara scientists confessed under torture and
the vague but continuing rumor that two time travelers had been sent
back to 1906, Ch’en decided to investigate this himself. He sent his
own spies to San Francisco to search for the rumored document, on the
slight chance it might exist and be discoverable. They searched every
possible repository of historical documents and papers, including all the
city archives, using keywords such as “time machine,” “time travel,”
and “1906.”
The message from Imam Abdul-Raouf, the Chief Advisor to the
mayor of San Francisco, said they found what Ch’en was looking for in
the archives of the San Francisco Fire Department. It had been evidence in the arson investigation of an apartment house partially
destroyed by fire in 1938.
Ch’en made sure that each of those who handled the English document and translated it into Chinese for him swore to God on The Sabah
that they would maintain strict silence, on pain of death.
He scanned the Chinese translation with increasing excitement.
Many pages were scorched and charred, and an unknown number of

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

119

final pages were burned away, but nevertheless, he could not believe
the information it contained. He went back through it, noting the details
he needed immediately: The time travelers were the Americans John
Banks and ethnic Sino-Vietnamese Joy Phim. They landed in San
Francisco on November 14, 1906, and created the successful Tor Import and Export Company. Ch’en also noted the dates for their travel to
Mexico, China, Japan, and Europe. The document even mentioned that
John Banks had set up the Joy Phim Democratic Peace Institute, of
which the Institute in Santa Barbara had been an affiliate, before its
members destroyed it.
We got them. For sure, these are the time travelers that received the
message.
He put through an urgent call to Shu Kuo. When Shu answered,
Ch’en asked without preamble, “Can we contact Khoo Jy-ying right
away?”
Shu Kuo hesitated, and finally responded. He sounded surprised
that the Imam would ask this after he had seen her disappear into the
past. “No. She is now in 1906.”
“I want to send a message to her immediately.”
“I do not understand.”
“This message will contain new information that will make it easy
for her to find the American time travelers and execute them before
they assassinate Sabah. I want you and Chief Scientist Liu to prepare a
time capsule to carry back this message to Khoo. I don’t care how you
do it; I don’t care about the expense; you need not hurry. But I want to
make sure she gets this message.”
After Shu Kuo assured him they would start on the assignment immediately, he hung up.
He now had copied the essential information from what its author,
Banks, called his Remembrance. The document was overtly revolutionary, Satanic, and anti-Sabah. It was too dangerous for anyone to read,
other than a high Imam, who was armored against its lies. It exulted in
a counter theology, that of infantile freedom. Ch’en knew what he had
to do.
He took the original and translation home with him late that evening. He turned on the floodlight on his patio, carried the documents to
his little garden off the patio, and picked up a trowel from his gardener’s bench. All the snow had melted, and the first buds of spring
were beginning to sprout. He dug deep and wide into the mulch he had
placed around the roots of his prized, aromatic hamamelis in the au-

R.J. Rummel

120

tumn, sniffing the exotic, spicy fragrance the activity conjured and
again enjoying the beauty of its delicate, creamy-white flowers. Nearby
he had also planted for contrast the red, orange, and yellow flowering
varieties.
He slowly tore the pages out of both documents and then tore the
pages into small pieces. He stuffed them into the hole.
Finished, he stooped over the hole, but hesitated. He’d destroyed an
historic document. Perhaps the most historic—the first report of time
travel to ever exist. If it were made public, it would revolutionize science.
“And these two would be heroes and martyrs to the anti-Sabahs,”
he told himself firmly. “I have just saved the Sabah faith, the word of
God.”
He covered the papers with soil and mulch and watered the mound.

aaa
Director Shu Kuo
Tianjin
Shu Kuo watched the final preparations for sending the message to
Khoo Jy-ying. They were giving the buzzer its last test. He held the
message for Jy-ying that detailed where John Banks and Joy Phim were
staying in San Francisco, and their major activities up to the birth of
Sabah. With this information she would have no difficulty finding, ambushing, and killing them.
Liu motioned him over and said, “I want to be sure about the time
frame. Security has insisted Khoo Jy-ying’s destination warehouse will
be unused at least two months prior to her arrival. Because of the range
of error in arrival dates for both Khoo and this box, we are planning for
it to arrive two months before Khoo, which would be August. The
warehouse will be unoccupied then. Is that correct?”
“Yes.”
“All the space time coordinates are now set, then, and have been
triple checked. We have clearance to heavily draw on Tianjin’s electrical power. Anytime you are ready, we can send it off.”
Shu Kuo walked over to the little, red metal box, punched in the
code—which was the same as Jy-ying’s equipment capsule, so she would
know it—and inserted the plastic-sealed message. Hiding the open capsule
with his body, he also put on top a personal message from him:

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

121

My Dear Jy-ying,
I know you will succeed in protecting Sabah, especially with the enclosed information. You were the best
for this mission and you would have been my first choice,
had the Council not stood in the way.
Now you are gone. I did not realize what you meant
to me until you left. I miss you, truly miss you. I am finding it almost impossible to accept that I will never see you
again, never again hold you in my arms.
I can only hope now that we will meet in Paradise.
Have a long life, Jy-ying, and I applaud with a kiss
what I know will be your success. God surely will be with
you.
Shu Kuo
He closed the capsule and returned to the large console to stand
next to Liu. “Send it off,” Shu ordered.
He watched as the red box seemed to shrivel, turned hazy, became
only a dusty outline, and then disappeared.

aaa
Jy-ying
San Francisco, 1906, Old Universe
The jackhammer of sound blasted her mind. Jy-ying put her hands
over her ears and moaned from the pain. She pressed her palms into her
ears as hard as she could, but they had no effect. The sound beat her
whole body and rattled her bones. She thought the machine must be
malfunctioning and she would not survive.
It attacked her for hour-long minutes.
Then in an unbelievable instant, the sound ended. Jy-ying had a
sudden falling sensation, heard a screeching sound, and was jolted to
her knees.
Silence. Absolute silence, except for the beating of her heart.
She leaned against the door, feeling helpless and deaf. She couldn’t
think. Was she dying?
As her senses returned, she realized that she wasn’t leaning, the
capsule was. It was tilted toward the closed door.
She had to be sure she was okay. She felt herself all over. She
looked carefully at her hands in the dim capsule light, and pulled up her

122

R.J. Rummel

toe-length dress to look at her legs. She was not, however, going to take
off the uncomfortable pointed shoes and look at her feet. She swallowed a few times, made a couple of coughs, and spoke out loud, “God
be praised. Thank you. I’m in one piece and apparently healthy.”
But did she make it? She looked up at the digital reading: 3:18:02
p.m., November 13, 1906. “Success!” she exclaimed aloud. The month
was off, but she didn’t think that would make any difference.
She mentally squared her shoulders. “Time to see the old world.”
She picked up her specially-made holster purse, styled to look like
an ordinary 1906 woman’s handbag, and took out her Taiyang .38 caliber semi-automatic. She switched off the capsule’s inside light, and
gently tried to open the door. Because of the angle of the capsule, it
would only open about an inch before the floor stopped it. She pushed
on it, but it would open no further. She looked through the small opening and saw light coming through a high window into what must be the
warehouse. She’d apparently arrived where planned, but now she was
stuck in the capsule.
How ironic, she thought, if with all their plans and preparations, she
made it to 1906, to the proper destination, only to die in the capsule because she could not get the door open.
Jy-ying switched the light back on, put away her gun, and stooped
down to take a look at where the door made contact with the outside
floor. It was hardwood, possibly walnut, and the door was thin steel.
She knew the capsule weighed as much as a small automobile, so she
didn’t think she could rock it back and forth.
But why assume a negative?
Okay, she thought, I will take off my shoes after all. Good thing my
feet are well callused from my sparring. She removed her shoes with a
sigh, and moved and crammed equipment, bags, and containers out of
the way. She carefully gauged the distance and spot to hit the capsule
side at a right angle from the door—if she seriously injured her leg, she
was dead—to tip the capsule over. If she succeeded, she could easily
get out. She crouched as far from the spot as she could and sprang at it,
hitting the metal flat and hard with one foot.
The capsule only gave a little shudder.
She fell back and suddenly realized another danger. Oh Sabah, if it
falls over on the door, I’m dead. So much for that.
Back to the door. She had to apply enough pressure to bend its top
out and its bottom in. She looked around at what she had. Just in case
the range of error in space-time coordinates had materialized the cap-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

123

sule somewhere outside the warehouse, the scientists had thoughtfully
clamped in various places in the capsule a long-handled spade, an axe,
a hatchet, a sledge hammer, a short-barreled shotgun, a rifle, and a few
other tools.
Well, with all this, if I can’t get out of here, I don’t deserve to live.
First, muscles.
Jy-ying laid across the seat, braced her back against the far wall in
between the clamped tools and weapons, and raised her well-muscled
legs to push on the door. She pushed and grunted and pushed. The top
of the door moved out maybe an inch or more while the bottom did not
move at all.
She looked more carefully at the door. There was no way to unhinge it.
Stupid, she thought. It should have explosive hinges.
There was the shotgun, but she was not going to shoot at the bottom
corner of the door stuck into the wooden floor. She might well be injured by a ricocheting bullet or scattering shot from the shotgun. She
could still use the shotgun, however. It gave her a brace for the shovel.
She first made sure the shotgun was unloaded. Next, she held it barrel
sideways across the bottom of the door, reversed the shovel so that the
bottom curved down, put the tip of the shovel in the open crack between the door bottom and that of the machine, and held the bottom of
the shovel against the shotgun barrel that was abutting the bottom of
the door. This gave her a lever. She put her shoulder under the shovel
handle and pushed up with her legs.
The screeching sound indicated some success. The door was now
open about two inches, with its bottom edge bent slightly inward. She
repositioned the shotgun barrel and the shovel and lifted again. She
gained maybe another half an inch.
Time for some heavy action.
Jy-ying took down the sledge, but trying to get a good swing was
awkward in the crowded and narrow capsule, and the position she had to
take strained her side. Regardless, she began to hammer just above the
point where the bottom of the door met the wooden floor outside. The angle at which she had to swing exhausted her in about ten minutes.
The door was now open about three inches.
Jy-ying sat down, panting, and looked at the door, hoping for inspiration. She could keep pounding away with the sledge, taking frequent
breaks, but she would be in poor condition afterward for anything but a
long rest.

124

R.J. Rummel

She sat very still, relaxing her mind and letting it play with the
problem. She imagined what the capsule and door would look like in
schematic. She mentally drew into the schematic the various vector
forces. That did it. The solution was simple. The door was a lever on
the capsule. It stuck out, and if she used her weight to lift on the lever,
she might straighten the capsule just a little, giving some clearance
from the wooden floor for the now curved edge of the door. Then she
could kick the door, knocking it open a little more. The more open, the
more leverage, and the greater the distance she could push it open.
When her strength returned she laid the sledge hammer close to the
corner of the door, turned the shovel right side up and put its point under the door as near to the edge embedded in the floor as she could, and
sat the upper part of the shovel down on the hammer.
Almost there, she thought, moving to the back of the capsule where
the end of the shovel handle extended.
Shoving down on the shovel handle with all her strength, she felt
the capsule tip slightly, and at that moment she kicked on the door. She
gained half an inch.
She did it again, gaining an inch. She kept this up, with frequent
rests, until the door was open just wide enough for her to squeeze out.
She put on her ugly shoes, held her holster purse in front of her and her
jacket behind her, and squeezed out without tearing anything. It had
taken her almost two hours.
Jy-ying looked around at the dirty and dusty warehouse, bare except
for wooden columns supporting thick beams overhead. The windows
were so dirty they were opaque. A dank and moldy stench mixed with
an old factory smell of greasy oil seemed to paint her lips.
Her equipment capsule was close to a far wall. Good. I have that.
She walked around the time machine capsule, trying to see what
had caused it to tilt. Looking under the back of it, she saw that it was
sitting on a red metal box tipped on end, which had been squashed to
half its height by the weight of the capsule.
Well, I wonder what that is. There are no other boxes on the whole
warehouse floor. She shrugged and turned away. She had more pressing concerns.
Jy-ying found two entrances to the warehouse. One was through a
corner office and was locked from the outside. In the middle of one
warehouse wall was a shipping entrance closed by two large doors with
a bar across them. Next to them was a door like that in the office, also
locked from the outside.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

125

She looked herself over as best she could. Her hair was supposed to
be up in a stylish bun and she felt around it to make sure her long black
hair was in place. Now that she was no longer concentrating on getting
out of the capsule, she began to feel the chill and put on her wool
broadcloth jacket. And then she remembered. No hat.
Striding over to her equipment capsule, she typed in her code and
opened its door. Everything was there, as it should be. Her one hat, a
“genteel” turban, was the only one that hadn’t generated gales of laughter when she tried on the variety of hats created for her 1906 wardrobe.
She refused all the others. “Too bulky, and they take up too much
room,” she had told Liu Bihai. “The turban will do until I get to a clothing store.”
After putting on her hat and pinning it, she realized that no one had
thought of including a mirror. “Just as well,” she told herself, grinning.
To be sure she looked presentable anyway, she checked herself
again. The bottom of her dress was wrinkled from her efforts inside the
time capsule, and under the jacket she was damp from sweat. But no
rips, no scratches.
I’m ready for this world.
Jy-ying unbarred the shipping doors and opened both of them out
enough for her to slip between them, then closed them behind her.
Looking around, she saw the shipping entrance was off a small alley
that connected to De Haro Street, an area of small factories and warehouses. In the foggy distance she barely see several large buildings,
their smokestacks billowing black smoke. Hazy bicycles, horses and
wagons bustled around their entrances, and many more were apparently
parked nearby. The air on the street smelled even worse than that in the
warehouse, and she could well see why, with all the clumps of horse
manure in the streets. There was no sidewalk.
All this was not completely strange. As a security officer, she had
taken a tour of China, where some backward areas still remained,
hardly touched by China’s economic development.
Jy-ying walked toward the street, and stopped in amazement to look
at the poles that lined it. They were so laden with wires looping from
pole to pole, and from the poles to the buildings scattered up and down
the street, that they seemed to defy gravity by remaining unbroken, especially those leaning at precarious angles.
She had made sure she knew where the warehouse was located in
San Francisco, and had memorized the streets in this area. There was
the intersection with 15th Street two buildings south, and with Alameda

126

R.J. Rummel

Street several buildings in the other direction, and she walked toward it
to make sure of her orientation. At the intersection she continued on to
Division Street, and from there did a one block jog over to Townsend
Street. She now stood on the edge of the huge downtown, commercial,
market, and residential districts destroyed by the April 18, 1906, San
Francisco earthquake and fire. The fog was thicker here, and from what
she could make out the area was still undergoing massive rebuilding.
Two-thirds of the city had been destroyed, with 674 dead or missing,
and 250,000 left homeless. She could see some indistinct mounds of
rubble and a few skeletons of buildings whose owners waited for or
contested their insurance settlements.
Now to find a hotel, get something to eat, and slowly settle in. No
hurry. I have eight years before Sabah is born.

Chapter 10
Joy

J

oy awoke in a sweat, with her heart beating rapidly. John was already awake and was looking at San Francisco’s skinny telephone
directory.
“I dreamed about my mom,” she told him, her voice shaking. “I was
with her and we were running away from a Khmer Rouge patrol when
Mom fell and broke her leg. It was horrible. She told me to run and
save myself and I ran and I heard the shot behind me as the patrol
found her and I ran back and saw her lying in a pool of blood.” Tears
sprang to her eyes as she tried to recover from the nightmare.
John put his arms around her and held her tight. She felt so sad. She
lamented, “I can’t get out of my mind the horrible suffering people experienced in our old universe’s wars and democides.”
“You know,” he said as he stroked her back, “finding out about Sabah and his nuclear murder of maybe two billion human beings
destroyed any feeling of success that we might otherwise have had. But
if you forget about him for a moment, as difficult as that is, we did succeed in stopping major wars and democide up to 1994. Except for
Sabah, we did accomplish our mission.”
Joy shook her head. “Isn’t that like the cliché, ‘The operation was a
success, but the patient died’? Anyway, we can’t get cocky about that
or work any less cautiously or cleverly. We don’t know whether we
followed The Plan you and the Society worked out, or whether we succeeded as far as we did because we threw The Plan out.”
John nodded. “It’s as though we’re starting from scratch again, except now we know about that son of a bitch, Sabah. And if we fail at
everything else, we’ve got to kill him.”
“Amen,” she said. “Let’s look at the chronology of this new universe that Lora sent us and at least see the consequences of what we
did—not that we necessarily will be able to duplicate them.”

aaa

128

R.J. Rummel

When the time came, Joy and John met their three guys, as they
were now calling them, for supper in the small hotel dining room. It
was only twice the size of their room, and held seven cloth-covered
post tables, all fairly close together. People were eating at four of them
when they entered. The guys were already sitting at one table, and John
pulled another table over so that they could eat together.
People had stopped eating to stare at John and particularly Joy as
they sat down. The waiter, a surly looking fellow, ignored them for the
next fifteen minutes.
Joy was irritated. John noticed, and cautioned her with his finger
and a shake of his head. He finally stood, tapped on the candleholder
with his knife, and waited for everyone’s attention.
Smiling, John spoke loudly enough for everyone to hear. “Good afternoon. My name is John Banks. I am the new owner of this hotel, and
also the owner of the Tor Import and Export Company, which I have
relocated to San Francisco from New York. I would like you to meet
my company’s new employees,” and John introduced the three guys.
Then he added, “I also want you to meet my assistant and translator,
Joy Phim.”
He smiled broadly, and continued. “Collectively, our parents,
grandparents, or near ancestors came from England, France, Germany,
Mexico, Spain, Vietnam, and China. I don’t see any Indians here, so all
of you or your ancestors have also come from a foreign country. Now
we’re all Americans. And we all benefit from the diverse cultures we
have brought together here. Isn’t this a great country? To celebrate this,
all your dinners this evening are on me.”
Some of the quests clapped, and John sat down, his smile now extending from earlobe to earlobe.
Joy was proud of him, her man, and rubbed his leg with her ugly
shoe to show it.
From then on, they always had the best of service from the waiter,
and word rapidly got around. For several days after, when they ate in
the dining room, at least one guest would come up to John, smile at
Joy, thank him for bringing his business to San Francisco, and congratulate him on the speech they’d heard or heard about.

aaa
With the guys helping with directions and flagging down hacks,
John and Joy began their first business in the past after breakfast the

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

129

next morning. The whole downtown area, and with it most city government buildings, had been burned down or destroyed during the April
earthquake and fire. But several buildings had been repaired, and these
were being used temporarily to conduct city business. Some city offices
in the partially destroyed city hall were still open to the public; again
with the help of the guys, they found the appropriate office for registering their company in San Francisco.
Next, John had to buy the warehouse. The Bank of California,
which had survived the fire, had been appointed as trustee for the warehouse, and the court permitted them to sell the warehouse to John at a
market value of $19,233.
“Less than one third of what you paid for the hotel,” Joy whispered
in John’s ear. He ignored the comment.
Until their new company developed sufficiently that they could
build or take over a whole office building, they intended to renovate the
inside of the warehouse into temporary offices and work and storage
rooms. On the advice of the manager of the bank, John had a long discussion with Muss Builders over what he wanted and finally gave them
a blank check to hire an architect and get to work. He was told that
their job would have to wait a year or more—there was reconstruction
going on all over San Francisco due to the fire and earthquake. After a
whispered conversation with Joy that raised the eyebrows of the company owner, John tripled the estimated cost of the remodeling. Their
job was given priority.
They had rented a team of two horses and a carriage, all hitched together for them at the Rent-A-Horse stalls, and had Dolphy, who had
worked on a farm, drive them from city hall to banks to builders. Once
they got the business details settled, John had the guys ask around for
an automobile dealer. At Hughson & Merton, a new franchise for the
Ford car, they found a 1905 Model C. It bore a $800 price tag. No
trade-in on carriages or wagons.
“Boy,” John exclaimed, “two cylinders, ten horsepower, maximum
speed thirty miles per hour. I have to buy this baby. It’s only about
twenty thousand in 2002 dollars. Cheap, for all that horsepower.”
“Like we have a choice,” Joy replied. “It’s ugly, but better than a
horse.” She hesitated, grinned, and whispered so that the guys couldn’t
hear, “And about one sixtieth of what you paid for the hotel.”
John made a show of looking at the sky, cupped his ear, and asked
Hands, who was looking the car over, “Did you hear something?”
“Huh?”

130

R.J. Rummel

John shrugged. “Think it’s a chickeylipper”
“What’s that?”
“Oh,” John drawled, trying to look bland but betrayed by the upward twitch at the corners of his mouth, “it’s a pesky female creature
that feeds off of male eagles and owls. Yes, pesky to be sure. Makes a
belching sound.”
The guys looked curiously at the middle finger that Joy jabbed at John.
The dealer showed John how to use the Ford’s hand lever to control
the high and low gears, how to operate the reverse and brake pedals on
the floorboard, how to control the motor throttle with the foot lever,
and how to set the throttle and use the lever on the steering wheel to
retard the spark when starting the car.
“Have you ever cranked an automobile before?” he asked.
John looked startled.
The dealer interpreted John’s expression as a “No” and showed him
how to crank the car without breaking an arm, just in case the car backfired.
As John finished noting it all down on the car’s advertising booklet,
Joy beat him to the driver’s side door and climbed up to sit behind the
wheel.
John got in and told her with an undertaker’s seriousness, “Women
are not allowed to drive at this time, since the automobile is considered
too complex for your simple minds. Besides, it’s too difficult for a
woman to crank.” He had a hard time getting her away from the crank
and steering wheel for the next week—she would have cranked the car
by herself, if she had to use both arms and one foot.

aaa
They’d been in San Francisco a month when Joy decided she
needed a wardrobe with more variety than the one the Society had prepared for her. There were several dress shops only four blocks away
along 16th Street, and walking to them would give her a better chance
to look around at this old world. John was busy working with their architect on their new offices; she let him know where she was going and
left the warehouse.
She got no further than the intersection of 8th and Wisconsin
Streets.
“Hey you, stop!” someone yelled, and Joy turned to see two policemen walking along the street toward her. One of them was a husky

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

131

fellow, about her height, in late middle age. He had a handlebar mustache and unruly hair that curled up around his helmet. The other fellow
was young and clean-shaven, and walked a step behind the older policeman.
The older man looked angry. He asked gruffly, “What are you doing here?”
“I work down the road, at the old warehouse.”
“You lie. No Chinks work around here. You’re not allowed around
here.”
“I beg your pardon,” she answered levelly, “I’m an American citizen, and you have no right to stop me.”
“Is that so. You’re either a Chink or a Jap, and you ain’t going to
fool me with your forged birth certificate. There are too many of you
paper sons around.” He looked at his younger partner. “Call a
wagon, Jim.”
There was a police phone on the pole at Wisconsin and 16th Streets,
and while Jim went over to call, the old one asked Joy, “How come a
good-looking whore like you is working this area? You must have escaped from one of the Chink cribs. But you’re too good-looking for
them. I can fix you up with a good location at Turk and Steiner
Streets—Madam Labrodet has opened a nice bagnio there, and she’ll
take on good-looking Chinks.” He added, leering, “We’ll take you there
for a little payback.”
Joy must have looked pretty angry, because he stepped back a couple of feet and brought his billy club up in front of him as she said
loudly, clipping her words, “I am no whore. I work at the Tor Import
and Export Company down the road. Do you understand that, my simple man?”
“Bullshit.”
Joy briefly considered laying out both him and his partner. Too
close to the warehouse. They might easily see her again in the future
and call in reinforcements. No need for additional trouble. She’d settle
this at police headquarters.
Jim returned. “Called ’em, Carl,” he announced, and the pair stood
off a little distance, waiting for the wagon. They stared at her and
chuckled, murmuring sidelong to one another.
While they laughed over whatever little jokes they were exchanging, Joy simmered. Let’s see, which of Carl’s legs should I break?
Better yet, why not wrap his right arm around his leg and tuck it back
into his right armpit? Nah. That’s too easy on him too.

132

R.J. Rummel

Finally a two-cylinder Buick that looked like a motorized buggy
puttered up to them, another policeman at the wheel. The police had
commandeered all the automobiles after the San Francisco fire; this
must have been left over from then, Joy thought. She was told to climb
into the back, and Carl climbed in beside her. Jim pulled himself up in
the front, next to the driver. They started off with a jolt.
Carl immediately leaned over and tried to put his hand under her
dress—no easy matter, since the skirt was so long it almost covered her
shoes.
She chopped down on his biceps.
He reared back, rubbed his upper arm, and tried to press the head of
his billy club into her side. With a twist of her upper body, she elbowed
the club away and knife-chopped down on his quadriceps, giving him a
painful charley horse.
“You fucking whore,” he roared, causing his partner in the front to
jerk around to see what was happening. “I’m going to enjoy personally
working you over and sticking this club up your fucking twat.”
She responded as demurely as she could, looking at him from under
her long eyelashes. “Try anything more—and I sincerely hope you
do—and your partners in the front are going to wonder how a sweet
little thing like me could take that club away and beat the shit out of
you.”
He reared back against the strut holding up the car’s canopy and
stared at her. I bet no woman has ever talked to him like that, Joy observed smugly.
“We’ll see, you fucking whore,” he spat. He kept his body turned
toward her, thumping his club hard into his palm, scowling. He kept
glancing back and forth between his partners in front and Joy.
After driving for about half an hour, they came to a small encampment of dirty, dusty-looking tents. The driver stopped at the entrance to
the camp and looked back at Joy. “Are you a Chink or a Jap?” he
asked.
“I’m American.”
“Shit you are,” Carl threw at her, his voice husky with rage.
“I think she’s a Chink,” the driver said. “Anyway, if we put her in
with the Chinks, rats know their own—they’ll send her over to the Japs,
if that’s where she belongs.”
The driver guided the Buick into the camp. Two policemen near the
entrance stood and stepped in front of the Buick. “Where is the
women’s tent?” the driver asked. “You know which one I mean.”
“Three tents down, on the left.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

133

The driver drove down the line of tents and stopped at the third one.
Carl got out first. As Joy climbed down, he smacked her hard on the
rear with his club. She stopped dead and gave him such a fierce glare,
his eyes widened for a moment and he took a step away from her. As
though to hide his reaction, he turned abruptly, pointed toward the tent,
and beckoned Joy to follow him, all without looking at her.
The air inside the tent was hot and stunk like a spittoon—or what
Joy though it would smell like, if she were to stick her nose in one. An
old Chinese woman hunched over a rickety folding table, her head
wreathed in a haze of smoke. She wore a gray, shapeless robe, and
clutched a long pipe with a tiny bowl in one hand.
Joy breathed through her mouth to escape the stench, and almost
immediately her lips felt oily. When she unconsciously ran her
tongue over them, they tasted odd, like they’d been rubbed with a
rotten orange.
The old woman raised her round, shriveled face, and Carl asked
her loudly, “Is this whore a Chink?”
Hardly seeming to open her eyes beyond a crack, she looked at Joy for
several moments. She mumbled in Mandarin Chinese, “Who are you?”
Joy answered in Mandarin, one of the Chinese languages—
mistakenly called dialects—she had studied, “I’m American. My parents were Sino-Vietnamese. My name is Joy Phim.”
“What?”
The woman was partly deaf. As well as olfactory-challenged, Joy
thought, reluctantly swallowing the taste in her mouth. She slowly and
loudly repeated what she’d said.
The old woman nodded, and responded in Chinese, “Call me Mei.
Am I not as enchanting as my name?” And she pulled her wrinkled
mouth into a grin, exposing her yellow teeth. Then she coughed, blowing a stinking hole in the haze of smoke. She turned her head in Carl’s
direction—Joy couldn’t tell where she looked, with those slit eyes—
and nodded. In English she said, “She Chinese.”
Carl’s eyes blazed with a mixture of hate and expectation. He
jabbed his finger at Joy, and opened his mouth as if about to say something. He suddenly changed his mind, clamped his lips shut, and jerked
around to stalk out of the tent.
Joy took the few steps over to the table and without invitation sat
down across from Mei. “Where am I?” she asked loudly in Mandarin.
Without seeming to move her lips, Mei mumbled, “You are in the
Presidio, near Fort Point.”

134

R.J. Rummel

“Why are you here, Mei?”
Mei inhaled deeply from her pipe and exhaled enough smoke in her
direction to obscure an ocean liner. Joy tried to hold her breath and fan
it away with her hand. When she partly succeeded, she warned Mei,
“Do that again, and I’ll take that pipe away from you.”
Mei ignored her threat, but answered her question. Pipe smoke
puffed out of her motionless mouth as she mumbled, “All of Chinatown
was burned down. We had no place to live after that, so the mayor
made us all go to one camp. Then another. This is our final camp.
There were about five hundred of us here, at first. Chinatown is being
rebuilt. Many went back there to live in new buildings. Only about fifty
of us are left here.”
“But the guards—aren’t you free to leave?”
“Yes, I think so. But, where would we go? Our homes are all gone.
White men do not want us to live outside of Chinatown. The mayor is
against it, and he is a little emperor.” She paused and gestured behind
her. “Would you like some tea? I have a hot kettle on a little fire.”
“Yes, thank you.”
When Mei put the green tea before her, Joy sipped it as she asked
Mei about her family and where she’d lived in China. Within a few
minutes, though, Joy became dizzy. Mei seemed to be disappearing into
a haze. Shit. I’ve been drugged.
She pushed herself up from the table, swayed on her feet, then
crumpled to the floor. She tried to get to her knees, but her body
wouldn’t work. She raised her head. Through the increasing darkness,
she saw Mei’s fuzzy back as the old woman left the tent.
She felt her head bump the floor. Blackness.

aaa
Joy’s mind slowly emerged from darkness, but she still felt dazed.
She had a headache. As her senses struggled toward awareness, she felt
cold air blanket her body. Only cold air. She was naked. Someone had
stripped her. And she could hear two men talking nearby.
She didn’t move as she tried to orient herself. She was on her side.
She could feel that her hands were tied behind her. And she was shivering from the cold.
Now, she thought, I could scream, cry, beg the men to let me go,
blush with embarrassment, and all those things women do in movies
when threatened. That antithetical model in her mind helped her take

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

135

deep breaths, slow her breathing, relax her muscles, and center her
thoughts and energy on what she had to do. She kept her eyes closed,
listened, and tested the bonds around her wrists. If left alone for a few
moments, she was limber enough to slip her wrists under her feet and
bring her hands in front of her, where she could bite through the bonds
or use her teeth to untie them.
She heard someone say, “This one is a beauty. She’s too good for
the peasants. I think we can spread the word that we have the most
beautiful Chink they have ever seen, available for two dollars a halfhour, ten dollars a night. Give her a nice, slant-eyed name, like ‘Lotus,’
or ‘Jade.’ I want to start working her tomorrow. Break her in by then.”
Someone with a thick accent replied, “She eat shit before she say no
when I done.”
“Yes, whatever. But no bruises, no cigarette burns, no broken
bones. I’m first tomorrow at 2 p.m., so I want her cunt shaved, clean,
and ready. You got that? Use her other hole or her mouth if you want,
but her cunt is mine.
“Before I leave I want to take a picture. When the rich pricks see it,
they’ll maybe pay double, if they get an early whack at her before everybody else slimes her up. Untie her hands and sit her against the wall.
Put the sheet around her, sexy-like. I don’t want anyone getting anything for free. I’ll go get the camera.”
She felt herself being rolled over onto her stomach. Her hands were
untied. Are bad guys always this stupid? Joy wondered.
Bad Accent roughly rolled her over onto her back. He put a hand on
her breast and tried to spread her legs with the other.
Planning to aim a chop at his neck, Joy opened her eyes, but they
wouldn’t focus. She saw only a blurred image of a bull of a man with a
large, bald, round head that seemed to merge into huge shoulders.
Focus! She imagined three hollow tiles stacked on top of each
other, the ends of the bottom one supported on bricks. She prepared to
break through the tiles with one mighty chop of her hand. She ignored
what Bad Accent was doing, gathered her energy, and focused and focused and focused.
Yelling “Haiyeee,” Joy released her chain of power. Like a whip, it
sprang up from her twisting hip and back, through her rotator cuff, into
a turn of her elbow, flip of her wrist, to end in a knife chop of blazing
speed and strength.
Slap. Thunk. She felt her chop dig into flesh, muscle, and cartilage
where she thought Bad Accent’s neck was.

136

R.J. Rummel

“Ummph,” he grunted, and a large club of a hand swiped at her face.
Joy ducked, rolled, and tried to stand up. The room swam before
her. She swayed. Damn drug. Okay, plan B.
He lumbered at her with both arms held wide to bear hug her and
throw her helpless to the floor. In all her years of training in judo and
karate, that was one approach no one taught her. For good reason. She
let him get his arms around her, but held up her right arm to keep it
free. As he tightened his hug, she brought her free arm down and
quickly jabbed two stiff, dagger-like fingers into his eyes.
“Yeohhh,” he cried, followed by some gibberish in a language she
didn’t recognize. He released her and yanked his hands up to his eyes
to rub the pain and sudden blindness away.
Joy’s vision and mind had cleared enough to do what came to her as
routine. She twirled on her left leg and kicked him in the throat with her
right heel, and as he bent over choking, she put both hands behind his
head and jerked it down sharply onto her knee. There was a loud cracking sound, and an even louder grunt as she felt his nose break. He still
wouldn’t go down.
Joy couldn’t trust going after his neck again. She simply stepped in
front of him and threw a powerful front toe kick into his vulnerable
throat, not caring whether she crushed his windpipe or not. He must
have had concrete legs. He still didn’t go down, but bent over further,
holding his throat and gasping for breath. Blood dripped from his nose.
His eyes were squinted shut.
She fired a two-handed knuckle punch into his temple. Sucking air
in huge, gurgling gasps, he finally lost consciousness, and toppled to
the floor.
She looked around the room as she took a moment to rest. It was
bare except for the bamboo mat she had been lying on, and her clothes
thrown in a corner. There were no windows; light came from a single
bulb hanging from the ceiling on its electrical cord. The only other
thing in the room was a dirty sheet at the foot of the mat. She picked
that up and was going to wrap it around her, but she remembered that
the other man was coming back with a camera. She took up a position
near the door and waited.
A few minutes later, a man entered carrying a large camera. She
was behind the door as it opened, so the first thing he saw was Bad Accent sprawled on the floor. He jerked his head around, looking for her.
She stood as nature made her, one hand on the door, the other on
her hip. “Hi Sweetie,” she said in a sexy voice, “looking for me?”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

137

He hesitated a second, surprised, then immediately crouched; his
hand flashed toward his pocket. Joy twirled, rotating her foot into his
face and kicked him sprawling. She leaped on him. Unlike Bad Accent,
he had a normal neck. She swiftly chopped his carotid vein switch and
his head flopped as he lost consciousness.
She straddled his body and searched his clothes. She found his wallet and saw that he not only carried a badge, but that he was Assistant
Police Chief Greg Glazier. She stripped him, sliding the .36 caliber
Colt handgun he had in a shoulder holster toward her clothes.
She tried to do the same to Bad Accent, but he weighed about twohundred and fifty pounds, and it was like moving a huge granite slab.
Employing various laws of mechanics, she managed to strip him also.
Glazier started gaining consciousness as she was doing so, so she
knuckle-punched his temple and put him out again.
My locket! She realized she was not only naked, she didn’t have her
locket. Frantic, she rushed over to her clothes—it wasn’t there. She
hurried over to Bad Accent’s clothes and rummaged through them. She
found her locket in his pants pocket. She held it close to her heart for a
moment, kissed it, and with a great sigh of relief, put it back around her
neck where it belonged.
She stood contemplating Bad Accent and Glazier. She had an idea.
With great difficulty, invoking even more laws of mechanics, she
dragged and rolled the naked Bad Accent up to a wall. Grunting with
the effort, she leaned him against it. Then she dragged the equally naked and much lighter Glazier up to the wall, and propped him next to
Bad Accent. She grabbed the sheet and wet a corner with her spittle,
then wiped the blood off of Bad Accent’s face. She folded the mat and
placed her clothes on top so that the pile was about a foot high. This
she positioned about ten feet away from the two men. Joy was pleased
to see that Glazier’s camera was a Kodak folding pocket bellows type,
with a ten second timer. Gauging the poor lighting, Joy set the speed at
its longest—one second—and balanced the camera on the folded mat.
Returning to the two men, she tilted Bad Accent down and positioned him so that his mouth was on Glazier’s penis. She made sure
Bad Accent’s diminutive penis was visible, so there would be no mistaking his gender. She stood back and studied her handiwork, then
arranged two fingers of Bad Accent’s hand right around his penis. She
rested Glazier’s right hand on Bad Accent’s head.
Again she stood back. Better. She grinned. My mom would never
believe this. Joy, the porno director.

138

R.J. Rummel

Finally, she placed Glazier’s badge where she could get it in a rush.
She set the timer on the camera, hid her locket down her back, rushed
over to the men, and sat on the floor next to Glazier. She placed his
badge over her genitals, covered her face with one hand, and with the
other held his head in a loving embrace so it would be visible for the
camera.
Click.
Done. Joy had to make sure. She took another photograph.
She dressed in Glazier’s clothes and stuffed her hair up into his fedora to keep it from sliding down over her ears. Glazier was only an
inch taller than she was, and thin, so with some adjustment of the
clothes, she was satisfied she could pass for a man, if no one looked
closely. She folded her clothes around her purse and placed them under
her arm, lifted the camera with the same arm so she would have the
other hand free to reach Glazier’s gun in his coat pocket, and opened
the door.
Joy had no idea where she was, but she could tell she was in a large
house. A number of rooms opened off a long hallway. She could hear
voices, and muffled crying came from a nearby room. Further down the
hallway, there were other sounds.
Lovemaking? Wrong word—rape.
She ambled down the hallway as though she were in her own house,
then passed through a dimly lit living room where a number of women
sat talking and two men stood looking like they were on guard. When
somebody said something to her, she lifted her hand holding the camera
and waved it. She kept walking.
She walked out the front door, down several steps, and onto a street.
It was night. Without stopping, she turned right and walked until the
house was out of sight.
Joy walked into the middle of what a street sign told her was Castro
Street and waved down what was possibly one of the first motor trucks
ever made. It looked like a poorly loaded washing machine and indeed
it was precariously loaded with bundled hay. When the driver leaned
out and looked down at her curiously, his whole body shaking in time
with the idling motor, she had to yell up at him to be heard above its
popping noise. Trying to imitate a man’s voice, she announced huskily,
“I’m going to a costume party but I’m very late. Five dollars if you take
me there.”
“What’s a Chink like you doing around here?”
“I’m not a Chink. This is good makeup. Fooled you.”
Looking at her doubtfully, he said, “Okay. Give me the five dollars.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

139

She pulled out Glazier’s wallet, hoping he had enough money in it.
She found two dollars. “Here’s two. I’ll give you the rest when I get to
the party.”
She climbed in, yelled the address at him, and with a loud backfire
they started off in a plume of acrid smoke from his exhaust. She tried to
raise her voice above the loud put-putting of the engines to ask, “How
long will this take?”
She wasn’t doing a good job of disguising her feminine voice. He
looked at her suspiciously, but answered, “Maybe half hour, forty-five
minutes.”
Joy nodded, and thought it best to ignore him for the rest of the trip.
Fortunately, the truck was so loud that she could risk finally communicating with John. Looking away from the driver, she sub-vocalized “KK” to
turn on her communicator and whispered, “Dearest, are you there?”
John responded immediately. “Jesus, baby, where’ve you been? I
was about to send the posse out after you.”
“Later. I’m coming to the hotel by hay truck. Wait outside for me in
a half-hour with four dollars. KK.”
They arrived about an hour later. As they approached, she could see
John pacing up and down the street. He took note of how she was
dressed but, mindful of the driver’s presence, he simply said, “Hi,” and
gave her the money. She turned it over to the driver and said with a
smile, no longer disguising her voice, “Keep the rest.”
As they walked into the hotel, John looked her over and said, “Nice
clothes. They cost you much?”
Except for a look of resignation over his sense of humor, she kept
silent. They got their keys from the desk clerk, who stared at her, shook
his head, looked up at the ceiling, then buried his face in his newspaper
as if seeking escape from a crazed world. When they reached their
rooms, John followed her into her room.
As soon as the door closed behind him, she let relief flood her mind
and body. It was over. The warrior could disappear until she needed her
again. She wrapped John in her arms, kissed him on the lips, on the
forehead, on the cheeks, and let the tears flow as she put her head on
his shoulder.
All he could do was ask, “What happened? What’s the matter?”
“You don’t like my new clothes,” she bawled, trying to imitate a little
girl who had skinned her knee. He looked like she’d hit him with a rock.
Joy waited until she’d calmed down before again attempting the catharsis of humor. She finally pulled away from John, bowed, and with a
sweep of her hand, announced, “Meet the newest candidate for sex
slavery.”

140

R.J. Rummel

“That’s not funny,” he said sharply.
“No, really, I was. I’ll tell you about it while I get out of these stupid clothes.”
“Why? They make you look good,” John said with a twisted grin.
Joy ignored that, and was into her story by the time she had kicked
the clothes into a heap on the floor and had a towel wrapped around her
for warmth. By the time she got to the point in her story when she was
coming out of the drug to find herself naked on the floor with two men
in the room, John was fuming. When she told him that Bad Accent was
going to break her in for sex slavery, he was livid. His hands balled into
fists and he looked like a boiler, red hot and ready to explode. She
could imagine steam pouring out of the safety valves in his ears.
But his face was transformed when she told him about flooring Bad
Accent and what she had done to Glazier, and he wore a pleased grin as
she explained in detail the photographs she had taken. “The photos are
in that?” he asked, pointing to the Kodak.
“Yes.”
“And you covered your privates with his badge, and the badge is
clear in the photo?” His grin almost split his face.
“Yes,” Joy murmured.
John now wore a delighted, smug expression, as though he had
taken a photo of his worst enemy making love to a goat. He could
hardly speak for chortling. “Well, well,” he managed to get out, “we’ve
got ourselves a smoking gun.”
“Excuse me, dearest,” she said pleasantly, “‘we’?”
“Of course, baby. Where would you be without me to develop the
photograph?”
“Of course,” she responded dryly. “I hadn’t thought of that.”
Joy gave him her version of a triumphant grin. “Anyway, I hope
you don’t find it too odd if I take a bath before discussing this further.”
She wrapped a blanket around her and waited while John disrobed
and covered himself with a bath towel. As they headed down the hall
toward the bath, John stopped at Hands’ door and knocked.
Hands answered; Dolphy and Sal were with him. Hands looked at
Joy and said simply, “We were worried about you, Miss Phim. Hope
that you’re alright? We thought your boss was going to murder someone if anything happened to you,” and he looked at John and smiled
knowingly.
John invited the three guys out for a meal and drinks. They agreed.
Saying they would see them after their bath, John and Joy continued

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

141

toward the bathroom. Suddenly realizing what they were doing, Joy
looked over her shoulder. The three guys were standing in the doorway,
utterly stupefied. She gave them a nonchalant wave as John opened the
bathroom door. They stepped inside.
After he closed the door, Joy said sweetly, “Do you realize those
three saw us come in here? They know we’re taking a bath together.”
His mouth dropped open. He stared at her for a moment, then broke
out in laughter. “Well,” he said between chuckles, “you thought they
would find out about us sooner or later, even if I hadn’t made that slip
yesterday. Sooner is better, but I don’t know whether I can stand the
envy.”
Joy couldn’t believe it. He did have a very pleased look on his face.
When they finished their bath, always a logistic victory for two in
that small tub, and were walking down the hall to her room—she now
remembered to put a towel around her—Joy saw that Hands had left his
door open and the other guys were still inside. She couldn’t help it. She
peeked in, and said cheerily, “The bathroom is now free, if you guys
want to take a bath together.”
All the way back to her room, she giggled at their shocked expressions.
When the door closed behind them, John snatched the towel off her,
flicked her bottom with it, and said, “Vixen.”
Joy didn’t think he lost his pleased expression until their dinner
with the guys, when she brought up the kidnapping. Hands and Dolphy
were outraged. Sal sort of brushed it off. “I’m really sorry it happened
to you, but it happens all the time, unless the girl has a family member
or husband with her. Corrupt policemen or a gang pick her up, drug
her, and make her disappear forever as a sex slave. Especially, you
know, Mex and Chi—Oriental chicks, since no one in power seems to
care about them.”
He looked embarrassed, and she put her hand on his arm. “Sal,
thanks. I know you’re trying.”
They went out for drinks afterward, to a place Sal recommended—
the new Liberty Cafe on Broadway. On the way, Joy warned John,
“You had better not buy the place, if there is any trouble over me.
Promise.”
“Cross my heart.”
Joy knew he had his fingers crossed as he said that. But she loved
him for it.
They had no trouble. The Liberty Cafe hosted a mixed clientele, including some Indians and Mexicans, and they provided Black

142

R.J. Rummel

entertainment. No one paid any attention to them, and they found in a
corner a nicked and scratched, redwood table they could relax around.
Once they all had their steins of Anchor Steam beer, Hands told
them about the sex industry in the Barbary Coast area of San Francisco
and Chinatown. “Before the fire, this used to be a wide-open town, although my baseball pals told me that the crusaders and religious leaders
were having some effect. There were the cribs, little rooms lined up one
next to another, where young girls were forced to prostitute themselves.
There were the cow-yards, which was just a collection of cribs under
one roof. And there were the parlor houses for the best whores. There
were hundreds of these places.”
Joy asked, “What about Chinese girls?”
Hands looked away and Dolphy found his beer stein interesting.
Finally, Sal spoke up. “I’m sorry, Miss Phim—”
“Please, I’m Joy.”
“Joy. You don’t want to know.”
Joy motioned with her hand. “Come on, Sal.”
Sal stared down at the table, his brow furrowed, his lips thinly
drawn.
“Sal!”
“Okay, okay. Chin . . . Chinese girls were sold by their families in
China to pimps, and then smuggled here and sold to Ch . . . Chinese
cribs. My uncle used to do deliveries to some of the Chinese cowyards. He told me that they could buy a fourteen-year-old girl for about
$1,000, and girls aged six to ten for maybe $500. Even girls one year
old were sold. Good-looking girls of twelve to fifteen might cost
$2,000.”
Still not looking at Joy, Hands added, his voice tight with disgust,
“Yeah, I heard about this. The girls would be strip . . . undressed and
poked before the sale. They were slaves.”
Though unfocused, Sal’s eyes blazed, as though he were staring
at some despicable mental image. He didn’t seem to realize his fist
was hitting the table in sync with his words. “Some Mex girls were
brought in—kidnapped—and treated the same way. They and the
Chinese slaves—those poor goddam girls—were diseased, ugly, and
goddam useless by maybe twenty, and you know what the goddam
crib owners did?”
Joy gaped at him.
Looking at no one, Sal answered, “The fucking shits took them to a
goddam death house, where they had to lie on a bamboo mat in a dark

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

143

room with little to eat or drink until they died, or—” he hit the table
with his fist, and again “—killed themselves.”
Sal was so enraged his face was a livid red, and both his hands were
doubled into fists on the table. He was completely unaware that he had
cussed horribly in front of a woman. Dolphy realized it, though, and his
face flushed.
John was aghast, not at the swearing—it had lost its shock value in the
old universe—but at what Sal revealed about the girls. “Jesus! I read
something about the Barbary Coast being famous around the world as the
American Paris—even worse than Paris—but I didn’t know the city allowed open slavery. You say it is being cleaned up now?”
“Oh,” Dolphy replied, his normal color returning, “it’s being
cleaned up now, but I think some of it is still going on.”
Gruffly, John asked, “What do the slave owners charge the . . . men
for these girls?”
Her face pale, her hand still on her cheek in outrage, Joy looked at
him sharply. “Leave it, John.”
Sal hissed, “Twenty-five goddam cents for a Mex; for an American,
one dollar.” He refused to look at Joy. “About fifty cents for Japanese
or Chinese. French women can get seventy-five cents.”
There were many things Joy wanted to ask. It even crossed her
mind to wonder whether the guys had used these young girls. She
stomped on the thought and kicked it into her mental garbage can.
Their repugnance was real. Having suffered her own experience with
San Francisco sex-slavery, it all nauseated her. But at least there is
something we can do.
“Let’s talk about the photos,” she said, and with obvious relief they
all discussed what to do with them. Except for Sal. His normal light
olive coloring returned, but he seemed distracted for the rest of the evening. I would not want to be a pimp propositioning him in the next
week or so, Joy thought.
Joy and John already knew from the chronology the Society had
prepared for them that in 1906, San Francisco had a corrupt administration. Just in the month of their arrival here, Mayor Schmitz, political
“Boss” Abe Ruef, and Police Chief Dinan were indicted by a Grand
Jury for bribery and extortion. In the following months, indictments
also would be handed down for the city Attorney General and all eighteen members of the Board of Supervisors. The guys, of course, only
knew about the indictments of the mayor and Boss Ruef, but they had
heard rumors, as had everyone else in the city.

144

R.J. Rummel

Now, she had found out personally that the assistant chief of police
was involved in the sex trade. The historical records said nothing about
indictments related to the sex slave market. Here was where the photos
could be useful. But it had to be done without Joy’s identity becoming
known. So they talked long into the night about how to handle this.
Those young Chinese girls bought and sold into sex slavery never
left Joy’s mind that night, and for weeks afterward the imagined images
of their awful lives blew into her mind at the oddest moments. She decided, There are missions and then there are missions. Eradicating
such slavery is a mission I could undertake with a vengeance—and in
vengeance.

aaa
They could not trust anyone to develop the photographs that she’d
taken, but the Society had anticipated their need to do their own photo
development and had included special chemicals in one of the supply
capsules, along with 8.5 by 11 inch photo paper. All they needed was
water, pans, a closed room, and a place to screw in a red bulb.
Hands bought pans, a bulb, and red paint as John requested, and
watched curiously as John painted the bulb. Then he put an Out of Order sign on the bathroom door on their floor—his buying the hotel was
proving smarter than Joy had thought—and set to work. He looked
carefully at the two negatives and picked the best. Then he followed the
directions that came with the development packets and photo paper,
worked to counteract the photo’s poor contrast and brightness caused
by the poor light conditions, and finally hung it up to dry.
Three hours later, John retrieved the photo from the bathroom and
examined it in the hallway, where he could see it clearly. “Yes!” he
yelled, and did a little jig.
He quietly took the photograph into Joy’s room, where Joy was
working on her laptop, writing the letters that would accompany the
photo. He leaned over her shoulder and proudly shoved one of the
black and white photographs under her nose.
“Look! Worth a Pulitzer Prize.”
She was amazed at how good it was, and what a pornographic tableau it appeared to be. She felt the heat in her face and realized she
must be blushing.
Bad Accent actually seemed to be committing fellatio on Glazier
while playing with himself. Glazier’s badge showed clearly. It ade-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

145

quately covered her genitals, and her hand hid her face. Poor Glazier.
Even though he’d been unconscious, his eyes closed, in the photograph
he seemed to be smirking, eyes drooping with pleasure. The only sensitive thing about the photograph were her breasts, but hell, no one would
know who those belonged to. No one would even know she was Asian.
“Oops.” It occurred to her: “Are you going to show this to the
guys?”
John thought for a moment. “Sure; they’ll envy me even more.
Maybe I’ll make copies for them to pin up on their walls.”
“Deviate!” she yelled, and pushed him onto the bed with her foot.
She jumped on him and tickled him. They both rolled around on the
bed, laughing.
Once they sobered, they talked through the problem. For one thing,
they had already grown to trust the guys, despite their background and
the little time they’d known them. Part of the reason was what Lora had
told them in her message. Another part was their intuition. The guys
had already shown themselves to be good and helpful employees, even
friends.
The other question was the display of Joy’s body. In their twentyfirst century of topless bars, R-rated movies, and Internet pornography,
the display of breasts was nothing, especially for Joy, with her Asian
background and the sexual training she’d received as a young girl. For
the young men in this era, a revealed ankle could be erotic, and indeed,
was considered risqué. Yet, if they were to use the photo to its maximum advantage, they had to distribute it, which meant that it would
become an underground sensation. Then the guys might see it anyway.
Besides, they were adults and surely not virgins.
“So,” she finally told John, “show it to them.”
“You don’t think this will demean you in their eyes? I worry that
they might get ideas from seeing your breasts.”
“They’re young men, sweetheart. They naturally get ideas, as you
put it. If they haven’t already, I’d think they were gay—or that there
was something strange about them.”
“I don’t want them to cut your picture out and pin it on their wall to
ogle,” John protested.
“Why not? Wouldn’t you?”
“Maybe I will. Okay, you win. I’ll bask in their incredible envy, the
unbelievable desire in their eyes, their amazing jeal—”
“Shut up, John.”

146

R.J. Rummel

aaa
John made nine copies from the negative, and the next day when
they met with the guys at breakfast, he gave each of them one of the
photographs.
Dolphy blushed while looking at it, and managed to say, his voice
unusually high, “God—gosh, this is good.”
Sal looked at it for a few moments, and said, “You’ve got . . . nerve.
I couldn’t have set this fuc—punk up any better.” He reddened, and
apologized to Joy for his language.
Hands looked at the photo for a long moment, then said, “Where? I
don’t see her . . . nerve.”
“There, behind the shield,” Sal said, grinning devilishly, his normal
color returning.
Hands put down the photo and gave Joy a little salute with two fingers. “I think the best thing that ever happened to me was meeting you
two.” Looking into Joy’s eyes, he continued. “And being hired by your
boss. If I can ever help you two, and I mean beyond the job, let me
know. You are my kind of people.”
“I agree,” Dolphy said, and Sal added his, “Me too.”
This affected her deeply. Moist-eyed, she reached across the table
and asked that they put their hands in hers. Once they had, she placed
her other hand on top of theirs and told them all, “Thanks, guys. You
don’t know what that means to me.”
“To us,” John amended, and added his own hands to the stack.
That afternoon, Joy put the letters and photos in envelopes, put a
two-cent stamp on each, and the guys mailed them from separate mailboxes around the city. They went to William Randolph Hearst’s San
Francisco Examiner, San Francisco’s Daily News and Chronicle, and
especially to Fremont Older, editor of the Bulletin, who was particularly devoted to exposing the corruption in the city. Each letter said:
Enclosed is a photograph of Assistant Chief of Police
Greg Glazier of San Francisco, who is running a sex
slave ring. With him is one of his female victims and the
enforcer, who is seen servicing him. The enforcer’s job is
to make the kidnapped girls fear him more than they are
sickened by the sexual acts they must perform for ten or
more men a day.
One way they procure the girls is to have them picked
up by the police for some bogus reason. They are taken to

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

147

a place where they can be drugged and kidnapped into
this slavery. Such a place is the third tent on the left after
entering the Chinese section of the Presidio camp. An old
Chinese woman named Mei is doing the drugging there.
Check her tea.
Yours Sincerely,
I.M. Justine
Two months later, the San Francisco Daily News carried the following headline.
SEX RING BUSTED
Assistant Police Chief Greg Glazier, eleven policemen, four Chinese, two Japanese, and sixteen others were
indicted for kidnapping, slavery, and murder. Three
committed suicide within hours of the District Attorney’s
release of the indictments.
Toward the end of the article, was this paragraph.
Two of the indicted policemen were being treated in
hospital for severe beatings they had received. One, Patrolman Carl O’Brien, had two fingers of his right hand
cut off. The policemen refused to talk about the beatings
and the prosecutor’s office disclaims any knowledge of it.
The prosecutor did say that this was assault with the intent to kill and they will pursue the perpetrators
regardless of the indictments.
Neither John nor Joy ever mentioned these beatings to the guys, although she did notice the next day that Dolphy had skinned knuckles
and Sal seemed unusually pleased with himself.
In the next year, all those indicted were found guilty, and Glazier
was sentenced to life in prison. Of those women the ring had enslaved,
twenty-three survived and five died or were murdered by the ring. The
survivor’s names had not been released, but through contacts John had
developed in the prosecutor’s office during the year, they got their
names and addresses. Joy personally sent each $5,000—about $94,000
in year 2002 dollars—with a note:

148

R.J. Rummel

You have my deepest sympathy for the suffering and
humiliation to which you have been subjected by the Glazier sex ring. My heart goes out to you.
Not all men are like those that sexually exploited you.
Most that I know are helpful, kind-hearted, and considerate. I hope that you have come to know such men also,
and have found love, or will do so soon.
Perhaps this gift will make your life a little easier, although I know nothing can ever erase the memory.
My very best wishes for your future happiness,
A friend

Chapter 11
Jy-ying

“M

y name is Khoo Jy-ying, and I am here to purchase a
property you are holding.”
The bank clerk was surly when he reluctantly gave her
his attention. She did not understand it. She was dressed in the most
fashionable and expensive clothes she could buy. She had come straight
from Eglantine’s Chic Shop and even wore an awful corset that the female clerk laced up for her. She felt like she’d been strapped to a pole.
Jy-ying laid a five dollar bill on the clerk’s plain oak desk. That
seemed to upset him. He looked her up and down again, then without a
word he rose and went to a rear desk, where he talked briefly to an elderly man. When he returned, he pointed to the rear without looking her
in the eyes and said, “Go see him.” He sat down at his desk and stared
at the papers scattered across it.
She strode purposely past him and sat down uninvited in the office
chair diagonally facing a lovely desk made from cross sections of redwood burl. On it a lacquered placard read Eugene Hoppner, Manager.
Hoppner ignored her, apparently checking a list of numbers. She
didn’t know how he could see over the gray handlebar mustache that
protruded further than his nose. The bank was crowded, with two long
lines of customers at the two available cashier windows. Many of the
people continued to stare at her, as they had done when she walked in.
The bank was uncomfortably warm and the temperature combined with
her dress, petticoats, corset, and bustle were making her overheat. She
could feel the sweat forming in her underarms.
Jy-ying looked back at the lines of customers. An old woman in a
long yellow dress had advanced almost to the window. She thought
back. Yes. I’ve waited through five people being served at the window.
Enough.
With the flat of her hand, Jy-ying slapped the desktop.
Hoppner jumped, throwing the paper he’d been holding into the air.
He jerked his head up to look wide-eyed at the invading hand, then further up to glare at her through his small wire-framed glasses, his

150

R.J. Rummel

mustache twitching like a sweeping broom. He face reddened all the
way up to the five strands of hair that he’d combed across his bald pate.
In a voice that would freeze the Nile River, she told him, “Your
bank has foreclosed on a warehouse. I will buy it.”
Jy-ying reached in her purse and threw down a roll of counterfeit
thousand dollar bills. She laid the address of the warehouse on top.
Hoppner’s eyebrows reached for the sky as he leaned back, his face
struggling with several emotions.
She looked at the lines of customers. No one moved; they were all
watching. She waved at them and smiled, and several turned away, embarrassed.
Hoppner leaned forward and picked up the address. He twisted
around and looked in the gold-colored file cabinet behind him, retrieved a file, and opened it on is desk. He compared the address to that
in the file, and turned to her. “I cannot sell you that warehouse. We do
not sell property to Chinks . . . Chinese outside of Chinatown.”
“What? Did Chinatown not burn down in the fire?”
Hoppner didn’t even try to hide his grin. “Yes, it did.” His grin disappeared into his mustache, replaced by a scowl. “Because of the
interference of your fuc . . . your country—that meddling Chow-Tszchi
from the Chinese Legation at Washington—the mayor is allowing your
people to . . . rebuild it.” He said the last words as though uttering an
epithet.
Jy-ying kept her temper. Too much was at stake. She gave him an
apologetic look and asked, “Would the honorable sir please inform this
humble Chinese woman whose policy it is that says I cannot buy this
warehouse?”
He picked up a pencil and started tapping it on his desk, a question
on his face about her sincerity. He leaned forward and replied, “This is
not my policy; this is the owner’s policy. We are both members of the
Japanese and Korean Exclusion League and this is white man’s land.
Go back to China.”
Will God be blessed? Security knew about the anti-Oriental prejudice, but they had not known it was so serious. One more question
before happy time. “Who is the owner?
“None of your business.”
She swiftly leaned over the desk and grabbed a sheaf of papers. The
second paper had the letterhead she was after: National Bank of San
Francisco; Paul Bales, Owner; Eugene Hoppner, Manager.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

151

Jy-ying stood, slowly folded the paper, and put it in her purse. She
was sure she had everyone’s attention. She wiggled her bustled behind
as she stepped around the desk and stopped a little behind Hoppner, so
that she wouldn’t block the view of the customers. She leaned over
him, tweaked his mustache, and gave him a smothering kiss. His struggled, but she held his lips in hers. When she finally released him, his
face was the color of her outrageously unladylike bright red lipstick,
which was smeared all over his lips and mustache.
She stepped back, gave him a little wave with her fingers, and
called in a sexy voice, “Bye-bye, honey. See you tonight.” She turned
and walked out of the bank.
When she reached her room in the All Nations Hotel, she cranked
her telephone and asked the operator to connect her with the National
Bank of San Francisco. When a clerk answered, she disguised her
voice. “Hello, I am a postal clerk and I’m trying to get the home address of a certain Paul Bales. I have tracked him to your bank. The
home address on this letter to him is illegible.”
Jy-ying heard, “Just a moment, please.” And in less than a minute,
“The address is 1081 Judah Street.”
One more question. “For our records, does he have an office somewhere?"
“Yes, his office is Room 233 in the new Watson Building on Merchant.”
Jy-ying hung up. She had to have that warehouse. She could quietly
have her capsules moved somewhere in Chinatown, but the warehouse
was perfect for constructing a gym for her practice. Hmmm. How to do
this? First I must find out who heads this Exclusion League.
Olaf Tveitmoe, she soon discovered, was the man. Jy-ying called
his secretary and set up an appointment to discuss a $10,000 project.
He was accommodating, and made the appointment for that morning.
When she entered the office, Tveitmoe’s secretary looked at her
with raised eyebrows. Jy-ying didn’t think he had ever before seen a
Chinese in the reception room. At least, not one the way she looked.
She wore a cheap blouse and skirt without a corset, and she was chewing gum. She had applied almost luminescent red lipstick, and heavily
rouged her cheeks in the manner popular among prostitutes.
He asked coldly, “Can I help you?”
“Oh yes,” Jy-ying said. “My name is Blossom and Olaf wanted me
to come to see him.”

152

R.J. Rummel

While the secretary hurriedly looked in his appointment book, she
started to ramble. “I don’t know why he wanted me to come in the
morning. It is so hard getting out of bed. You know, I have this late
cafe act and—”
The secretary looked up. “You have no appointment at this time.
There must be some mistake. I have an appointment here for Mrs. Marble.”
“Mrs. Marble? Oh yes, that’s me.” Jy-ying giggled and faked a
guilty smile. “He told me he wanted to see me.”
His lips puckered as though he’d tasted sour milk, the secretary
knocked on Tveitmoe’s door and stuck his head in. She could hear him
snap, “Your nine o’clock appointment is here.”
Jy-ying sashayed in, leaving the door open a crack behind her. She
placed her purse just where she wanted it on Tveitmoe’s solid oak desk.
She removed her hat, and as she took the pins out of her hair, she whispered throatily, “I am a gift from Paul Bales.”
She took off her cheap wool cape and threw it on the floor. He sat
gaping at her as she unlaced her taffeta silk shirt. She wore nothing underneath. She exposed one breast, stepped around the desk, and rubbed
it against his face. He licked his lips and his eyes widened. Face
flushed, he started to caress her breast. She took his hand off her breast,
raised her skirt, and put his hand underneath. She wore nothing there,
either.
She pulled him to his feet. She could see he had a full erection. She
leaned over, letting her breast hang, and unbuttoned his woolen pants.
With some gentle maneuvering, she pulled his erection through the slot
in his long underwear.
Jy-ying was ready.
She ripped her shirt further apart, shook her hair over her head, and
screamed, “What are you doing? Let me go! No, stop. Please!”
As his secretary rushed in, she yelled even louder, “Help me!
Rape—he’s trying to rape me!”
Jy-ying snatched her cape off the floor, scooped her purse off his
desk, and ran past the secretary, who stood by the door with his hand to
his mouth, his eyes like saucers.
There was a public washroom two offices down the hall. She ran
past two people in the hallway and into the women’s room. In five
minutes she had herself repaired, and quickly left the building. Another
ten minutes and she was driving her new Rolls Royce Silver Ghost to
her room at the All Nations Hotel.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

153

In her room, she had everything ready that she’d brought from the
equipment capsule. She took the Wang digital movie camera out of her
purse, in which she’d cut a view hole in the bottom corner. She had set
the camera to automatically take pictures once she switched it on with
her remote. She removed the memory card from the camera and inserted it in the card reader she had plugged into her laptop. She opened
her Taicang photo manipulation program and went to work.
Three hours later, Jy-ying printed out her three favorite photos and
studied them with a little embarrassment. She didn’t have to wonder
what Imam Ch’en Hsun would think of her work on behalf of Sabah.
After her noon Contact Prayers, she wrote a letter to Tveitmoe.
Dear Sir:
You are a devil, sir, trying to rape me in your office. I
am sure that your secretary will try to deny that anything
happened. But for my protection, I took the enclosed photographs of your mad passion and your attempt to take
advantage of me.
I do not know what to do now, sir. My lawyer advised
me to sue you for attempted rape. These pictures and
what your secretary will have to swear to under oath
should establish the truth. However, I am only a humble
Chinese girl and cannot be sure that I will get justice in
your white man’s courts.
My honorable father is angry, and has told me to send
the photographs to the newspapers. But I fear they would
embarrass him.
My husband is so angry over what you have done to
me that he has bought a gun and threatens to shoot you. I
have begged him not to.
As for me, I have told them all I would be satisfied, if
only Paul Bales would sell me the warehouse I asked for
on De Haro Street. A simple transaction at market price.
My lawyer, father, and husband most reluctantly will accept this if it makes me happy.
My lawyer, I am ashamed to admit, is a suspicious
person. I had to turn over to him copies of these pictures,
just in case something should happen to me.
I will telephone Mr. Bales tomorrow afternoon to
close this deal.
Your humble Chinese,
Khoo Jy-ying

154

R.J. Rummel

Jy-ying hired a courier to deliver the letter into Tveitmoe’s hands
only.

aaa
Jy-ying paid $21,000 in counterfeit bills for the warehouse.
Once she killed the time traveler, she would be living in San Francisco as a base until Abul Sabah was born. Afterward she planned to
travel to Uighuristan and be a servant to his family until Abul’s first
contact with the Agent Gabriel. She would be Abul’s first convert. It
was her dream. But she had a job to do and a life to live until then.
She contacted an architect, took him to the warehouse, and told him
what she wanted: a complete gym for indoor jogging (he thought she
was crazy), a practice room for marital arts, a weights room, a soundproofed gun room, and a corner office with an outside door. He took
rapid notes, asked a few questions, and finally asked, “What is this all
for?”
“I will be training a team of athletes to participate in the 1908
Olympics.”
That seemed to satisfy him. He pointed to the time machine and
supply capsule and asked, “What are those containers for?”
“I shipped some special equipment from China in them. They have
to be especially strong to make the voyage with the heavy equipment
inside.”
With the use of a primitive wagon jack and a sledgehammer, she
had managed to get the door closed enough on the time machine so that
the interior was hidden. She also had put a chain around the capsule to
keep the curious out.
The architect drew up plans, she approved them, and he recommended The Pacific Construction Company for the remodeling. She
telephoned them to send a representative to the warehouse.
He came, saw that she was Chinese, and said he could do no work
for her. He was friendly enough, but could do nothing about his company’s policies. He explained, “My company has to belong to the
Building Trades Council. It’s headed by Patrick McCarthy, and he is a
leading member of the Japanese and Korean Exclusion League.”
On an off chance, she asked, “Does Tveitmoe have any relationship
to the Building Trades Council?”
“Yes, he is the general secretary of the Council.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

155

“Thank you,” she replied. “I think you should make preliminary
plans for the remodeling of my warehouse. I’m sure that when I explain
my needs to Mr. Tveitmoe, he will allow an exception in my case.”
When Jy-ying returned to her hotel, she completed her Noon
Prayers, ate her cold rice, dried tuna, vegetables, and drank the hot jasmine tea she heated up on her small electrical hot plate. Then she wrote
the letter that had preoccupied her mind during lunch.
Dear Mr. Tveitmoe:
I am so sorry to disturb you again over my humble
problems, but its seems that The Pacific Construction Co.
cannot do the remodeling of my warehouse because of a
misunderstanding over my being Chinese. As General
Secretary of the Building Trades Council, I’m sure that
you can resolve this question in my favor.
Your humble American,
Khoo Jy-ying
As with the previous letter, she sent it via courier.

Chapter 12
Joy

W

ith a promised bonus as an incentive, the builders started
remodeling John and Joy’s warehouse into temporary offices almost immediately. John and Joy were surprised, then,
when they arrived late one morning and found the warehouse empty.
None of the workers who had been doing the remodeling were around.
John telephoned their builders, who informed them that Patrick
McCarthy, head of the Building Trades Council, had ordered a boycott
of their remodeling. As to why, John could get no explanation. He was
told to call Olaf Tveitmoe, general secretary of the Council.
John tried several times to reach this fellow, but he was either busy
or out. So John drove to the Council building. Refusing to take the secretary’s “no” for an answer, he stalked into Tveitmoe’s office.
Tveitmoe was angry; when John confronted him, he dropped all
pretense and told him the score. “The Council is going to drive you out
of business, Banks, because you have violated an unwritten principle of
labor in San Francisco. White men in business do not hire Orientals.
You are stupid enough to do so, and you must suffer as a result. And
don’t think you can go to the politicians on this. They’re on our side.
Read this.” He flipped a carbon copy of a letter across the desk.
John picked it up and read:
Mr. A.E. Yoell
Secretary, Japanese and Korean Exclusion League,
San Francisco, California
Dear Sir:
As it is now nearly one year since the organization of
the Japanese and Korean Exclusion League, I venture to
write and congratulate the League through you upon the
progress made toward the ultimate exclusion of Japanese
and all Mongolians from our shores.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

157

If the agitation is kept up, and we continue to bring to the
public’s attention the Japanese competition and the dire evil influence upon our civilization of their residence among us, we
are bound to succeed.
I shall be glad at all times to cooperate. I remain,
Sincerely Yours,
E.A. Hayes,
Congressman of the Fifth District,
House of Representatives, Washington
May 1, 1906
John made no effort to hide his disgust as he looked up.
His expression seemed to excite Tveitmoe, who gloated, “We are
all members of the Exclusion League here.”
John had heard enough. He wordlessly tore up the letter, spit on it,
and tossed the wet pieces on Tveitmoe’s desk. He rose to his full height
and strode to the door, where he paused and turned to glare at Tveitmoe. He said in a clear, firm voice that he hoped carried into the outer
office, “You’re crud, Tveitmoe. The lowest of the low. A snake would
tower over you.”

aaa
“No swear words?” Joy asked, raising one eyebrow, when he told
her later.
John answered, “None that I’ll tell you. To complete the story, I left
Tveitmoe’s door open when I left his office, tipped my hat to his secretary, who was gaping at me, and walked out of the building.”
Joy looked at his cool expression, and the words just rushed out of
her by themselves. “I’m hurting our mission. First the Chink bit and
sexual slavery, and now this. You don’t seem a tiny bit concerned
about it. Don’t you care?”
John immediately changed his tone, which showed he had learned
by now to read her looks—well, some of them—and understood her
“subtle nuances.” He responded, “Oh, I’m damn-well concerned. More
than concerned. Didn’t I show that when I left Tveitmoe’s office? I’m
fighting mad, and I’m not going to bow to those bastards. We could run
away to another city, such as what that bastard called ‘Chink asskissing Seattle’ and leave others to suffer this discrimination. But I
want to fight them.”

158

R.J. Rummel

Joy put her hand on his arm. “I’m sorry, dearest. I shouldn’t have
said what I did. I know you care. Of course.”
John nodded at her apology, and continued. “Whatever we do,
baby, we can’t go off half cocked. We can’t screw up our mission, or
forget about Sabah. That understood, let’s see what we can do about the
Exclusion League and the Buildings Council.”
“We aren’t completely blind,” Joy countered. “While you were
gone, I called the secretary to the vice president of Muss Builders, and
talked to her woman to woman. I told her I was your secretary, and I
was going to be out of work because of your lust for some Chink, and I
wondered if they had a job for me. I told her my name was Shirley
Carpenter. She was friendly, and suggested I see their personnel man
who does the hiring. All this was groundwork. Then I probed and
probed—you know how women can do this, with little questions that
build an edifice of information.”
Joy grinned as John impatiently motioned with his hand, urging her
to continue. “Okay. I found out that the Japanese and Korean Exclusion
League you mentioned is in fact headed by Tveitmoe, and its membership includes the general president of the Buildings Trade Council, the
vice president the secretary I spoke to works for, and the waterfront labor boss. And, as you know from the research the Society passed on to
us, the labor movement in San Francisco has at this time the most powerful stranglehold on labor of any city in the country.”
“Yes, I know,” John replied.
She had to add, “Although apparently focused on Japanese and Koreans, the secretary told me that the Exclusion League is really trying to
exclude all Orientals from San Francisco.”
“Yes,” John replied. “That was clear from Representative Hayes’
letter I read.”
Her final bit of information: “The local labor leaders have been
strong backers of the Chinese Exclusion Bill now before Congress.
This effort extends to all of California, the idea being to make it ‘white
man’s country.’” Just saying this upset her even more.
“Because of my race, I think the Society made a mistake in picking
San Francisco for our base. Perhaps New York or Seattle would have
been much better. I don’t know how they made this error.”
“Well, they had what I thought was full information on San Francisco during these years,” John replied. “But they missed the depth of
feeling against Orientals, and don’t even mention it in their chronology.
Nor do they mention the strong anti-Oriental bias of the labor move-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

159

ment here. I think the problem was that Society members were too familiar with the cosmopolitan, wide-open, anything goes, San Francisco
of the twentieth century, and that misled them as to 1906. Also, the
problems we—”
“Me, my love. I’m the Oriental here.”
“—ran into may be a matter of bad luck. If you’d gone shopping a
few hours later or earlier, you probably would have missed the policemen who picked you up. Moreover, another hotel might not have any
restrictions on renting rooms to Orientals.”
With more heat than she intended, Joy disagreed. “Not bad luck.
Very good luck. We busted up a sex slave ring, and doubtlessly saved
the lives of many women. The first lives we saved. Do you understand
what that means to me? We saved the lives of many women and ended
for others miserable slavery. This is not ending war. This is not stopping the mass murder by tyrants. This is not our mission. But doesn’t it
weigh in the balance?”
His eyes softened, and he looked at her with pride. He put his arm
around her and pressed her head to his shoulder. “And more good luck.
Now we can bust up this Exclusion League. That is, if you’re interested.”
She kissed him. “You got it, dearest.”
She shook her head and looked away from John for a moment, reflecting on what they were doing. Amazing. We certainly have egos. A
less charitable interpretation would be delusions of grandeur. Here we
are, new to this age, no power base, and we intend to put out of existence a very influential Exclusion League supported by powerful
politicians, businessmen, and union leaders. To think of doing this
should have been our ha-ha moment. But we are absolutely serious.
“Now,” John said, “let’s think about this. We have a pretty good
chronology of the immediate future for the Old Universe from the Society, we have the tremendous wealth they sent us, and we have the
best of twenty-first century technology. If we can’t put something together to deal with this little problem, we’re pretty dim bulbs.”
“Yes, we’ll be the idiots some villages must be missing.” After a
moment, Joy mused, “The people who control the League and the
Builders Council are pretty important. We have to go high up to finesse
them. What are our levers of power here?”
John replied, “So far as I know—and no matter how we hate it—
these people are acting within democratically determined law. In this
era, they are free to discriminate in this fashion. Whatever we do, we

160

R.J. Rummel

have to do legally, too. No frame-ups, no Chinese mistresses coming
out of the woodwork, no bribes. And this is a widely felt movement
among whites; if we remove those at the top, someone will take their
place. We’ve got to persuade those running the movement to end the
discrimination themselves.”
“Keep in mind that they are trying to destroy our business simply
because you hired me,” she pointed out. “If this is not illegal, it is
against the spirit of the laws, and what our country stands for. But I
agree. At first, let’s try this the legal way.”
She got out her laptop and opened the chronology of the Old Universe the Society had prepared. She also opened alongside it Lora’s
chronology of the new universe they had created. They went over them
event by event.
“Aha,” John exclaimed after two hours. “That’s it. There’s our
solution.”
Joy had to agree, and they started planning for it immediately.

aaa
As they left their room for dinner that evening, John thought it
would be nice to ask Hands and the others to join them. He was just
about to knock on Hands’ door when a pretty young woman wrapped in
a towel, her long brown hair unpinned and hanging over it, came out of
the bathroom at the end of the hall. Hands was right behind her, also
covered by a towel.
The young woman gave Joy a sisterly smile and sauntered into
Hands’ room. Hands turned to them in his doorway and noted, with a
huge grin, “The bath is free, if you two want to use it now.” He winked
at John.
As they went down the stairs, Joy couldn’t help thinking, What is it
with men, to make a clubby, in-group, kind of thing about sex? We
don’t. Hands’ honey just smiled at me and went into Hands’ room. No
wink. No, “Ha, ha, look at what I did.” No making a little joke out of it.
John must have thought he read her look. He tried to point out,
“Well, sweetheart, we did set an example.”
She had to chuckle at his misinterpretation.
As they’d planned, the next day she phoned the secretary of the
Chinese Consulate and made an appointment two weeks hence with
Chung Pao Hsi, China’s Consul-General in San Francisco. The secretary was at first reluctant to set up an appointment, but Joy described

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

161

their company and the tens of millions of dollars they would be spending, and how generous they could be. She got the appointment.

aaa
All five of them trooped into the rebuilt Chinese legation at Laguna
and Geary Streets. The Chinese secretary let the Consul-General know
that Miss Joy Phim had arrived, and looked surprised when Chung Pao
Hsi came out to greet them. In Chinese, Joy introduced John as the
head of the Tor Import and Export Company and her boss, and just
waved her hand at the guys, saying simply, “Our guards.” Chung
seemed surprised.
He led Joy and John into his office, and asked them to sit down on a
green fabric coach, while he sat on a hickory office chair across from
them. When they were seated, Joy asked him if they could talk in English so her boss could participate, and he agreed.
She nodded. Looking at John, she explained, “My boss is very rich
and in November transferred his company from New York to San Francisco. Part of its business will involve imports to and exports from
China.”
She turned back to Chung and leaned forward. “He will also hire as
employees a good number of Chinese. His attempt to build his offices,
however, has been boycotted by the Builders Council and the Chinese
Exclusion people are clearly involved. He wants to fight them and end
the discrimination against Chinese.”
Chung’s eyes narrowed. “We know what is going on here. It was
only with some difficulty that our first Secretary in Washington and I
were able to persuade local officials to allow Chinatown to be rebuilt,
after it was completely destroyed in the fire. Even then, we had to talk
to Governor Pardee in Oakland and pass on the Empress-Dowager’s
displeasure.
John spoke up. “We realize what you did, and that is why we are
here. Before I make any suggestions, I would like to give you this little
gift.” He handed him a beautifully engraved Chinese envelope that Joy
had bought from one of their future import competitors in San Francisco. Inside the envelope was $10,000.
Next, John opened a heavy box he had carried into the office, and
pulled out with two hands a smaller box with gold gilt wrapping. On
top was an envelope on which was engraved in gold and classical Chinese calligraphy the name of the Empress-Dowager of China. John

162

R.J. Rummel

carefully handed it to Chung, bowed, and solemnly said, “This is an
indication of my esteem for the Empress-Dowager and for our future
relations. It is a 99.98 percent pure gold bar worth $101,023. The bar is
engraved with her name, Tzu-Hsi.”
It had taken Joy and the guys a week to get everything together, and
find the Chinese who had the materials and could do the fancy Chinese
engraving necessary. The gold bar was part of the resources that the
Society had sent them.
Chung put his envelope and the heavy box with the gold bar on his
solid rosewood desk with a thump. He was obviously impressed when
he turned back to them, and looked expectantly at John.
John reiterated what Joy had said about trying to end the discrimination against Chinese in San Francisco, and to improve trade with
China. Leaning forward as Joy had, he went into his pitch. “I think the
best way of doing this is through the American Secretary of State and
the President. Although I think that President Roosevelt is opposed to
discriminating against Chinese, he has so much to do that his attention
needs to be focused on San Francisco by some big event or very important dignitary. Can you please ask your Empress-Dowager to do this? I
know that she has a personal interest in San Francisco, since she gave
about 100,000 taels, or about $75,000, as a personal contribution to the
fire relief effort after the earthquake; and an additional 40,000 taels to
the relief of the Chinese here. Also, she allowed you to use her name to
have Chinatown rebuilt.”
Joy knew that what the Empress-Dowager contributed to relief was
big money. She tried to estimate it—overall, two million dollars in year
2002 dollars. The gold bar they’d just handed to Chung was worth nearly
that. In effect, they were repaying her for her aid to San Francisco.
John asked, “Through her Foreign Minister, can the EmpressDowager issue a formal protest to the United States over treatment of
Chinese in San Francisco? A diplomatic hint would be helpful—that if
the discrimination continues, China will boycott American imports
from California. I’m sure your Foreign Minister can properly word
such a communication. Perhaps she would also want to express how
insulting this discrimination is to the great nation of China, and that the
Chinese people are humiliated by it.”
Chung was silent for a moment as he probed John’s eyes. He asked,
“Why are you doing this?”
John also took a moment before responding. He held Chung’s eyes
with his, and said in a firm voice, “First, I love this woman sitting be-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

163

side me. Her working for me is a formal technicality. She is in effect
co-owner and manager of the business. We would marry, but have not
because of the long-run interests and nature of our business. What the
League and others who agree with it are doing to her is not only an insult to this woman, but to me.
“Second, I need to hire many other Chinese for my business.
“Third but not least, Chinese are an intelligent and creative people,
and the United States will benefit immeasurably from their immigration
and contributions.”
Joy was flabbergasted. She had no idea John would divulge their
relationship. She didn’t know whether to kiss him or kick him.
Chung sat back thoughtfully, and looked at Joy as though he were
her father and they had asked him permission to marry. He asked her in
Chinese, “Do you have a love arrangement with this man?”
“Yes. He lives in my heart.”
“Is he really so . . . accepting of Chinese?”
“Yes, he sees all people as equal, as human beings.”
“That’s extraordinary. Is this not because he loves you? Doesn’t he
see all Chinese as being in your image?”
“No. It is his character and the way he views the world. He treats
Koreans, Japanese, Russians, Arabs, Africans, and all other races and
national groups the same. He does not have a prejudiced cell in his
body.”
Chung’s eyebrows rose. “Where, may I ask, did you find this exceptional man?”
“He was once a professor of history and I took a class from him.”
“So he is a very knowledgeable and distinguished American.”
“Yes.”
“My minister will ask me this question and I want to be clear in my
answer. Is it that you are Chinese that he will not marry you?”
“No. It was a joint decision not to marry. Such a decision would
have to be made by any woman in my position, given the kind of business we do.”
Chung studied her. “You two are involved in something secret, beyond this business. Yes?”
It was Joy’s turn to lock eyes with him and judge his sincerity. He
was in his forties, about the right age for this honored position. Clearly,
he was a rising star in the Chinese Foreign Ministry. He had those soft
features and the lean, small-boned body of the southern Chinese, which
probably meant that he was outside the inner, influential circle around

164

R.J. Rummel

the Manchu Imperial dynasty. That the Chinese ministry had given him
this legation position was even more impressive. He spoke excellent
American English; he must have had a superior education, probably
some of it in an American university. People like him could be very
helpful to their mission.
And his eyes never wavered from Joy’s.
Okay, she thought. John trusted him about our relationship. I’m
ready to go further.
Speaking in English, eyes still fixed on his, Joy asked him, “What
do you think of a free, independent, and democratic China?”
John and Chung were both startled by the question. John turned and
stared at her, clearly looking for a hint as to what was going on.
Chung sat back, raised his hands, brought his fingertips together,
and said, “What a surprising and interesting question. And by democracy, you mean?”
She answered, “There are many types, including those where there
is also a king or queen. The idea is that people freely, privately, and
regularly vote for their government executive and members of a legislature, which has the power to make laws. The United States and Great
Britain are examples, but not the only ones.”
Chung rose suddenly and went to the door of his office. He opened
it and looked around. Through it, Joy could see Hands, Sal, and Dolphy
paging through Chinese travel guides and pamphlets. Chung shut the
door and pulled his chair closer. He sat down.
Softly, he said, “Everything we now say in this room is private. If
anything of what I say is divulged, I may not live long, but you will die
before me.”
They nodded.
“Now, we each have secrets,” he said. “You first.”
Continuing in English, Joy said in a low voice, “When the time is
ripe, we will try to bring about democracy in China.”
“Who are you, to do this?”
“We have resources you would not believe that make it possible for
us to attempt this.”
“You are secret agents for the United States?”
“No.”
“But you are secret agents, yes?”
“In a way, yes. Your turn.”
“I am allied with Sun Yat-sen.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

165

Joy mulled that over. Sun Yat-sen was a revolutionary trying to
overthrow the dynasty and create a democracy on his terms. In reality it
would be a top down, authoritative government with a mixture of democratic elements. Close enough.
Joy nodded. “Thank you. You need say no more.”
Chung’s eyes never left Joy’s during this exchange. He sat unmoving in his chair. When John saw that Joy was finished and Chung had
no more to say to her, he turned to Chung and said, “Well, that concludes our appointment. I hope that you can influence your government
to help us and the Chinese in San Francisco with this problem of discrimination.”
Chung got up, and they stood as well. He shook John’s hand vigorously, saying, “I will do what I can. You have a . . . friend here.” He
gave Joy a little bow, and said in Chinese, “May the sun always shine
on you and your man.”
“And on you and your country,” Joy replied, bowing deeply in return. “Zai Chien—Goodbye.”

aaa
That evening, they relaxed with the guys at the Liberty Café, singing along with everyone in the café as a small band played “In My
Merry Oldsmobile,” “Meet Me In St. Louis, Louis,” and beer songs like
“Under the Anheuser Bush” and many of the risqué lyrics popular with
the men. Joy danced with John and each of the guys several times and
in fact they all did get a little under the Anheuser Bush. Joy’s life had
been so serious for so long, she couldn’t remember when she’d last had
so much fun and been so relaxed. The fun continued when Joy and
John returned to his hotel room.
At their breakfast together the next morning, Sal, who had a room
next to John’s, asked with a grin if he slept well.
John replied, “Well, something came up so I couldn’t sleep for
awhile.”
Joy kicked him hard under the table, Dolphy choked on his donut,
Hands spewed his coffee when it went down the wrong hole, and Sal
smirked.
Joy glared at John, who wore the innocent look of a choirboy.

Chapter 13
Joy

I

n the following weeks, John rented temporary offices and storage
space so they could continue to build up their business while they
dealt with the Exclusion League. He also hired away from a Los
Angeles import and export firm its manager, at twice his salary. He began to pull their business together, hired additional people, and initiated
the difficult job of setting up company offices in other countries.
Always the teacher, John spent three hours a day home schooling
the three guys about business and other things they had to learn. Hands
had an education up to the ninth grade, and the other two up to the
sixth. So there was much home schooling, and he told Joy that he enjoyed it. He informed the guys that this was part of their job, sort of
apprenticeship training, and they accepted it. He was especially happy
to discover the three were very intelligent; it was a misfortune of the
age that those like them had so little education.
Somehow, the Oriental Exclusion people found out that Joy was
still involved in John’s business, and decided that tough action was
necessary. John received a letter without a return address, left in his
letterbox at their hotel, which read simply, Fire the Chink, or regret it.
That was all Joy needed. Enough nice girl, she told herself.
They had not armed themselves so far, since they perceived no
danger in San Francisco. This had been a lucky decision, for if she had
been armed when she was drugged by the sex slave ring, the kidnappers
might have gotten scared over her knives and gun and murdered her
while she was drugged.
John was against arming until they did their first intervention in
Mexico, but there was too much at stake not to be prepared for hostile
action. She knew how to get to him. Even though she had given him
some training in weapons before they had to flee the Old Universe, she
told him, “It’s just as well. You’d likely shoot yourself in the foot. No,
I take that back. By the time you drew your gun, I’d have knocked out
our attackers and would be going through their wallets.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

167

He agreed to arm, and they decided to visit the weapons capsule at
the warehouse at noon, when they were least likely to be attacked. Still,
John had a sour look as they entered the warehouse.
During her many years of weapons training, Joy had concentrated
on defense with the knife. She armed herself with a five-inch tactical
knife in a sheath on her hip and a six-inch throwing knife in a lower leg
sheath. Both had thin, flat grips. When armed, she would choose
clothes that allowed her to reach either knife in no more than two seconds. She also would carry a holster purse with her Ruger SP101 .357
magnum loaded with five 125-grain hollow points, and a box of reloads. Even a shot in the shoulder would flatten most attackers, and one
of those bullets would even crumple a charging football linesman.
No knife for John, she decided as she helped him select his weapons. Even somebody behind him is in danger when he tries to throw
one. But despite what she said when she was goading him, he was now
beyond the “which end do I point?” stage with a gun. He would carry
two. One, an H&K USP .45 caliber semiautomatic in a shoulder holster, loaded with ten rounds of 235-grain hollow points in the magazine
and one round in the chamber. The other, a small .40 caliber S&W
double-action that he could carry in his coat pocket holster.
They also donned light armored vests that had been custom-fitted to
each of them, with cardiac trauma protection. They weighed a little less
than four pounds. Joy’s was molded over her breasts and gave them a
flatter look—she would be right in style for the flapper 1920s, when
they came.
“Good fit, my boy . . . Oops, my girl,” John said, purposely showing those dimples at the corners of his mouth that irritated Joy so much.
That warranted an especially loud raspberry.
John’s armored vest covered his genitals and made his trousers puff
out. “The girls are going to twitter around you,” Joy couldn’t help saying.
Deliberately puffing out his trousers even more, he responded,
“That will make the discomfort worth it.”
Joy giggled, then pointed out, “Wearing these vests must now be as
permanent as wearing our skin. We never know where a shot will come
from, or when. These will stop bullets from a .44 caliber magnum, a 9
mm submachine gun, a modern high-powered rifle, and a 12-gauge rifle. They are little protection against armor-piercing rifles, but the
dangerous ones won’t be produced until the late twentieth century.”
“What about a sharp tongue?”
“Get used to it, dearest.”

168

R.J. Rummel

aaa
Joy wanted to buy land to build a weapons practice site outside of
San Francisco, but the boycott against them and the threatening letter
had prompted her to postpone this. However, they had trained in a variety of attack and defense scenarios, especially those that would protect
their heads, for which they had no armor. No hurry, Joy felt. They had
only been in 1906 for a couple of months and were hardly rusty yet.
One thing was certain, although neither of them would say so. They
would discuss the risks of their mission in this new universe in the most
serious tones: “Our mission,” they would say to each other, “our mission, now including Sabah, is uppermost. Billions of lives depend on
us. Our mission cannot fail, if humanly possible.”
“Yes, that is so true,” they would agree. And they would say to
each other even more seriously, “If I go down, you must escape in any
way possible. I’ll hold the attackers off, if I’m able.” And they’d nod to
each other.
But when laying in bed at night with the light out and her mind idle,
thoughts percolated up from her heart and soul, and told her the truth:
Yes, billions of lives depend on at least one of us surviving. But I would
die inside if, while escaping, I left him behind and still alive. I would be
so heartbroken and ashamed of what I did that I couldn’t live with myself afterward. I’d be worthless for our mission. It’s as clear and simple
as one and one equals two—if attacked, we would survive or die together.
She knew John felt the same way.
So they armed themselves to try to make sure they both survived
whatever kind of attack they faced.
Three days later, John received a second message: Last chance.
Fire the Chink whore, or else.
John had wanted to keep the guys out of this, but now Joy persuaded him that they might be attacked, as well. To any casual
observer, the guys probably seemed unusually close to both of them—
more than simple employees.
That afternoon, they met with the guys in John’s room and he
showed them the two threatening letters and explained the situation.
Dolphy said, “We’ll take care of it.”
“No,” John said. “I want them to make the first move. That will tell
us what kind of action to take in return. I don’t want to do anything illegal unless it’s forced upon us. Behave. Okay? Now, do you have
weapons?”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

169

Sal took out a knife that he had sheathed in his sock and showed it
to John. Joy grabbed it out of his hand and hefted it. It was a seven-inch
hunting knife with a bulky handle and poor balance. Joy figured it was
only good for carving wood.
“How does this thing stay in your sock without falling out?” she
asked Sal. She balanced it on one finger, determined where to put her
thumb and forefinger, and threw it the fifteen feet to the door frame. It
stuck there, quivering. “Not a good knife, Sal,” she said. “It’s too head
heavy and the grip and blade are too thick. I’ll get you a better knife.”
The three guys looked at Joy as though she had turned into a witch
and had just floated up on her broom. Sal got up to pull the knife out of
the door frame. On the way back he said, “Jesús Cristo, John, where
did you find her?”
They didn’t know it was the other way around—Joy had found
John.
John laughed and asked, “Do you all know how to use guns?”
Hands and Dolphy responded at the same time, “Of course.”
“Good. Now, today I want the three of you to buy guns that you are
comfortable with and holsters to hide them under your clothes. Then
always keep them with you for protection. The cost is on me.”
Dolphy asked, “What about you two?”
Joy pulled her gun from her holster purse, and lifted the bottom of
her dress to show them the knife in its sheath on her lower leg. “That’s
my throwing knife. I have a tactical knife on my hip.” She decided
against showing them the one on her hip. John would have a cardiac
seizure.
Sal looked appreciatively at her leg sheath and knife, while Dolphy
blushed at seeing her lower leg.
John opened his coat so that they could see his .45 and its holster,
and showed them his pocket S&W.
“My God, “ Hands exclaimed. “I won’t mess with you two.”
John smiled. Looking from one to another of the guys, he said, “I
want to be very clear on this. I will not support you if you use your
weapons aggressively. We trust you all, and I don’t want to insult your
loyalty and honesty, but I want to say this for the record. If your weapons are used for any criminal purpose, if you assault anyone with your
weapons, I will fire you immediately.”
They agreed. John put out his hand to shake each of theirs. Then
they did something unexpected—they held out their hands to shake
Joy’s. She was moved by this. Putting their hands together between
hers, she said, “For our boss and the company—cheers!”

R.J. Rummel

170

“Cheers!” they echoed.
Joy visited their weapons capsule the next day and picked out a
seven-inch combat knife with a double-edged, bead-blasted blade,
stainless steel guard, and a linen micarta grip. She also picked out a
waist sheath and a leg sheath. When she gave these to Sal in his room,
he hefted the knife, threw it at his door frame, and said, “I love it. Now
you haven’t got a chance. Wanna fight?”
“How dare you suggest such a thing, you brute! I’m only a poor
woman,” she quipped.
Sal laughed too. “You could have fooled me. Thanks, Joy.”
After breakfast a few days later, Joy and John headed down the alley next to their hotel, on the way to their Ford. John was going to take
Joy to their temporary offices, then return for the guys’ home schooling. She had yet to buy her own car, but kept saying she would do so
soon.
They had almost reached the Ford when two men emerged from a
doorway further down the alley. Joy automatically checked behind, and
saw two other men approaching. They all carried bats, and swung them
back and forth with one hand as they approached. All were burly,
heavyset, and dressed in rough work clothes. They were obviously enforcement punks.
“Well, dearest,” Joy said, “fun time.”

aaa
Jy-ying
Remodeling at her warehouse was now underway. Jy-ying had been
there most of the previous day, watching the builders piling construction material and getting organized. They’d brought in a Mack truck
that belched oily smoke like a locomotive. It had a crane welded to the
truck bed. The workers fixed chains to Jy-ying’s time machine and
supply capsule, lifted each, and moved them out of the way of their first
remodeling phase. When the time machine was hoisted and moved, a
worker picked up the red box that had been crushed underneath it, carried it over to a dumpster, and threw it in. Jy-ying just watched. She
had no interest in the warehouse’s old debris.
After her Dawn Prayer and breakfast of rice with hot tea poured
over it and pickles—thank God for Lee’s Oriental Food store in Chinatown—she took a Hansom cab to her appointment with her architect, to

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

171

look at his wall and floor samples. His office was on 17th Street, across
from Franklin Square.
As her cab passed by an alley on 16th Street next to the Fairfax Hotel, she glanced down the alley, and her security training instantly
alerted her. She turned and yelled at the driver sitting on his high seat
behind her, “Stop!” When he complied, she threw a dollar to him,
jumped out of the cab, and dashed back to the alley, where she’d
glimpsed four men with clubs, about to carry out a mugging, beating, or
rape.
It was none of her business. But four tough-looking muggers with
bats against an unarmed man and a woman—a Chinese woman, she’d
seen—was unfair.
She entered the alley, prepared to intervene before the muggers
could swing their clumsy clubs. Without thought she stopped and
kicked off her shoes and dropped her skirt and petticoat. This was not
her fashion day. She wore no corset or bustle.

aaa
Joy
Joy and John moved close to the wall next to them to protect their
one side, and turned at a right angle to each other, with about five feet
between them. No sense in having one of them duck a blow, only to
have it strike the other’s back.
As she studied the thugs approaching her, Joy suddenly noticed a
Chinese woman poised just behind them. It was obvious that the
strange woman was prepared to intervene. She was barefoot and had
stripped down to her silk panties so she wouldn’t be hampered by her
clothes.
Panties? Women wear such panties in this age?
The woman still had on a shirt with frilly sleeves, and her hair was
pinned up. Her shoes, skirt, and hat rested on the ground nearby. By
training, Joy noticed and assimilated all this in a split second. “Woman
behind the men on my side. May get involved,” she tersely alerted
John.
Then she warned herself, The men are too close. No more distractions. But with half her mind, Joy monitored John’s behavior, like a
music teacher at her student’s first recital. This was his first battle.
John said to the two men approaching him, “Good morning. Nice
day, isn’t it?” His voice didn’t waver. He stood rock solid, in a perfect

172

R.J. Rummel

ready position. The one I taught him, Joy realized, pleasantly surprised
by her student’s aptitude.
“Fuck you,” one of the thugs grunted to John.
Joy and John let the men get within range, and waited until the first
swing of their bats. Then each suddenly ducked inside their man’s
swing, grabbed the men’s shirts, kicked inside their knees to knock
them off balance, and directing knife-chopping blows to the their
necks. Both thugs sprawled unconscious, their bats now in Joy and
John’s hands.
In the midst of this, Joy noted peripherally that the strange woman
lunged forward, as if about to jump in. When Joy glimpsed her next,
she had backed up and stood watching.
The remaining two thugs came at them with bats swinging wildly,
but Joy had some training in Shaolin staff techniques and had passed on
the elementary moves to John during their training. It was a simple
matter to block the punks’ swings with their own bats. As the attackers
tried to bring their bats back for another swing, Joy and John straightarmed their bats deep into the knot of nerves in each punk’s solar
plexus. Both doubled over and collapsed, unconscious.
Joy glimpsed the woman putting on her skirt. Must have decided we
could handle this, she thought, and then her attention was pulled back
to one of the first punks they’d knocked out. He was scrambling away
from them on his knees. John overtook him and picked him up in a full
nelson, his fingers locked behind the man’s head to prevent the usual
defense against such a move. He thrust his knee into the man’s back.
Joy undid the man’s belt and cut his pants down with her knife.
When she did the same to his shorts, the stench of his body almost
overcame her. He must never have bathed or used what passed for toilet
paper in this era.
Stinky tried to move away from her, but John held him tightly.
“This woman was once violently raped,” he told him. “Hates men. Cuts
off their balls whenever she can. I usually can’t stop her, so hurry and
tell me who ordered you to attack us, before you become a eunuch.”
Stinky struggled without saying a thing, so Joy pricked his penis
with her knife.
He screamed, and threw a name out. “Olaf.”
“Tveitmoe?”
“Yeah.”
“Was Patrick McCarthy involved?”
“He’ll kill me.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

173

As John repeated his question, Joy took Stinky’s testicles in hand
and positioned her knife as though she were going to cut them off
“Okay, yeah!” Stinky cried, trying to struggle free of John’s hammerlock on his neck. “My God, he told us you’d be easy.”
John threw him forward onto the ground. He landed next to the
other three.
“Pull your pants up and play unconscious like your buddies,” John
told him, “and no one will ever know you talked.”

aaa
Jy-ying
Good for them, Jy-ying thought as she put her skirt back on, I
couldn’t have done better. Strange, that in this age they would be
trained like that. And that Chinese woman. She is stranger still. Something familiar about her, very familiar. I must have known somebody
who looked and moved like her in the . . . future? Old world? I don’t
know what to call it. Jy-ying shrugged. Her handsome partner can certainly protect himself, as well.
Now I know that I won’t be alone in hating Tveitmoe. And he has
gone too far, having a man and Chinese woman attacked like this. Time
to take care of him, once and for all.
But right now she was late for her appointment, and she’d have to
walk the rest of the way. No time to congratulate the strange couple.
She hurried off.

aaa
Joy
When Joy and John returned to the hotel, Joy went straight to the
sink and washed her hands, smelled them, then washed them again.
When she was satisfied, they puzzled over the strange woman.
“I wonder what she was doing there,” Joy mused. “She could be
trained in martial arts, to free her legs that way. Nobody can fight well
in the clothes this era’s fashion dictates. And her stance seemed ready
for offense or defense. I would have at least liked to talk to her. But
poof, and she’s gone.”
John scratched his head. “She stood just on the other side of the
thugs, as though she was going to intervene. But on whose side? Was

174

R.J. Rummel

she in fact their leader—had she organized the attack? Or was she going to come to our aid? Nice legs,” he added.
“John!” She glared at him for a moment. “She was going to help us,
I’m pretty sure. I don’t know why she disappeared again, after we were
done.”
John wondered, “Is she American, or newly from China?”
“From China, I bet. She had that look about her. There was something else about her . . . something I can’t put my finger on. But then, I
could only steal one or two glances at her.”
John smiled. “You know, I thought she looked familiar. But I could
only steal a glance at her, too. Maybe she has deep, dark secrets, as we
do.” He shrugged and changed the subject. “We’ve got some planning
to do about Tveitmoe and McCarthy.”
Later they called in the three guys and told them what they’d decided to do.

aaa
That evening, when Olaf Tveitmoe arrived home from his office,
they were waiting for him. He’d no sooner stepped out of his Cadillac
than Joy stepped out from her hiding place and chopped him on the
neck.
John, Dolphy, and Sal dragged him to a truck they had rented and
threw him into the back as though handling a carcass. They drove him
to the city dump, which was closed for the night. When Tveitmoe
started to regain consciousness, Joy gleefully put him under again.
John and the guys stripped him and dragged him into the smelliest
part of the dump they could find. Not without difficulty. He was almost
all belly and must have weighed 250 pounds. The note they tied to his
penis read:
The Tor Import and Export firm is under our protection. If anyone associated with it dies or is hurt in any
way, and that includes their Chinese workers, we will
slowly kill you with the Chinese death of a thousand cuts.
You had better hope for their continued good health.
The Bloods.

aaa

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

175

Jy-ying
Well, what do we have here? Jy-ying thought as she approached
Tveitmoe lying naked in the garbage. He was not an attractive man. His
spindly legs and narrow shoulders seemed comical adornments to his
round belly. He was lying on his back. She bent down and tried to read
the message tied to his penis, but even with the full moonlight, she
needed to use the penlight she carried in her purse.
Clever. I couldn’t have worded it better.
Jy-ying thought back on what she had seen, trying to figure out
what it meant, as she waited for Tveitmoe to wake up.
She had been waiting in Tveitmoe’s garage for him to come home
when she heard a truck pull up nearby. When she saw the Chinese
woman she’d seen in the alley get out of the truck, she snuck out of the
garage and hid in the bushes nearby to watch. The Chinese woman had
delivered an expert chop to Tveitmoe’s neck. When she and her companions loaded him onto the truck, Jy-ying followed them to the
garbage dump.
Tveitmoe groaned and put his hand to his neck. He shuddered, sending
little waves of fat rippling back and forth across his stomach. He opened
his eyes, and focused on her. In the moonlight, she could be seen clearly
enough that he recognized her. “You . . . !” He tried to get up.
“Hello honey,” Jy-ying said sweetly. “I happened to be walking by,
and found you here. What a surprise. Oh yes—friends of mine left a
note on you. I advise you to read it and give it careful thought. As to
me . . . ” She bent over, close to his face. She narrowed her eyes to slits
and said in an icy voice intended to chill him to the bone, “If you try
anything with me, I will kill you. Slowly.” She could see the whites of
his eyes as they widened in fear. She held his gaze for a long moment,
then straightened up and took one last look at him. He had peed on
himself.
She gave him a little wave. “Good-bye, honey. I enjoyed seeing you
again.”

aaa
Joy
It was late when McCarthy came home half drunk from partying
with his friends, but Joy, John, and the three guys were patient. He

176

R.J. Rummel

soon ended up stripped naked and wearing an identical note, but in a
different part of the city dump.
About a week later, Joy found in the San Francisco Chronicle what
she had been waiting for. Almost jumping with glee, she flashed it in
front of John’s eyes, leaned over his shoulder, and mimicked the bland
tone of a news anchor as she read it to him:
BUILDING COUNCIL SHOCKED
Olaf Tveitmoe has resigned his position with the
Building Council in order to accept a job in Los Angeles.
Patrick McCarthy expressed his great appreciation for
the excellent work that Tveitmoe had done for the Council
and wished him the best of success in his new job. He
mentioned that he also had done all he could with the
Council, that the cool and damp weather in San Francisco was affecting his health, and that it was time for
him to move on.
The loss of Tveitmoe and McCarthy came as a shock
to members of the Council, which had been almost wholly
dependent on the two men. Al Gerwig of Gerwig and
Bros. commented that “The loss of these important and
influential men will leave a hole in the Council that will
be difficult to fill.”
Jerome Bassity, manager of McCarthy’s NonPolitical Liberty League, said he was dumbfounded by
this decision. “McCarthy stood a very good chance of being elected mayor in 1909,” he said.
Waterfront labor leader Andrew Furuseth said that
the efforts of the Japanese and Korean Exclusion League
will continue as vigorously as ever in spite of the loss of
McCarthy’s influence. He pointed out that . . . .
The next day, Joy found a gem in the Gossip, the city’s widely-read
tabloid, under the headline, “The Naked Truth.” They were at their
temporary offices, and this time she did jump up and down, and rushed
into John’s office, not even nodding at their secretary. She gleefully
plopped the paper on top of the company inventory on which he was
working.
“See this?” Joy shouted.
He looked up at her askance, rubbed his eyes with his hand, leaned
back, slowly stretched, and scratched his underarm.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

177

“Bastard,” she yelled, and snatched it off his desk. She started to
stalk out but he tore the tabloid out of her hand and read it aloud.
Police picked up separately Olaf Tveitmoe and Patrick McCarthy on indecency charges. Acting on tips, the
police discovered Tveitmoe naked near the city dump and
McCarthy walking naked on a street a mile away. A
source in the police department claims that McCarthy
fought with the police when they tried to arrest him for
indecent exposure, injuring a policeman.
When we contacted the police they refused to comment on this story. Tveitmoe and McCarthy would not
answer their telephones when we called, and their associates denied any knowledge of this.
However, rumors are flying around the Building
Council and City Hall. One source claims that both men
were kicked out of an orgy with three Chinese and two
Japanese women when they made deviate sexual demands. One woman pulled out a gun and made them
leave without their clothes. A second independent source
agrees that there was an orgy, and they were driven out
at gunpoint, but that the orgy involved three Chinese
women and two Japanese boys.
We contacted the League for Decency and they have
informed us of their plan to demonstrate outside the
homes of both men.
John got up and hugged Joy. “Am I forgiven?” he asked.
“Of course not,” she answered. “My turn will come.” She gave him
a peck on the cheek.
The news items were reason for celebration; that night, they and the
guys went to the Liberty Café. They were all armed, of course, so they
sipped their beers and made them last while they sang and danced.
It was beginning to bother Joy that she was the only woman among
these four men. The guys did not seem to have any steady girlfriends.
So she asked Hands what happened to the one they’d seen with him in
the hallway of the hotel.
“Oh, she was . . . ah . . . just somebody I met. Nothing steady.”
“She was a prostitute?”
Hands’ face turned red and he found something interesting to look
at on the wall. “Well . . . yeah.”

178

R.J. Rummel

“Have you or the other guys had any steady girlfriends?”
“No. It’s hard for us, Joy. What we did, and what we’re doing now,
makes it difficult to meet nice girls. You know, good girls don’t come
alone to bars like this, and you are the only nice . . . ahh, woman working for our company that I know.”
“Hmm,” Joy replied noncommittally, not wanting to get into the
meaning of “good” and “nice.” She let the subject drop.
Back at the hotel, as they talked in Joy’s room, she told John,
“We’ve got to help the guys find girlfriends. There seems little way for
them to meet nice girls. You know, other than prostitutes.” Looking at
John from under her eyelashes, she added, “Nice girls like me.”
“You’re a nice girl?” John asked.
Joy threw a punch at his shoulder. To her surprise, she found herself thrown over his shoulder and onto the bed. That’s what I get for
teaching him this stuff, she realized.
John jumped on her and said, laughing, “Don’t mess with your
man, woman.”
She put her arms around him and said seriously, “We’ve got to do
something about this, you know. It’s not good.”
“What is it with you women and matchmaking? Can’t you stand to
see a man without a woman?”
“Would you like to be without this woman, my man?” Joy purred,
ruffling his unruly hair.
“And where do they find a woman like you?”
“My dearest, where it counts, all women are like me.”
“Let me see, “ he said, staring at her so-called dainty lawn-waist
blouse, with its Dutch collar trimmed with wide embroidery and Valenciennes lace. He was trying to figure out how to undo it. Finally he
mumbled, “No wonder young women were so virginal in this age.”

aaa
Tired of eating out and the constrictions of living in hotel rooms,
John searched the classified ads and finally, after discussing it with Joy,
bought a three-story apartment building containing nine apartments. It
was at the corner of 16th and Vermont Streets, about three blocks from
their new company offices and salesroom—within easy walking distance.
Joy and John took two of the ground floor apartments. Joy’s
apartment was for appearances, and became a large work area and a

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

179

place to store their time machine and supply capsules. They turned the
third first-floor apartment into a conference area and guest apartment,
and let the three guys choose which of the remaining apartments they
wanted for themselves, rent free.
They all spent a week shopping and furnishing the apartments, the
guys’ furniture at company expense. John hated the shopping. He always wanted to buy the first or second piece they saw. Joy loved
shopping, and worse, she was a comparison shopper.
After the first full day of shopping, John told Joy, “Baby, all I want
is something to sleep on, to eat from, to sit on, and to store things in.
You shouldn’t treat this as though it was our mission, you know.” By
the fourth or fifth bed, dresser, table, or whatever it was they were
looking at, John always mumbled, “I like it, already.”
Understandably, almost all the furniture was to Joy’s taste—Asian,
with simply-styled late nineteenth-century oak, teak, and walnut
American furniture thrown in.
Once all the furniture was delivered, and at Joy’s insistence they
had repositioned it all several times, John was reduced to muttering,
“Damned if I’d have volunteered for this mission, if I’d known it would
involve this inhumane torture.”

aaa
Weeks later, John rushed into Joy’s company office and threw the
first page of the newspaper down in front of her. Triumphantly, he
pointed to the front-page headline, and yelled, “Baby, we did it!”
She leaned back and stretched, rubbed her nose, and turned to close
the drawer on her two-drawer file cabinet. She finally looked at John,
who stood patiently, unperturbed, as though waiting for a bus.
Joy was too curious to continue the nonchalant act for long. She
leaned forward and read the article he indicated.
ROOSEVELT UNHAPPY WITH CITY.
In a letter leaked to the press, President Roosevelt
has written to Governor Pardee of California about the
practice of excluding Orientals from normal business and
other occupations in San Francisco. Roosevelt pointed
out this has affected vital American interests. He asked
that the governor throw his weight behind stopping this
practice, and organize help for Oriental immigrants to
adjust to, and find work in our great country.
Attached to the letter was a note from Secretary of

180

R.J. Rummel

State Elihu Root, pointing out that this exclusion movement has hurt American relations with China and Japan.
He hoped that the Governor would recognize the seriousness of the President’s letter.
Our Washington reporter was told by a high State
Department source that the Empress-Dowager of China
had expressed to the President her unhappiness over the
exclusion movement and wrote that it was a personal insult to her and all Chinese.
Joy and John were now vying daily to be the first to read the newspapers. Joy found out when the morning newspapers were delivered to
the small kiosk at Harry Adams and 16th Streets, and made sure she
woke up then. Offering John some excuse for leaving the apartment,
such as, “I need to get some panties from the supply capsule” (she
never wore bloomers), she would quietly slip out of the building and
rush to the kiosk, pay her five cents, and hurry back to the apartment. It
paid off. On the third day of this, she returned to John’s apartment and
casually asked as he dressed, “Oh, do you remember Chung Pao Hsi at
the Chinese consulate here?”
“Of course.”
“He was part of an official delegation meeting with the mayor.”
“Oh.”
The kitchen faucet dripped into a pan, its sound magnified by the silence. John had promised to change the washer.
He cracked his knuckles, scratched his neck as if in a slow motion
replay. He cocked his head at her and finally asked, “What about?”
“He came with Cyhow Tszchi.”
“Who he?”
“No, not Hu He. Cyhow Tszchi.” Joy noticed the dimples at the
corners of John’s mouth again.
“Who is this other notable you say appeared with Chung?”
“First Secretary of the Chinese Legation in Washington. Also, he
had with him Ow Yang King, Chung’s assistant consul, and Lyman I.
Mowry, the attorney for the Chinese officials.”
“Really. How come they’re here?
“Governor Pardee was with them.”
“And . . . ” John made coaxing motions with both hands.
“Also included was the Assistant Secretary of State.”
“Bitch. Are you enjoying yourself?”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

181

Joy waited, but John smoothed his face and refused to look annoyed. He seemed to be taking great interest in a callus on his palm,
and started picking at it.
“They met with the Mayor.”
John must have seen the newspaper she was hiding behind her
back, for he rushed her. When she jumped onto the bed, he tackled her
legs, brought her down on her back, and wrested the newspaper from
her hand. He sat up and read it.
MAYOR TAKEN TO WOODSHED
Governor Pardee, along with United States Assistant
Secretary of State James Watson, First Secretary of the
Chinese Legation in Washington Cyhow-Tszchi, and
other high officials visited the city yesterday to meet with
Mayor Schmitz about the practice of excluding Orientals
from local jobs. A high source said the Mayor was told in
no uncertain terms that the city must cease and desist,
and that he must use his full authority to make sure private boycotts and sanctions are not used for this purpose.
Cited in particular were the exclusion policies of the
Building Council. Attempts to contact the Mayor or members of the Council were unsuccessful . . .
What a glorious time this is, Joy thought, her smile feeling as
though it would engulf her face.
From then on, Joy and John laughingly agreed to get the newspaper
together. Three days later, when they picked the newspaper up at the
kiosk, John rapidly scanned the front page. “This is it,” he said, and
held the paper up so that Joy could read the great news with him.
CITY HALL PURGED
In a wide-ranging purge of the city government, the
Mayor has fired or transferred to manual jobs all those
who were associated with the Oriental exclusion movement. Rumors are that the Building Council itself will be
reorganized under new leadership, and several other organizations have been threatened with the most rigorous
police and fire inspections, if they likewise do not change
their policies.”

182

R.J. Rummel

That was Thursday. On the following Monday, John got the call
from Muss Builders asking him if he wanted remodeling of the warehouse to continue. “Yes,” he said with seeming reluctance. After
hesitating, hinting at other options, and expressing his disgust over their
boycott, he got them to shave 25 percent off the cost.
The five of them had waited for this, and that evening Joy and John,
completely unarmed just this once, pushed two tables together at the
Liberty Café and celebrated with Sal, Dolphy, and Hands.
They sang many songs that night, like “Moonbeams” and “Let It
Alone,” but when they sang “Hello! Ma Baby,” as all their voices
came down on the “baby” and Joy raised her beer stein to John and
the guys, everything she and John had accomplished since arriving
in 1906 hit her.
They’d only been here for a few months, but they’d already broken
up a sex slave ring and saved their first lives. They’d brought down
some real bastards who had ruled part of the community. They’d ended
the Oriental exclusion movement here and turned it around to welcome
Orientals. Work on their warehouse had resumed.
John saw her happy tears and got up to come around the table. He
leaned over and put his arm around her as they sang the theme again.
She tilted her head back, reached up to put one hand behind his head,
and crushed his lips to hers.
When the song was over, a waitress with a little label over her left
breast that read Sue came over to refill their steins. She looked at John
and Joy and asked her, “What are you celebrating?”
Her eyes brimming, Joy summed it all up: “Love and life, Sue.
Love and life.”

Chapter 14
Jy-ying

W

ith the work on her warehouse underway, Jy-ying decided it
was time to get serious about finding that infidel time traveler.
She bought a whole set of the most expensive brown leather luggage she could find, including a large Sitka spruce sea chest with
reinforced leather straps. She took a ferry to Oakland, searched the
Chinese stores there, and found China luggage tags and stickers to put
on her luggage. She filled trunk and suitcases with weapons, clothing,
tools, medical supplies, computer equipment, and other things from her
equipment capsules that would make the luggage heavy.
She found the Mode de Paris, a high-class woman’s clothing store,
and visited the store wearing her elegant, ankle-length, imperial Chinese cheongsam. It was made of double lined red and black silk
brocade, with a mandarin collar and a keyhole opening that modestly
closed above her cleavage. She wore no hat, but pulled her hair back
into a tight braid, and circled that into a bun on the back of her head.
The look was high-class Chinese.
When the clerks at the store ignored her, she loudly counted out
five counterfeit ten dollar bills onto the counter and yelled, “How can a
Chinese princess get service here?” No problem from then on.
She bought the most expensive, fashionable clothes, including a
travel ensemble for ship voyages that she put on afterward, in her
room—a light blue shirtwaist blouse with leg of mutton sleeves and
white lace spilling down the front from a high-neck, sky blue collar,
and a rich-looking sky blue silk gored skirt that flared at her ankles,
with a small sashed waist. She wore no corset or bustle to configure her
body in the fashionable S-shape. She was supposed to have just come
from China, and she could assume that people would believe that she
wore the latest Chinese fashion, of which they knew nothing.
She wore a white Mink fur cape and what Jy-ying thought was an
outrageous, albeit Peking-stylish, bonnet. The hat was a milliner’s masterpiece of hair braid and silks laid around a narrow brim, folded lace,

184

R.J. Rummel

and white ostrich tips that fell over one side. She laughed for five minutes when she first put it on and looked in the mirror. Her laughter
finally diminished to hiccupping chuckles. Shu Kuo should see me now,
she thought, and started laughing again.
Prepared, she hired a two-horse coach with two coachmen and a
driver. The lone bellhop at the All Nations Hotel brought a large cart up
to her room. He could barely maneuver the Sitka chest onto it, but
managed easily to pile her luggage on top. At the coach she tipped him
fifty cents, and he gave her a huge smile.
The coachmen loaded her luggage and chest, looking at her with a
mixture of admiration and envy all the while. She ordered the driver to
take her to the Little Palace Hotel on Leavenworth and Post Streets, the
temporary site of the Palace Hotel, which had been destroyed by the
earthquake and fire and was being rebuilt at Market and New Montgomery Streets. Before the disaster, the hotel had been the largest and
most luxurious in the world.
As everything was being unloaded in front of the Little Palace Hotel, the doorman, wearing a magnificent military-style uniform, bowed
and waved forward two porters dressed in red and yellow uniforms
with brimless square hats lined in blue. They brought up a cart to take
her luggage to the registration desk.
Does not anyone in this stupid age have a feel for color? Jy-ying
wondered. Turning her attention to her act, she strode, head high, chin
out, through one of the three front doors. She crossed the lobby, over a
rug so deep and lush she thought it could hide a lion or two, and
stopped in front of the long, marble-topped reception desk. No spittoon
anywhere. Everything had a new smell. Cocking her elbow on her hip
and raising her forearm so that she could let her snakeskin purse swing
back and forth from her white-gloved hand, she painted a bored expression on her face and announced in a heavy Chinese accent to the suited
clerk behind the counter, “I am Princess Tz’u Li Poh. You got reservation for me.” It was a statement, not a question.
The clerk checked his file and looked up, embarrassed. “I’m sorry,
Princess. We have no reservation for you.”
“What? You lose my reservation?” She swore loudly in Chinese,
gesturing so wildly that her fur cape almost slid off her shoulder. “How
could you? I want see manager.”
The clerk rushed off and in minutes a tall, distinguished elderly
man with a bushy gray beard and what was obviously a brown wig approached her. He looked over her luggage and her clothing. Satisfied,

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

185

he took the appropriate stance of respect and, clasping his hands together, crooned, “I am Henry Vidrick, the manager. There seems to be
a mistake. We do not have a reservation for you.”
Jy-ying looked at him disdainfully. Guests nearby stopped to watch.
“My legation make my reservation.” She raised her voice. “You say my
diplomats did not?”
Vidrick took an unconscious step back, wringing his hands. “Oh no,
Princess. I am sure they did and the mistake is ours. I humbly apologize
for the error, but we are temporary here until the Palace Hotel is rebuilt,
and we do not have our full staff. Our services are limited, and there
may be some inconvenience. If you accept that, I will give you our ambassador suite. Please accept the first week at our expense, as a token of
apology.”
She looked at him as though she expected nothing less, and nodded.
He hurried behind the desk and reached up to one of the largest mailboxes in the top row. He pulled out a silvery key with what looked like a
gold nugget attached with a silver keychain. He hit a bell on the desk. Almost immediately, two bellboys appeared. He gave them the key.
Jy-ying bowed slightly to the manager and waited, body straight as
a pole, while the bellboys slowly maneuvered the cart with the luggage
across the thick rug toward the elevator. She followed them into a metal
elevator cage whose sides seemed entirely made of wrought iron curlicues. With a loud hum, it laboriously lifted them to the fifth floor.
The older bellboy showed her around the suite, pointing out the
plush Third French Republic sofa and easy chairs and the Tiffany electric lamps in the living room before showing her the small kitchen with
a marble-topped table for two and standup marble counter, new Wehrle
gas range, and Puritan White icebox (she opened the ice door and saw a
fresh fifty-pound ice block inside). Then on to the huge bedroom, furnished with a Second Empire Napoleon III poster bed, side chairs, and
high mirrored chest of drawers. The tour ended at the bathroom, which
contained a shower over a gold-gilded circular bathtub, a sink with hot
and cold running water, and the latest toilet, with a low water tank and
a soft pine seat.
She tipped each of the boys a half-dollar. They seemed overjoyed.

aaa
Over the next weeks, Jy-ying began circulating in high society. It
was so easy. Acting as the Princess’s secretary, she called Mayor
Schmitz’ office and said a visiting Chinese Manchu princess would like

186

R.J. Rummel

to make an unofficial visit to the Mayor on behalf of the EmpressDowager, who might be considering her own informal visit. She met
Mayor Schmitz and his close staff the next day. Of course she didn’t
ask him about his indictment for bribery and extortion. She played out
her role to perfection. Security would be proud, she thought.
As she expected, word got around. She began finding invitations to
parties and formal dinners in her mailbox, or received them over the
phone when she returned telephone calls.
When the First Secretary of the Chinese Legation in Washington,
Cyhow Tszchi, was in town for discussions about the treatment of Chinese, she was conveniently out of town. Jy-ying thought they all had
left when she started circulating again, but at a formal reception for visiting Prime Minister Alfred Deacon of Australia, a Chinese diplomat,
Song Shihao, was also present for some reason. He spied her at the
gathering and as he came toward her, she thought he must have been
looking for her.
He hovered nearby as Jy-ying chatted with an army colonel about
his battles in the Philippine War. When the colonel saw the diplomat
standing nearby, he excused himself.
Song Shihao bowed to her, and introduced himself in Mandarin
Chinese. After she returned the greeting, she said without any preliminaries, “Please join me on the veranda so that I may introduce myself
properly.”
Jy-ying led him to a corner of the veranda where they could be relatively alone. She bowed to him again. “I am known here as Princess
Tz’u Li Poh. I tell these people that I am here informally to look over
San Francisco for the Empress-Dowager, who is thinking of making her
own informal visit.” She knew he knew this already. Checking her out
may have been the reason he was at the reception.
He replied, “Yes, I had heard that.”
She noticed, as he’d intended, that he didn’t acknowledge her title
of “Princess” in his response—a truly rude test.
She hardened her voice and her eyes. “What I will now tell you
must be a secret, on pain of recall and death.”
His eyebrows rose slightly.
“You must swear by your oath to the Empress-Dowager that you
will repeat what I tell you to no other, and if asked about me, you will
only authenticate my cover story. Do I have your oath?”
“But your have told me noth—”
“You have three seconds to give me your oath, or I will walk away
at your peril.” Her voice was now iced steel.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

187

Only when she started to turn away did Song respond. “You have it.”
She reached into her black and gold clutch purse and felt for what
Security had prepared for just this eventuality. Out of a hidden pocket
she pulled a miniature badge embossed with the Imperial Guard seal,
and a document on Imperial rice paper folded into a one by one-inch
square. It also bore the Imperial seal and contained a short message
over the signature and stamp of the Empress-Dowager. Jy-ying handed
both to him and watched as he looked at the badge and carefully unfolded and read the document.
Song’s jaw dropped and his eyes opened wide for a second before
he regained control. Almost standing at attention, he carefully refolded
the document and handed it and the badge back to her.
She took her time putting them away. She looked him in the eyes,
which were still wide with amazement. As though talking to an inferior,
she told him, “To be sure you understand, I am Major Khoo Jy-ying of
the Imperial Guard, here on special orders. You know that revolutionaries are working against the dynasty. I am seeking one special man who
is involved in this. I am here to kill him. You are commanded to give
me whatever aid I request.” Jy-ying softened her voice and smiled.
Anyone watching would think they were having a friendly discussion.
“Do you understand?”
He gave her a deep bow and replied, “I understand . . . Princess. I
am available as you wish.”
She painted a friendly expression on her face and turned to return to
the celebration. She noticed that the assistant to the Mayor and the
Chief of Police had been watching. They had set this up, she realized,
but now her false identity was solidly established. She was sure that
Song Shihao would confirm it, even under the harshest torture.

aaa
Jy-ying hated the charade she led, but she had to go through with it
to find the time traveler. He must have funds like I do. He must be circulating among the high and mighty with his knowledge of current
events and the future. He must be well trained to impress people and
exploit their power and influence. I am sure I will find him this way.
Jy-ying looked over each new man she met, at the risk of it being
misunderstood. Old men? Obviously, no. Boys, or the immature young
men? Surely not. Men too fat, pot bellied, or thin? Hardly. Only a man
in good shape, showing good poise and self-control, would be picked

188

R.J. Rummel

for a time travel mission, whatever that was. This narrowed down the
field considerably. Moreover, he was from her time. She was sure all
the small cultural and behavioral clues of a man out of time would be
easy for a security officer to recognize.
In late March she attended a party hosted by retired railroad tycoon
E.H. Harriman at his huge mansion on the bay. She circulated as usual,
engaging in small talk about China, the prospects for a settlement in the
conflict with Japan, and, some indelicately broached, the prospect of a
Chinese revolution.
Then she saw him.
He was alone, sitting in a plush armchair, legs crossed, a champagne glass in one hand, relaxed. There was a jaunty self-confidence
about him. He seemed to be studying people in the room. Immediately,
she thought him out of place and time.
He was also attractive and masculine, and she felt a little shiver as
she thought about approaching him. She also felt uneasy, suffering a
momentary lapse in confidence. She thought about the way she was
dressed, her tight maroon silk dress that spread out on the floor and her
bare shoulders and low-cut bodice. She’d had her hotel’s beauty salon
do her hair in high curls with supposedly errant wisps of hair falling
between them. She had on her jade necklace with matching jade earrings. She was sure that she was the prettiest at the party, as he was the
handsomest.
Jy-ying walked casually past him, knowing he was studying her,
and within a short time she approached him from behind and bumped
his drink, spilling some on his pants. “Oh, excuse me, “ she said in
pidgin English. “How bad of me. I spill drink on pants.” She put her
hand to her mouth. “I embarrassed.”
He stood up and shook his pants. He was taller by about six inches.
“My mistake, ma’am. I shouldn’t have had my drink hanging out in
your way. But if you insist on taking the blame, you can make it up to
me by telling me your name.”
This is him.
Jy-ying tried to look apologetic. “I get you another drink.” She
didn’t drink herself. Sabah forbade it. But she got another glass of
champagne, and soda water for herself, at the bar.
When she turned around, he was standing behind her and she almost bumped into him and spilled the champagne on him again. She
pulled it back in time and handed it to him. “Here is drink.
“My name Princess Tz’u Li Poh. As you guess, I from China.
Would do me honor of name?”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

189

“I am Rex Scott. I’m a movie actor.”
Sure you are.
“What you act in?”
“I’ve had bit parts in a number of movies. Have you seen The Great
Train Robbery?”
“No. I do not.”
“Why are you here, Princess? I mean, in the United States.”
“I visit for my empress. Maybe she visit San Francisco in near future, if I say I like.”
Rex showed great interest in China and asked many questions. Jyying asked her own questions about his movie career, testing him to see
how good his cover was.
She left him with her telephone number. He said he was moving
around a lot and he was hard to contact, but he would get in touch with
her.
When he called the next day, she invited him to dine with her at the
hotel restaurant, but he said he knew of a good restaurant on the
coast—would she like him to give her a tour of San Francisco?
I’ve got him.
He picked her up in front of the hotel in a Ransom Olds. He was
fun to be with, and surely did not have the Victorian values of men of
this age. He treated her like an equal, but at the same time, a woman.
Her only concern was to penetrate his cover. He no doubt was a Christian in a Christian land, so after the day was almost done, she told him
she was a Muslim.
“What’s a Muslim?”
He’s good.
“You know, Christian Crusades. Jerusalem? Islam?”
“Oh, very good. I’m a Baptist.”
“Baptist? What Baptist?”
“It’s a Protestant church, but I’m not sure what it believes in, except
it’s not Roman Catholic. I call myself Baptist because that’s what my
mother was. She used to take me to church when I was a little boy, but
I don’t remember what it was about.”
Jy-ying did not want to get into any of this Christian stuff with him.
She had her holster purse partly open and near her hand. She readied
herself to move suddenly and quietly added, “I am Sabah Muslim.” She
watched his eyes and lips for the slightest sign.
He answered cheerily, “I would say ‘what’s that,’ but it’s beginning
to sound like we’re playing some sort of game.”

190

R.J. Rummel

He is better than good.
The next day he picked her up for a tour of San Francisco. She was
enjoying herself, but she never forgot why she was here. She watched
him carefully, but could not break through his cover.
When he dropped her off at her hotel, he asked, “Would you like to
go to a nightclub tomorrow night?”
“What is nightclub?”
“It’s a place where people dance and drink and get entertained.”
“You honor me. I hope I not bore you.”
Jy-ying spent part of the next day trying to find out more about
Rex. After calling a local five-cent nickelodeon and getting information
on the movie The Great Train Robbery, she telephoned the Edison
Company Studios that produced it and for whom Rex said he was
working, and asked for the public relations man. His secretary came on
the phone.
“Hello, can I help you?”
Jy-ying answered, “Hello, I am a reporter for the San Francisco
Examiner and I wish to do an article on the actor Rex Scott. I need
background information on him. Can you give me that?”
“Rex what?”
“Excuse my accent. His last name is S.C.O.T.T.”
“Sorry, I don’t know the name. Let me check my file.”
While waiting, Jy-ying studied the wall telephone, amused by the
design. She had spoken into a transmitter connected to a wooden box
while holding the bipolar receiver to her ear—a cord-covered wire connected it to something inside the box. She opened the box and saw on a
top shelf the switch for the receiver on-off hook and the ringer, a five
magnet generator on a second shelf with the attached crank she had just
used to signal the operator who placed her call, and two four inch tall
dry batteries to provide the talking power. Fascinating, she thought.
She took the receiver away from her ear and unscrewed it. Inside, she
saw brass castings and a carbon cup turned from a solid brass piece. As
she tapped the carbon diaphragm with her finger, she heard the secretary speaking as though from a long distance. She put the diaphragm to
her ear in time to hear, “ . . . no such name.”
“He plays bit parts. Could he be a bit player?”
“No, I have looked at the whole payroll under S. No such name.”
“Thank you. How can I find out who played in the movie The Great
Train Robbery?”
“Hold on a moment.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

191

She should have brought something to work on while she was
waiting on the phone. About ten minutes later, the secretary came back
on the line. “I have the cinema credits here. What do you want to
know?”
“Is there anyone with the first name ‘Rex’ on the listing?” She
might have misunderstood or misspelled his last name.
After a short delay, he answered. “No.”
So, Rex lied to me about his acting. Completely. Why else should he
hide his background or work from me, except that he is the time traveler? I have him for sure.
Rex drove up to the hotel that night to take Jy-ying to a nightclub.
She was waiting. But when he got out of the car to open the car door
for her, she asked him in a throaty voice, “You like come to my suite?
We dance there.”
He looked surprised, then excited. “Sure,” he blurted.
He drove around the hotel to its little dirt parking lot. When he returned, she put her arm through his and led him to the elevator cage and
up to her suite. She opened the door and led him in, and closed and
locked the door behind him.
As he stood looking around the suite, obviously impressed, Jy-ying
waved with her hand and said, “Sit down on couch. I get more comfortable clothes.”
She had not seen that expectant grin on a male’s face since her first
sexual experience when she was eighteen years old. She went into the
bedroom and changed into her black satin wing chun practice clothes,
with red toggle fasteners, red satin piping on the jacket, and elasticized
ankle pants. She left her feet bare. As she tied her hair into a pigtail, she
fixed in her mind every piece of furniture in the living room and the
distance and angle between each. If he knew martial arts, which she
was sure he must, she was ready for him.
He looked surprised when he saw her come out of the bedroom.
“Why are you dressed like that?”
Jy-ying looked at his eyes to see if there was any recognition of her
clothing. None.
I will play his game.
“This informal dress of Princess.” Staring into his eyes, and aware
of the slightest twitch he might make, she strode up to him and asked
sweetly, “You take off coat?” She helped him remove it.
As he stood there in complete surprise, she unbuckled his belt, unbuttoned his trousers, and pushed them down. He was already clearly

192

R.J. Rummel

aroused and speechless at how fast Jy-ying was moving things along.
He let the trousers drop and kicked them off is feet. She motioned to his
underwear and he looked a little embarrassed as he took them off. He
was now naked from the shirt down. She took his hot hand without another word and led him, smiling and erect, into the bedroom.
Jy-ying told him to lie down on the bed, and as he did, she entered
the closet and pulled down from a hanger several long ribbons she had
prepared. She looked at him lying on the bed, hands behind his head,
legs slightly apart, a grin on his now ruddy face that even crinkled his
eyes.
“I have fun,” she meowed. “Be still now.” She told him to put his
arms out and she tied his wrists to the head posts with the ribbons. She
asked him to spread his legs, and she tied his ankles to the foot posts.
Spread-eagled, still grinning, he said, “I haven’t done this before.
Your turn. Take your clothes off.”
Jy-ying dropped the pidgin. “My fun does not include getting
naked.”
There was a nice filet knife in the kitchen and she took her time getting it. When she came back with it in her hand, Rex stared at her.
“What kind of game is this? I’m not into that whip and pain stuff.”
She sat down next to him on the bed, holding the knife close to his
thigh and almost regretfully watching his erection disappear. “You are
good,” she said, “but not good enough. I know who you are. But I want to
hear it from you. The truth. I will carve you up piece by piece if you lie.”
He tried a different kind of grin, but it only caused his mouth to
tremble. He drew in a deep breath and let it out slowly. “Okay. You
caught me. I don’t know how you found out that I’ve been lying to
you.”
He stopped and looked at the knife. Jy-ying waved its point at him
to continue.
“I am not a movie star. I am . . . ” He looked ashamed now, as
though telling his wife he had been fired from a good job. “I’m a
gigolo.”
“What is a gigolo?”
“I seduce rich women and take their money for it.”
“How were you going to take my money? I would not give it to
you.”
He was relaxing. There was a lift to the corner of his lips and a look
in his eyes that was close to pride. “I would have taken you to bed in a
couple of days, and several days after that I would have said that my

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

193

producer needs a big investor to support a movie he wants me to star in.
If I treated you like a queen, and you were falling in love with me, you
would have given me the money.”
Jy-ying put the knife down. At the moment she didn’t trust herself
with it. She kept her voice calm. “You were pulling one of the oldest,
meanest, most despicable scams on me?”
“What’s ‘scam’?”
Her voice rising, she asked rhetorically, “You were trying to use my
feelings to trick money out of me?”
“Yes, if you put it that way.”
Jy-ying started to shake with anger. She stood, leaving the knife on
the bed. She now had no doubt he was telling her the truth. That story
of his, told in the way he told it, was not something the time traveler
could have done. Her security training told her that. Her feminine instincts told her that.
She looked down at him. What a poor excuse for a man, she
thought. He had the body and looks that would have made some
woman very happy. He had the intelligence that should have enabled
him to go far in some legitimate career. He could have contributed
much to humanity and God, if he had only had the right education. The
rule of Sabah will help lost men like him.
“What is your real name?” she asked him.
“Cosmos Trzoniec.”
That just dissolved her anger. She couldn’t help but chuckle.
“If I understand you . . . Cosmos, you would have taken my money
and left me, never to see you again? Even if I fell in love with you, God
forbid? What about your feelings for me?”
His mouth turned down and his brow furrowed. “Unhappily, regretfully, with strong feelings for you, I would have taken your money and
disappeared. That is what I do. It’s how I survive. If I stayed around,
you’d get tired of me—you are a princess and I’m nothing. Eventually,
you’d send me away without anything. I’m just bringing the end closer
while getting out of it something to live on.”
Jy-ying began to undress. He watched her with increasing comprehension.
When she was naked, she pirouetted, and asked, “You would have
left me?”
He said nothing, but didn’t have to. His body answered for him.
She straddled him, made love to him, untied his hands and feet, and
he made love to her. As they rested in each other’s arms afterward, she
purred, “I ask again. You would have left me?”

194

R.J. Rummel

“No,” he said, “I don’t think I could have. You are the most wonderful woman I have ever met.”
Jy-ying pulled out of his arms and stood. She dressed while he
watched. She walked into the living room, picked up his clothes, and
returning, threw them onto the bed next to him. “Get dressed.”
He took his time, grinned a lot, but didn’t say a word. When he was
fully dressed, she turned down his right collar that was sticking up and
pulled down the back of his coat. She took his hand and led him to the
door and opened it.
“Goodbye, Cosmos. If I see you anywhere in San Francisco again, I
will have you killed. Live long, Cosmos, and far away.”
He paled, and with a final look, he left.

aaa
Jy-ying was lonely. She missed Shu Kuo and even Rex. She needed
a companion.
She found one.
Her gym was finished; finally, she could get the exercise she
needed. She had done what she could in her suite, and had driven her
Rolls Royce Silver Ghost over impossible dirt roads to a remote area in
the country four times a week to jog along a path in the woods. She
knew she could not jog on the streets of the city, nor did she know of a
weight room or gym that would accept a woman. So she went back to
her exercise routine and wing chun practice against her sand bag and
Mook Yan Chong—a wooden dummy precisely constructed to her
specifications. She increasingly regretted not speaking to the couple
that she’d seen attacked by the thugs. Maybe she would see them again.
After shopping for a formal ballroom gown on California Street, Jyying was on her way back to the hotel when she saw a dirty little white
terrier trying to get into a garbage can outside of Harold’s restaurant.
She went over and lifted the lid for him. His hair was matted, caked
with dried mud, and he was clearly famished. But rather than jump into
the garbage, he came up to her and licked her hand. When she bent
down to him, he licked her face. He had no collar, no I.D., and he followed her when she turned to leave him.
What could she do? She picked him up, carried him to a market
nearby, bought him a pork chop, and watched him gobble the meat and
fat off the bone. When she walked off to leave him, he followed her
with his pointed tail up and wagging and the bone in his mouth. She
thought he would disappear soon, but he followed her to the hotel.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

195

The doorman tried to shoo him away, but she stopped him. The terrier was scared, but he wouldn’t leave, nor would he follow her into the
hotel when she was halfway through the door. He looked at her with his
head and tail down, his pointed ears back. He had dropped his bone in
front of him. An offering of thanks, she presumed.
Jy-ying sighed and picked the little one up in her arms and took
him into the hotel with her. She said nothing to anyone. She just
walked into the elevator cage with him. She ignored two other guests
in the cage. She could feel the little one trembling. When she put
him down in her suite, he stayed close to her at first, but gradually
relaxed enough to sniff around the bedroom, living room, and miniature kitchen—especially around the gas range—and finally the
dining-conference area. Soon he was running all over, and she was
finding pee spots.
She was happy to have found him. She loved little dogs, but in her
job she could never own one. Now she could. Breaking only for her
Contact Prayers, she spent most of the rest of the day playing with him,
feeding him, and cleaning up after him. She neglected her exercise this
once. She didn’t care what the maids and manager said. He was here to
stay as long as she did.
Jy-ying washed him thoroughly—twice—to get rid of his ticks and
fleas. Finally, as far as she could see, she had washed off all his fleas,
and she removed the remaining ticks with tweezers. That done, she
tried to bathe him a third time, and they had their first fight over that.
With her martial arts skills, she won. Barely.
She wrapped him in a warm blanket and held him while she read a
magazine until he was dry. He slept with her that night, the first male
she’d slept with in this new world. In the morning she took a good look
at him. He had a beautiful, longhaired white coat, now that it was clean
and fluffy, with a black nose and footpads, sparkling black eyes, delicate pink inner ears, and a red tongue. His pert ears stood straight up, as
did his pointed tail. She had not seen a little dog like this before.
With his head cocked to one side, standing solidly on his four feet,
with his tail straight up, he also took a good look at Jy-ying. She must
have passed, because he licked her hand.
She named him Little Wei—little one full of presence
She checked the telephone directory for a veterinarian and found
nine. She checked her maps and selected the one with the largest advertisement that was not too far away. She carried Little Wei through the
lobby without comment, and approached the horse and automobile

196

R.J. Rummel

hacks waiting in line. Rather than drive, she took a Hansom, with the
driver sitting on a raised platform behind the seats. She enjoyed watching Little Wei look around with excitement as they rode along.
He checked out well with the veterinarian—no disease, no problem
that the vet could tell. He told her that Little Wei was a West Highland
White Terrier, a new and still rare breed; no dog like this would be wild
unless something happened to his owner. She left after buying a new
red collar and leash, a play ball, rubber bone, and what the veterinarian
guaranteed was special soap that would keep fleas and ticks away.
Being a princess had its advantages. From then on, Little Wei and
Jy-ying went almost everywhere together. The only time she kept him
in the suite while she was gone was when she attended a formal dinner.
People grew to expect that, except for those affairs, if they invited her,
Little Wei, black blanket, and leash, came along. So had a little bag and
scoop she kept in her purse. People would turn away, faces would turn
red, and nobody would comment when she cleaned up after Little Wei.
I do not know what their problem is, she thought. After all, not so
many years ago, when nature called people, they were no less discerning than Little Wei
Jy-ying was becoming well known in the tight-knit group of San
Francisco’s elite, and could recognize most of them and recall their
names. It was getting so that she could easily identify a new man in attendance at their functions and quickly check him out. She had two or
three possibilities, and got close enough to one to have an excursion
with him, but not one was the time traveler.
Aside from using his funds to mingle with the rich and powerful,
what else would the time traveler do? she wondered. He would try to
make legitimate money, presuming he used mostly counterfeit money.
How would he earn it? For one, he knows the future and could thus
make money by betting on horse races, the stock market, and commodities. For another, he would be trying to change things he thought were
bad here or elsewhere. Of course, he would try to establish legitimacy,
and how better than to be the head of a business? And because he
knows the future, it would be a surprisingly successful business.
These were enough particulars to put a private detective to work on
it, and within a few days she had the Anderson Detective Agency looking for a missing person on behalf of Princess Tz’u Li Poh. “It is my
personal wish to find this person,” she told Gerald Anderson. “And I
am willing to pay $1,000 plus expenses.” That was a sufficient answer.
He must have thought it as a matter of the heart.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

197

Mr. Anderson had a long list of questions about the person she was
searching for, most of which were easy to answer: “He is in good
physical shape, perhaps athletic, keeping himself in shape through
regular exercise. He is good at self defense and weapons. He is doing
extraordinarily well on the stock market or betting, may head a rapidly
developing and successful company, is in his twenties or thirties, and is
probably of greater than average height—maybe much greater. He is
unmarried and very well educated. He is not from San Francisco and
possibly speaks English with a strange regional accent.”
Jy-ying let Anderson know that she would be especially grateful with
a bonus if they found this person. He was to report to her once a week.

aaa
Jy-ying got a call from Mrs. Hiller, the head of the San Francisco
Orphan and Child Welfare Society. This was one of the charities to
which so many of the wives of the rich and powerful contributed their
time and money. After the introductory small talk, Mrs. Hiller said,
“We will be visiting an orphanage for Chinese girls this coming Thursday, and hope that you can join us. I knew that you would have a
special interest.”
Jy-ying replied, “Yes, thank you. I do.”
The orphanage was in the home of Barbara Atherton, a former Chinese missionary. Her husband had been killed in the Boxer Rebellion,
and she survived only because she had been rescued by a unit of British
soldiers. She had returned to San Francisco, her home, and started taking in homeless and orphaned Chinese girls, and others in trouble. Mrs.
Hiller’s society helped support her work.
Jy-ying took Little Wei with her, of course, and had put on his red
collar. It stood out against his white fur and matched his red tongue. He
was a hit with the girls. She left him unleashed, and could not tell who
was having more fun—Little Wei, with his tail a blur over all those
faces to lick, or the young girls who chased him, petted him, and gamboled on the floor with him.
She stayed in the background on this trip and let Mrs. Hiller and the
other women with them do all the talking. Barbara Atherton obviously
wanted to have a long talk with Jy-ying about China. Jy-ying told her in
an aside that she would call to get together with her. When they left,
with the greatest regret shown by the girls and Little Wei, she thanked
Mrs. Atherton for inviting her and gave her 100 real dollars for the orphanage.

198

R.J. Rummel

The next morning Jy-ying called Barbara, who immediately invited
her over that afternoon. “Bring Little Wei,” she said. “Then my girls
will play with him and give us a chance to talk.”
She did, and they talked while watching the dog and girls play.
Barbara missed China and so did Jy-ying, but more important, she
missed companionship. Barbara was in her fifties, friendly, smiled a
lot, and missed her dead husband. The girls she took in helped, but
sometimes she just wanted an adult to talk to, confide in, share memories with. Jy-ying visited her many times in the following weeks, and
eventually spent every Saturday afternoon with her and the girls. Little
Wei looked forward to the visits and seemed to sense when that afternoon had come. He would get very agitated, waiting by the door with
his tail wagging, and whining with eagerness.
Early on, Jy-ying told Barbara that she was a Muslim and asked if
that bothered her.
“No,” Barbara replied. “Does my being a Christian missionary
bother you?”
“No, but you should know that I am something of a missionary
myself.”
“Well,” Barbara said, “we both believe in God. It’s just that our intermediaries differ. You have Mohammed, and I have Christ.”
They had many religious discussions after that. Jy-ying gradually
introduced Barbara to Sabah, and she did the same for her Presbyterianism. Jy-ying thought Barbara was mistaken in her beliefs, in her faith in
Jesus, but Jy-ying was not there to proselytize. She just enjoyed Barbara’s company and appreciated what she was doing for the poor
Chinese girls.
Barbara was very curious about Jy-ying being a princess, and the
amount of time she was spending in San Francisco. Barbara was so
open and friendly with her and with all she was doing for the girls, that
Jy-ying found it difficult to lie. She had to tell her cover story, anyway.
Barbara nodded, and didn’t believe her, Jy-ying knew. But Barbara was
familiar with China and its many currents, spoke Mandarin and Cantonese Chinese, and understood that Jy-ying would tell her, if she
could.
Jy-ying grew to enjoy spending time with the young girls, teaching
them about the world. After their first hour of play with Little Wei, he
would fall asleep at her feet, exhausted. The girls gathered around,
some petting him, and Jy-ying would tell them about science, about the
stars and galaxies, about other countries and their history, and about
Islam.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

199

She was a professional. She was dedicated. And children of her
own were not possible. She had never given it much thought. Before.
Now Jy-ying realized how much she enjoyed these girls, some as
young as five years old. They awakened in her a feeling she hadn’t
known before. Her closest experience of it was when she took over care
of her sister when her parents died. But that was only for a few months
before the girl was brutally killed in the same Chinese civil war that
had claimed their parents.
This was different. She realized now how much she wanted children. It was driven home to her when vivacious, ever-smiling, everlaughing, eight-year-old Mary Lee died from tuberculosis. Jy-ying
could do nothing for her, once she found out about her sickness. She
would have survived in Jy-ying’s time, and that made it worse. Jy-ying
sobbed with the girls and Barbara, and Little Wei lay on Mary’s empty
bed and whined. Dogs know.

Chapter 15
Joy

S

ettling into this “primitive and backward age,” as Joy often characterized it, was a happy time for her. Her fights with John were
glorious. Their making up afterward was even better.
She could not stop thinking about how to help the guys find steady
girlfriends. It bothered her. Besides, as the only female among the four
men, she sometimes wanted another woman to talk with.
One day John looked up from his perusal of the company budget
and nonchalantly told her, “I’ve stopped home schooling the guys.”
“Why? They need it, and I thought you liked doing it.”
“They’ll have other things to do.”
“Have you been loading them down with work?” Joy accused “You
shouldn’t do that. If you’re bored with teaching them, I’ll take up the
home schooling. It’s important, you know.”
“No more need for home schooling. They’re starting college next
week.”
Joy gaped at him.
John had turned back to his budget. A dog was barking somewhere,
and a car backfired on the street.
She went over to his desk, ripped the budget away from him, and
threw it on the bed. She gave him her practiced evil eye and waited
with her arms folded across her chest.
He looked up at her with an innocent expression. “What? You don’t
like my budget?”
“Bastard!” she exclaimed. “How can they go to college?”
“Oh, that’s what you want to know. Well, now, beginning Monday,
the three guys will be attending San Francisco College as unclassified
students during the remaining months of the Spring Semester. They
will take classes in liberal arts, and what passes for business courses.
Although they will start late for the semester, the college has agreed to
accept them, and I have hired a student tutor to bring the guys up to
date on the classes they missed. They are really eager to attend.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

201

John walked over the bed and, as he bent over to retrieve his
budget, Joy gave his behind a good kick, knocking him onto the bed.
Putting both her hands on her hips, she demanded, “How did you
do this? They’re not high school graduates.”
“Easy.” John rolled over onto his back. “I promised they would
pay triple tuition for status as unclassified students, and I made a contribution to the college of $10,000. I also contributed $1,000 to the
personal expense account of the president of the college, for his troubles. When he asked why I was doing this, I told him these men were
important to my business and I wanted them to get a good, all-round
education.”
John put his hands behind his head and waited. His eyes twinkled
and he had the dimples at the edges of his mouth that Joy hated. He was
obviously happy with himself.
“Why?” she threw at him, exasperated.
“‘Why’ what?”
“What about the word ‘why’ don’t you understand?” she yelled.
“You mean, why am I sending the guys to college?”
She grabbed his foot, jerked off his shoe, pulled off his sock, and
bent back his little toe.
“Ouch. Really baby, what’s so hard to understand? That’s where
the nice girls are. The nice girls interested in intelligent and educated
men. They might even meet someone like you, heaven forbid.” He
looked smug. “Are you going to be jealous, now that I’ve solved your
matchmaking problem?”
She released his toe, stood, and glared at him—the mess of wild
hair, the twinkling eyes, the dimples, the smug expression. The laughter
bubbled up from the bottom of her stomach to erupt in a guffaw that
doubled her over. She collapsed on the bed. She couldn’t stop laughing.
She grabbed her sides and curled her legs over her stomach, and
hooted.
When she finally settled into snickering, she looked at John. He
looked serious, even grim, as he struggled not to laugh. It gave him a
most mischievous look, and she broke up again. Finally, he joined her
laughter.
Her sides ached. She hugged him. “I love you, dearest. But I’ll get
you for that.”
Over the next month, they seldom saw the guys in the evening. It
seemed that their time was taken up elsewhere. “Obviously by study,”
John opined.

202

R.J. Rummel

Within two months, they found out that the three had girlfriends.
They introduced them to Joy and John, of course, and they all ate together several times at the Cold Day Restaurant on Pine Street. Hands
and his girlfriend Jane put on a picnic in the country for all of them.
Having been a catcher for the San Francisco Seals, he was an ardent
baseball fan and took them all to the 1907 season opener against Portland in the Seals’ new stadium at Valencia and 15th Streets, not very
far from John’s apartment building. It was a good thing they could
walk—with ten thousand spectators attending, traffic was a mess of
horses, wagons, coaches, and automobiles.
Joy noted how the guys behaved toward their girlfriends. In this
age, men were so chivalrous. They opened doors, pulled out chairs, and
stood when a woman came into a room. They always doffed their hats
when saying goodbye, or took them off when in the same room with a
woman. They even walked between their female companions and the
street, to protect them from splashing mud and water.
Come to think of it, why don’t they act that way toward me? Joy
wondered. She asked John. “How come you and the guys—well, you I
understand, but the guys? How come they treat me like a man?”
“They see you as more a man than a woman.”
“More a man?”
“Yeah. You have all these skills that this culture tells them belong
to a man. You’re supposed to shrink from danger, scream, and cover
your eyes, and treat men as superior. That would tell them you are a
woman.”
“I see.” She dropped the subject. She had in mind a supper meeting
scheduled with the guys to discuss reorganizing the Tor Company so
that they would have larger roles.

aaa
Joy spent over an hour getting ready for the meeting. John kept
yelling at her, “It’s time to go.” By the time he ended with “damn it,”
she was ready.
She had let her hair down to fall naturally over her shoulders. For
the first time since arriving in this age, she put her locket in her purse
and wore instead a necklace with tiny, interwoven gold links and a single large pearl, with matching gold-rimmed pearl earrings. Her light
pink blouse had puffed white lace at her wrists, down the front, and
along the open collar that displayed her cleavage. She tucked the blouse

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

203

into a hip-tight maroon silk skirt with velvet flouncing at the ankles.
She carried a gold-colored clutch purse. No armored vest, no holster
purse, only her hidden knives.
Grateful that makeup was coming back into fashion, she powdered
her scar, put soft red lipstick on, brushed out her eyelashes, and added
the final touch: she had spent two hours away from the company in the
afternoon, searching for just the right perfume. She found it in the Paris
Deluxe Magasin. Not heavy. It was so light that men would not know
she was wearing perfume, even while breathing in its stimulating musk.
John was waiting impatiently at the apartment front door when Joy
walked out of the bathroom. She saw his eyebrows snap up as his eyes
widened, and his tongue whisked across his lower lip, all for just a second before he regained control. “About time,” he said gruffly. “What
took you so long?”
On their way out he picked up a folder from the sofa side table and
jotted something on it. He opened the door and went out, leaving Joy to
follow him, and climbed up into their new American Mercedes, leaving
her to do the same on her side. He hummed to himself as he drove them
to the Cold Day Restaurant. There he strode purposely ahead of her
with the folder in his hand.
Conversation around the restaurant almost came to a stop as people
stared at Joy. She ignored them and regally glided to the large table
where the guys were waiting. John immediately handed the folder to
Hands and asked him to pass it to the others. The guys were goggleeyed, but Hands soon ripped his eyes from Joy, looked down at the
folder he had been holding, then passed it down the table.
She stood next to her wicker dining chair. John sat down. On the
other side of her, Hands had started reading his menu. Disgusted, she
plopped down in the chair, but remembered her act and sat erect with
her ankles crossed and her hands on her lap, one over the other. She
looked around the table. No one was paying any attention to her, although she kept getting furtive looks from other tables. She lifted one
hand and demurely looked at her menu, turning a page with a delicate
flip.
John leaned over and whispered, “Look at these prices, will you?
They range from fifteen to thirty-three cents, and that’s for steak and
potatoes.”
When he looked back at his menu, she unobtrusively held hers over
the edge of the table and let it fall. “Oh, clumsy me,” she exclaimed,
putting her hand over her cleavage.

204

R.J. Rummel

“Yes. Clumsy,” John said.
On the other side of her, Hands seemed to have trouble turning the
page of his menu while hiding his face in it.
Joy leaned over, picked up her menu, and slammed it on the tabletop, almost knocking over her glass of water. Sal looked up and started
to shake his finger at her, but stopped and put his hand in his lap. Dolphy seemed to be interested in a painting on the wall.
When the waiter came to their table, he looked first at Joy for her
order. As she was about to speak, Dolphy whisked the menu away from
his face, waved his hand at the waiter, and ordered beef ribs, extra cut.
Before the waiter could look back at her, Sal ordered corned beef,
Hands put his hand up for the waiter’s attention and ordered roast beef,
and John immediately followed with an order of cold salmon with
mayonnaise sauce.
When the waiter finally was able to look at Joy again, his face had
the look of one intimately violated. She managed to squeak at the
waiter, “I’ll have the same,” and pointed to John. As the waiter nodded
disgustedly and turned to leave, the laughter bubbled out. She had to
shove her plate aside and put her forehead on the table, she was laughing so much. The guys laughed with her. People at the other tables
smiled curiously at them.
Joy had finally realized what was on that folder John had handed
around. He must have told them to ignore her, that she was trying to act
like a woman. When she finally stopped laughing, she waved her hand
at all of them and exclaimed, “Beasts!” She burst into laughter again.
When they were all laughed out, Dolphy spoke up. “You don’t have
to prove you’re a woman, Joy. You’re the most beautiful, nicest woman
I know.”
John raised his water glass. “A toast to womanly Joy.”
They all clicked glasses. Joy put her glass down and shook her finger at each of them. “Thanks, guys. But don’t you forget it, or I’ll break
your arms.”
When the waiter returned to the table to take their orders for dessert, he didn’t know who to look at first. John and the guys waited,
looking at Joy. She ordered an éclair. The three guys ordered apple pie,
and John asked for a pineapple fritter with hard sauce.
When they were finished eating, Joy made to push her chair back
and stand up. The men all sprang to their feet, and John just managed to
beat Hands in pulling out her chair. They walked ahead of her out of
the restaurant, as they should, and John opened her car door for her.
The others tipped their hats while saying, “Good night, ma’am.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

205

When they got back to the apartment, John opened the door for her
and followed her, wearing a huge smile. “You looked stunning tonight,
sweetheart. You never have to prove to me you’re a woman, but I like
it when you show me how much of one you are.”
He proceeded to show her how much he meant it. He was learning
how to undo her shirts.

aaa
It became clear that three guys were more than just trustworthy,
they were loyal friends. Joy and John gathered them together at their
apartment without their girlfriends—a remarkable, perhaps unrepeatable achievement—and John told them, “No more monthly antidotes to
your poison.”
He waited until their shocked expressions turned to fright, then added,
“That’s because the last antidote had no renewal of the poison in it.”
They were beginning to look irritated. John hastened to add, “You
have become so much a part of our company and our life, and have
shown such dedication and honesty in so many ways, that we now
completely trust you all.” Satisfied, he sat back.
The guys looked at Joy—she raised her eyebrow—and back at John
and at each other. Hands grinned, leaned toward John, and said, “You
never gave us poison, did you.”
“Of course they didn’t. You’ve seen how devious they are,” Sal
said, pointing a finger at Joy.
“Yeah,” exclaimed Dolphy, “we should have been giving them poison. I don’t know how we ever trusted them.”
Joy assumed a coquettish expression and put her hand on John’s
shoulder. “Us? Devious? They can’t be serious.”
They all laughed, and the subject never came up again.
As the months went by, John built up their executive staff and
company employees. He worked toward setting up a company office in
London and, thanks to Sal’s help, he actually did incorporate one in
Mexico City. He and Joy also began making business and government
contacts in almost every major Big Power in the world. It was hard
work. It was slow work. It was absolutely necessary work.
In a corner of their converted warehouse they’d had their builders
put in a gym. They would drive to the warehouse at dawn, jog around
the adjacent streets, do their weights, and practice their karate and judo.
Jogging was unknown in this age. Twice a policeman on this beat

206

R.J. Rummel

stopped them to ask why they were running. Thereafter, he just looked
at them as though they were crazy when he saw them jogging.
With some special exceptions, they now never went unarmed. They
always jogged in long pants and sweatshirts to hide their armor. Joy
carried her throwing knife, and John his small 40 caliber S&W doubleaction. The smell that accumulated on the armor from their sweat became a problem. They were never quite able to remove it with washing.
But no one noticed. So few people in this era bathed regularly that everyone stunk, and after a while their noses became inured to the smell.
They had purchased twenty-five acres for a weapons range and test
facility where Joy could ensure she stayed ready to use the various
weapons the Society had sent them—sniper rifles, nighttime vision
scopes, and laser targeting rifles—while she continued to train John in
their use. She deemed this so important that she was willing to endure
the drive on country roads to get there twice a week.
Most of their fights occurred during practice. Having been a
teacher, he seemed to view Joy’s teaching methods with an air of superiority. Joy thought he resented being taught by a mere woman. She
certainly resented his attitude.
When she got exasperated over his clumsy use of a tactical knife,
she observed, “You couldn’t survive a fight against a little girl with a
pen knife.”
“And you couldn’t teach a dog to sit,” he retorted. He threw the
knife at the target in anger, and nicked its edge two feet from the bull’seye.
“You missed it, of course,” she pointed out. He stomped off and
pouted for the rest of the day.
But in spite of his attitude, he did learn very well. A testament to my
teaching, Joy thought.

Chapter 16
Jy-ying

J

y-ying’s brow furrowed. She tightened her lips and again looked at
the list the Anderson Detective Agency had sent her, containing
the names of those companies recently set up and very successful.
A second list included those local speculators and investors who were
also very successful on the stock market. The agency was still investigating those who had been making very successful bets on races and
sports teams. She had correlated the business list with that of successful
stock speculators, and checked off the names of those who had been
doing very well at both.
“This is another good possibility,” she said to herself. She’d been
going down her list for weeks, visiting each company and trying to determine if their products were at all related to a possible time traveler’s
project, whatever that was. Next, using one guise or another, she met
and talked to the person in question. She had eight more likely possibilities to check out.
She didn’t have to drive to this one. She walked from her warehouse down De Haro to Mariposa, two streets uphill west, and found
the Tor Company on Potrero Hill near the intersection with Kansas
Street. It was a two-story building taking up a third of a block. Its display windows contained a Persian rug, a Chinese ivory carving of a
dragon, a Chinese vase painted with a traditional landscape, a French
medieval suit of armor, a German walnut cuckoo clock, a Japanese
samurai sword, and English crystals. Through the window she could
see a variety of large and small imports pleasantly arranged around the
showroom. The aisles between the displays were wide and dotted with
potted rubber trees and bamboo. Somebody had tried to make the display floor attractive to buyers.
There was a two-door castle entrance, with a huge false knocker.
Above it was the name Tor Import & Export Co. and the hours open:
9:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m., Mon.–Tues.; Thur.–Fri. Or by appointment.”
She ambled past the doors and stopped at the next corner under a
eucalyptus tree to recheck the notes that the Anderson Agency had

R.J. Rummel

208

added to her lists. Owner John Banks; single, Caucasian; nationality
unknown; age: 27; business started in 1906, worth approximately
$232,000, small offices in London and Mexico City, employs 113 people. She next looked at statistics for Banks on her stock list: Stock
speculation initiated in December 1906 with a purchase worth
$1,397,000 in shares of four companies; current portfolio valued at
approximately $5,000,000, or almost 258 percent profit. His ratio of
gains to losses is now about 3:1.
Oh Sabah, what a portfolio. Big operator, she thought. But she reminded herself that these statistics could apply to many who had
profited from the 1906 earthquake and fire, or moved here afterward.
There was much profit to be made, although Banks was probably a big
exception. Time would tell—some portfolios did very well for a while
and then went bust; some had special insider’s information.
The one kind of information she needed badly she didn’t have. She
did not know when the time traveler arrived and to what date the message had been sent from that institute in Santa Barbara
Time to look-see.
She strode back to the storefront and entered, tripping a bell above
the door.

aaa
Joy
When Joy and John found out that Sal had a girlfriend, rather than a
passing fancy, they stopped Sal at the front entrance to the apartments
and asked him if it was true.
He smiled and said, “Yes, of course.”
They had to meet her. John asked him to bring her to a little party
they would arrange at John’s apartment. They set a date, and Joy and
John rushed off to an appointment.
But Joy was too curious to wait. Several days before the party, she
took an eighteenth-century Mexican shawl to Sal’s office, ostensibly to
ask him some questions about it, and just happened to ask, “Who is
your girlfriend?”
He replied nonchalantly, “Her name is Jy-ying Khoo. She’s a local
Chinese girl.”
“Oh,” Joy replied. “Moving up, eh?”
Joy couldn’t help it. She had to point out, “If she is Chinese, her
surname, Khoo, goes before her personal name, Jy-ying. That’s true

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

209

also for—” She clamped her mouth shut, feeling a little embarrassed.
Damn. I’m beginning to lecture like John. I must be picking it up by
osmosis.
Sal ignored her, and started in immediately on what he seemed to
think would interest and impress Joy most. “Her father is Liu-chin
Kim—
“Kim Kiu-chin,” Joy corrected.
“—and he taught, ahh, something sing shun—”
“Wing chun?” Joy asked.
“Yeah, that’s it.”
“That’s a form of kung fu very popular in Hong Kong. It’s a
woman’s martial art, with the emphasis on overcoming brute strength
through timing, positioning, anticipation, and strategy. Its origin is in
the Shaolin temple and it was devised by five Grand Masters. When the
Manchus burned the temple, the Grand Master nun, Ng Mui, escaped.
Afterward, she taught the art to an orphan girl named Wing Chun, who
in turn taught it to her husband, thus beginning the long line of Wing
Chun Masters. The style is—”
“Can I continue, Joy?”
Joy felt her face heat up. “Sorry.”
“Her father taught her that in his home, starting when she was two
years old.”
“Really,” Joy exclaimed.
He grinned, then resumed. “Her mother had been killed in a gang
rape during Oakland’s anti-Chinese riots of the 1880s.”
“I’m sorry to hear that.”
“Her father never got over her death and never remarried. Jy-ying
told me that he insisted she learn to protect herself.”
“I’ll be darned,” Joy told Sal, startling him. “You know, it sounds
like my own life. Because of my mom’s horrible experiences in Cambodia, especially the murder of her husband, she wanted me to learn
martial arts from the earliest age.”
Sal was silent, apparently waiting to see if she had more to say, but
Joy now had full control over her mouth.
“She visited our company showroom looking for an imported statue
of Yuh Niuy,” he said. “Do you know who she is?” Sal looked like he
hoped she would say no.
“Of course,” Joy responded, a little maliciously. “She’s the famous
Chinese woman sword fighter who, under the king of the Zhou, was the
final victor in a seven day contest involving one thousand swordsmen
and—” She covered her mouth with her hand.

210

R.J. Rummel

Sal seemed disappointed that she knew. “She is Jy-ying’s idol.” He
stopped and looked at her, waiting.
Joy prodded, “She was in the showroom?”
Yeah.” He turned back to the Spanish list of potential Mexican exports he’d been scanning.
John has been teaching him tricks, Joy realized. “Sal!”
Sal looked up, brows raised, then resumed. “Well, Joy, it was my
lucky day. I happened to be passing through the showroom and saw
this Chinese woman looking at some statues. At a distance, I thought it
was you. You know, even up close you two look alike.” He stopped,
but Joy impatiently waved him on.
“Anyway, Jy-ying was clearly someone special and I couldn’t just
let an ordinary salesman deal with her. It’s a matter of what’s good for
the company.”
“Naturally,” Joy responded dryly.
“So I told the salesman to take a coffee break and offered Jy-ying
my help. She had just come from her win chin practice.”
“It’s wing chun, Sal. How was she dressed?”
“Dressed? I don’t know.”
Damn, Joy thought, Men are so frustrating. They can describe an
automobile down to the number of seconds it takes to reach sixty miles
per hour, but they can’t describe what a person wore. What do they
look at, anyway? She knew the answer to that.
She had to ask Sal detailed questions to finally get some idea of
what she looked like, aside from “like you” and “what a galón gortious—gorgeous gal.” It was like a cross examination during a court
trial. But she did finally find out that Jy-ying wore baggy blue slacks
with a pink shirt that hung down to her hips. She’d also had her long
hair in a ponytail, as Joy often did, which probably enhanced their resemblance. When she found out that Jy-ying’s parents had come from
Canton, Joy was sure she had inherited from them the soft, slanted almond eyes, natural beauty, and flawless complexion of southern
Chinese women. Joy believed one or both of her parents had come from
southern China as well. Jy-ying was twenty-six years old, and about
five and a half feet tall.
My age, Joy thought. But I’m two inches taller.
To get that, Sal had asked Joy to stand next to him, and said, “She
comes up to about here. She’s slender, but she has all the right bumps,”
he added. “She walks like she’s boss—like you do,” and he demonstrated by swinging his arms and strutting around his office, head held
high.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

211

After Joy got all that out of Sal, she prodded him to continue describing their first meeting.
“After finding out what she was looking for in our showroom, I offered to make the statue a special order from our contacts in Shanghai.”
With her usual subtlety, Joy asked, “How did you make your
move?”
He looked at her and smirked. “Move? You mean, ask her out? I
used you.”
“Me?”
“I told her, ‘We have a Chinese woman working for our company—”
“Sino-Vietnamese,” Joy corrected.
“—and I asked, ‘Do you know her?’ She answered, ‘No, I’ve never
met her,’ and I saw my chance. You understand, I didn’t at the time
know about her training in wing son—”
Joy held up her finger. “Wing chun. Chun, Sal.”
“—but I couldn’t have got her more interested. I said, ‘Her name is
Joy Phim and she has black belts in judo and karate.’ Jy-ying almost
dropped the stature she was holding. She jerked her head around to
look at me directly, and with big eyes, just like yours are now, she
asked, ‘She is? Who trained her? Why did she do this? What degree is
she? What does she do for your company?’”
He looked smug. “What a great line. Think I’ll pass it on to Hands
and Dolphy. The rest was easy.”
“Don’t tell me,” Joy exclaimed. “You said something like, ‘Why
don’t you join me for dinner and I’ll tell you all about her.’ Yes?”
Sal laughed. “You know, Joy, I thought she would be useful to the
company, but I had to know her better to be sure. So we had dinner and
I answered a million questions about you.” He hastened to add, “But
nothing personal.”
“I’m glad to hear that your mind wasn’t totally blasted.”
Sal ignored her. “I found out that she had graduated from the California Institute of Technology. She told me she speaks Chinese. Her
father would only speak that at home.
“She also questioned me about our boss, about our business, and
whether we had run into any difficulty because of you being Chinese—”
“Sino-Vietnamese, Sal.”
“I told her what happened to us and what you and John did. With
my help, of course.” Sal paused. “She told me she may have seen you
and John being attacked by punks with bats.”

212

R.J. Rummel

Joy opened her eyes wide. “So that’s who it was! We saw her
watching us, but she disappeared before we could talk to her. Now I
understand why she had prepared herself for combat. She would have
helped us, if needed.”
Sal looked at Joy diffidently. “She was looking for a job.”
Joy noted the past tense. “Sal, you didn’t.”
“Yes, I hired her for the company, to work under me.”
Joy chose to let that opportunity pass. But, knowing Sal, Joy knew
what she said next was a slam-dunk. “You hired her as your assistant
and translator.”
Sal looked surprised. “How did you know?”
“Woman’s intuition,” was all Joy could say before laughing. She
had not known about his hiring Jy-ying. Sal was a vice president of
their company, after all, and was free to hire whom he pleased.

aaa
At the scheduled time a week later, Joy answered a knock at John’s
apartment door and saw standing alone on the threshold a beautiful
Chinese woman.
“Hello,” the woman said with a lovely smile, and her almond eyes
sparkled. She looked very familiar. But not seeing Sal, Joy thought the
woman had the wrong apartment. Then the woman said in Chinese,
“You must be Joy. I’m Jy-ying. I’m very happy to finally meet you.”
Startled, Joy took a second look, and was suddenly tongue-tied. No
wonder she’s familiar—she does look like me. Almost. Somewhat different. But so close. She could be my clone—impossible, but there she
is. Sal’s girlfriend. Some God must be messing with the probabilities.
Sal stuck his head around the doorjamb and looked at Joy with a
smirk. “Judo Joy, meet wun son—”
“Wing chun,” Jy-ying interrupted.
“—Jy-ying,” Sal continued. “Well Joy, you’ve met your match.”
Jy-ying backed up and kicked him in the behind. She smiled at Joy
and asked in English, “Is he always like this?”
Joy grinned knowingly. They came in and Sal introduced her to
John, and Hands and Dolphy and their girlfriends.
The party went well. Jy-ying got along well with all of them.
“I think Sal has a winner,” John said to Joy after the party.
She gave him her most innocent smile. “Of course. She’s Chinese
and looks like me.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

213

“You’re Sino-Vietnamese,” John reminded her, and hit her with one
of their beat-up pillows.
Over the following weeks, Joy got together with Jy-ying several
times to see what kind of person she was. “After all,” Joy informed
John, “I do have a responsibility to our company, for which Jy-ying is
now working. And Sal is our friend as well as our vice president. It’s
only my duty to see if she is right for him.”
“Of course,” John said, nodding, lips pursed.
Eventually she asked Jy-ying, “Would you like to practice your
wing chun with me? I know little about that form of kung fu, and
would love to learn it from you.”
Jy-ying responded, “I am impressed that you know it is a form of
kung fu. Actually, my style is mostly yip man, with some techniques
from the soft, internal form of kung fu. I would love to spar with you,
but I would be embarrassed at how little I know about judo and karate.
Could you teach me some of your moves?”
That little dance over, Joy mentioned, “Well, there are certain standard moves in all Asian martial arts, and the human body has only a
certain range of motions all experts come to learn, as one does to walk.
But also, each of the martial arts has certain moves meant to exploit the
weaknesses of competing schools. I look forward to seeing what those
are for wing chun.”
Jy-ying nodded. “I’m so ignorant of the martial arts. I hope you will
teach me.”
Dumb me, Joy later mused. I should have realized that was typical
Chinese understatement. Like the stars are a humble distance from the
earth.
Joy scheduled their first practice—really a subtle challenge—at
their private gym. She didn’t tell John or the guys about this meeting—
she didn’t want to embarrass Jy-ying. Her first thought after their sparring was Ha! Her second was Ha! And so was her third.
That evening, tired, bruised, muscles strained, Joy had to make an
unhappy confession to John—she didn’t want Sal to blab it to him first.
“Jy-ying and I had a martial arts practice session this afternoon.”
Anticipating her kind description of how easy it was, John asked,
“You were merciful, weren’t you?”
She replied with some passion, “She’s strong. Damn strong. She
made moves I didn’t anticipate, and had a speed and agility that I could
only match, not overcome. Our first practice session lasted two hours,
and I was exhausted at the end.”

R.J. Rummel

214

John looked awed.
She ignored his look. “I tried to go easy on her at first, but it was
clear after a few minutes that she was my match.”
“Did I hear you correctly? She was your match?”
“This was not a standoff, love. We each were able to penetrate and
take down the other. Had we been serious, we could have killed each
other. For Jy-ying and me, the only problem was lack of training in
each other’s moves.”
“This other woman is like you in ways other than looks? Is she a
clone? I’ve got to change my whole conception of the universe.” John
shook his head in mock despair. “It won’t be the same from now on.”
“Smart ass,” Joy retorted. “If you can rein in your stupid humor, I’ll
go on.” She gave John her you’re-lower-than-a-worm look. “When we
left each other, we agreed to meet regularly for practice and training.
She also agreed to train Sal, and I said I would most certainly pass on
to you what I was learning from her.”
“I don’t know,” John said. “Maybe I should learn directly from her,
rather than second-hand from someone just learning the moves.”
“Bastard. You just want an excuse to touch her breasts.” Joy didn’t
have a pillow handy, but she gave his shoulder a tired whack.

aaa
Jy-ying
Jy-ying was satisfied. Her suspicion had grown as she closely
watched John and Joy. Their behavior toward each other and in general
did not fit into this age. They were too relaxed, too open, too informal.
And from the point of view of this time, their etiquette was atrocious.
She smiled. As is mine.
They were certainly lovers, as Sal said. But she had not had to be a
spy to know that.
She’d gathered all the evidence she needed from Joy and John’s offices, and added to it what she’d uncovered in their separate apartments
while they were at work. They were sloppy about writing things down,
keeping duplicates in their office files, and letting important secrets lie
around their apartment. It was as though they thought they were protected by a force field, and were immune to prying eyes.
She closed the file cabinet in John’s office and held her penlight on
it as she checked to make sure she’d left no marks on the cabinet. She

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

215

locked it with her lock pick. Clearly, he had not expected anyone to seriously search through his files, and had only locked the cabinet to keep
out the mildly curious in the office, such as their secretary.
Jy-ying would return at another time and scan the important documents into her laptop, but that was only so she could make use of them
herself—especially the chronology of future events that John had
locked in his office file. She wanted to compare that with her own.
John’s printout of daily stock transactions published in the Wall Street
Journal would also be useful.
She slipped out of John’s office and locked the door with her pick.
She slowly opened the company’s front door, checked for the policemen on patrol, and closed the door behind her and locked it as well.
She walked around the corner to her Rolls, where Little Wei was
watching out the window for her. She opened the door, let him lick her
face and, with a grin and chuckle, gently pushed him into the passenger
seat so she could get in. She hadn’t been this happy since leaving
China.
She purposely left her mind blank as she drove. Now was not the
time for thinking of something this special.
When she got to the apartment building she’d recently moved into,
she walked Little Wei to a grassy area nearby to pee, then took him upstairs to her second floor apartment, fed and watered him, filled her
teapot with the pu-erh tea leaves she recently bought in Chinatown, and
put it on her Acme gas range to heat. While she waited, she sat in the
bathtub and bathed herself by dumping a pot of hot water from the faucet over herself, soaping, and pouring more hot water over herself
several times. She could not understand why Westerners bathed while
sitting in their own dirty water. She hated the thought of it. Little Wei
stood up with his front paws on the bathtub’s rim and watched her as
usual, and she splashed him, just for fun.
By the time she finished, her teapot was boiling. She let the tea
steep while she got out her prayer rug, and stood, then prostrated herself eastward toward Mecca. She thanked God and Sabah for her
success. Her eyes were wet at the end. Saving Sabah’s life was now a
certainty. Shu Kuo would be happy. Imam Ch’en would praise her to
God. She would live in the history of Islam as one of their greatest
heroines. But no one would know. Not even those who sent her—this
was now a different universe.
She was ready to think about how to make her mission a success.
She threw a blanket over her shoulder, poured her hot tea, and went out

216

R.J. Rummel

to her apartment’s balcony, with Little Wei following. She settled into
her ship’s deck chair, set her tea on the wrought iron table next to it,
and covered herself with the blanket. Little Wei jumped into her lap.
She gently stroked his long white fur, and sighed. The world was
perfect. The sky was almost cloudless and a three-quarter moon reflected off San Francisco Bay, its light joining the many scintillating
lights from Treasure Island and Yerba Buena Island and Oakland
across the Bay. At this late hour there were few boats or ships on the
water, although she could see the navigation lights and the wake of one
small ship. The air was cool, almost cold, and a sky full of sparkling
stars shone down on her
She sipped her tea and put her head back against the pillows. “I
have them,” she told Little Wei. “I know what they are doing here.
Breaking into their apartment was easy. They obviously have no security background, no fear of spies. They are novices at this.
“Now, what to do with them? It is still years before they will attempt to kill Sabah or his parents. Their mission seems to be ending
war and what they call democide. They only altered that to include Sabah after receiving that message from the institute in Santa Barbara.”
She pondered what to do. “I could kill them tomorrow, but is this
the best course? Is it what I want?”
Happy with the attention he was getting, Little Wei put his paws on
her chest and licked her nose. Her eyes slitted with pleasure, and she
kissed him on his nose. She held him back from her face with two
hands and told him, “Sabah succeeded because they succeeded. They
did help create a world of democracies, and almost eliminated war. But
. . . ” she smiled broadly, “in doing this, they created a world whose
democracies lost all incentive to maintain military forces or intelligence
services. Joy and John thus made Sabah’s Great Victory possible.”
This almost derailed her thoughts for a moment, for again it brought
to her mind the horrible global catastrophe, the billions killed in seconds, to assure this Great Victory. With a sigh, she laid Little Wei on
her lap and held him there. She almost had resigned from Security
when that occurred; she almost gave up Sabahism. But she had talked
to the Imam of her mosque, a long-time friend, and he had convinced
her that this was God’s way, that Sabah, as His Prophet, had thus prepared the way for God’s universal triumph.
“Let me put it this way,” he told her. “Just think of the billions and
billions of heathens and infidels that will now live under Sabah. Islam
will now be the only world religion, and the sin of godlessness and as-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

217

sociated corruptions are ended. Peace, freedom under God, and the
good and proper life will now reign.”
She had been convinced, but she hated what had been done. With a
shake of her head that startled Little Wei, she jerked her attention back
to Joy and John.
Her tea was cold, but she finished it anyway while he looked at her
curiously, head tilted, ears up. She gave him a little smile. “Well, little
one, if I kill Joy and John, I destroy their mission, and the world their
documents say existed in what they call the Old Universe may continue
to exist, with its wars and far fewer democracies. Thus, Sabah’s success
in Uighuristan or China may not happen. And his Great Victory may
not be possible.”
She scratched Little Wei’s stomach. “If I kill them, I won’t be able
to duplicate their results. I don’t have John’s knowledge of history to
know exactly what to do to create what they call the New Universe, and
I would be only one person—a Chinese woman—trying to transform
the politics of Europe to avoid war. I have to keep them alive and let
them do whatever they can before I have to kill them.”
She decided she would also learn from John as much as she could
about his planned interventions. She liked that. He was a man she
wanted to know better. Much better.
“That means I should join them,” Jy-ying concluded, and added
thoughtfully, “Maybe I can keep John alive and replace Joy. And manipulate him to save Sabah. What do you think, little boy?”
Little Wei was asleep on her lap and she soon joined him, but not
before making plans.

Chapter 17
Jy-ying

I

n the women’s room at the company, Jy-ying took the pins out
of her coal black hair and let it fall naturally to her waist, and
brushed it, paying particular attention to her bangs. She opened
her small suitcase and changed into a white silk lady’s shirt, tight at
the neck with pick-lace ruffles on the sleeves and down the front.
She tucked that into her burgundy German linen skirt, with its little
built-in bustle and a pink flounce around her ankles. She took out a
mild Chinese perfume and applied it sparingly to her neck, with just
a touch on her forehead. She also applied a smidgen of rouge—a
cosmetic just becoming acceptable—to her cheeks. After surveying
herself in the mirror, she headed for John’s office with Little Wei
trotting behind her.
John’s secretary was momentarily away from her desk. Jy-ying
knocked on John’s office door, opened it, and stuck her head inside in
such a way that her hair fell around her face like a black waterfall. “Can
I see you?” she asked. “It’s important.”
John didn’t look up. “Why are you asking, Joy?” he said. When she
didn’t move, he looked up, eyes still unfocused, and said, “What are
you waiting for, baby?”
With a smile in her voice, Jy-ying responded, “Is that a promotion?”
John jumped, focused on her face, reddened, and stuttered, “I’m
sorry . . . Jy-Jy-ying. You look so much like Joy, and your voice sounds
like hers, that I—”
Jy-ying stepped in with Little Wei on her heels, and held up her
hand. “I just wanted to say that I broke up with Sal. He is a very nice
man, was very considerate of me, but I’m sorry to say, I slowly realized
our personalities are too different. I like working for your company, but
I can’t work under Sal because of our breakup, and I told him so. Is
there something I can do for you?” Her smile would have electrified a
small town.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

219

“Sure, “ John replied, a little hastily, Jy-ying was pleased to note.
“Joy is not only my assistant and translator—” he smiled at that “—
she’s also in charge of our China operations. Would you like to work
under her?”
Right now, under you would be better. Aloud she said, “It would be
an honor.”
“Fine, I’ll check with her and let you know tomorrow morning.”
“Ahh, that brings up something else. I’d like to talk to you and Joy
about something very important. Can I see you both this evening at
your apartment?”
“Can’t we discuss it here?”
“No, I need the privacy of your apartment.”
“Okay, join Joy and me for dinner at 6:30.”
Jy-ying picked up Little Wei and nodded. “Thank you for the invitation. I will see you then.”
As she closed the door behind her, she glanced back and caught him
wiping his forehead. Get used to it, my man, she thought.

aaa
Joy
John entered Joy’s office and, rather than saying whatever he’d intended to say and leaving as he usually did, he dropped down in her
stiff-backed chair. Looking as though he had lost a big bet, he told her,
“Sal and Jy-ying have broken up.”
Joy pursed her lips and rubbed her cheek with her hand. “Too bad.
I was hoping that Sal had finally found someone. But I didn’t think
they suited each other. She is too strong for Sal and. . . . ” She tried to
put her finger on it, but couldn’t. “I have an odd feeling about her, aside
from her being my double. I sense a kind of otherworldliness . . . you
know?”
The image of Jy-ying in the alley when they were attacked continued to bother Joy. She’d been wearing panties—panties, not bloomers
or some other ugly underwear of this age.
John hesitated, as though reluctant to say something. Finally he
pointed out, “Well, you have to admit that Sal had fallen for you from
the beginning. I think he saw you as a tough guy’s mole. Since Jy-ying
looked like you, and was into martial arts, he fell for her. He’ll get over
it when he meets a sweet, wholesome gal.”

220

R.J. Rummel

John paused again while Joy mused over that. Then he said, “I
thought Jy-ying could now work for you. She certainly can’t work with
Sal anymore, and she told him that.”
“Since she speaks idiomatic Mandarin, I can find more than enough
for her to do. Good idea.” She smiled broadly. “Maybe I’ll make her
my assistant and translator.”
Chuckling, he allowed a few seconds to pass before mentioning,
“Jy-ying has something important to say to us in private, so I invited
her to join us for supper tonight.”
Joy was a little annoyed that John had not asked her first, even
though she was interested in hearing what Jy-ying had to say. “John,
ask me before you invite someone to eat with us at home, okay? I have
to prepare the meal, you know.”
After letting a few tactical moments go by, Joy continued. “I hope
she doesn’t mind day-old rice and leftover sausages. I’ll warm that up
while you make the salad.”
John nodded, rose, and left the office with a wave.
What, a nod only? No apology? Joy thought as she watched him
leave. My love, someday you are going to find that I have volunteered
you to attend a social tea.

aaa
John left the company a few hours early, telling Joy that he had
to stop somewhere. The somewhere was Kin Chee Chop Suey at
Powell and Broadway Streets in new Chinatown. So when Joy arrived home, which is what they had started calling John’s apartment,
he simply waved to her from the sofa where he was reading the
newspaper.
She stopped halfway across the room and looked around. He had
straightened the clutter of newspapers, magazines, pillows, and the
other debris of relaxed living. Shaking her head in wonderment, she
went to their bedroom and changed into her favorite house clothes,
Levi’s jeans and a sweatshirt.
She was even more amazed when she entered the kitchen to prepare
dinner. It also had been cleaned, and dishes left in the sink from breakfast were washed, dried, and put away. On the counter were three
serving plates heaped with rice, stuffed chicken wings, shrimp fu
young, and vegetables. On a cutting board were slices of fresh sourdough bread.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

221

She turned around and almost bumped into John. He was smirking.
She reached up and brushed his cheeks with her lips, then gave him
a little peck. “You’re forgiven.”
“Is that all I get?”
“Later.”
When Jy-ying arrived with Little Wei, she was dressed to look no
less feminine than when she had visited John in his office. She had
pulled her hair back into a ponytail secured with a pink ribbon, tied into
a bow. She wore a narrow black ribbon around her neck, a taffeteen silk
shirt with full hanging sleeves, and a tan German linen skirt that perfectly matched her light olive skin. Her face was freshly-washed and
bright. No makeup; no perfume.
She had dressed Little Wei in a shiny black collar, and he greeted
Joy and John with jumps, waving paws, and a doggie grin, as though he
had not seen them for weeks.
She is beautiful, Joy thought when she saw Jy-ying come in. She
felt shabby herself. Just before Jy-ying arrived, Joy had changed into
her standard, all-wool, cheviot serge work dress for dinner.
During the meal they chatted about China, the instability of the
Manchu Dynasty, and the gathering strength of prodemocratic forces.
Jy-ying had brought it up and initially carried the conversation. Joy was
wary of getting into it. Although they had continued to spar together
two or three times a month, Joy had avoided any serious discussion of
the political situation in China as they were showering and changing
afterward—she never saw Jy-ying wearing panties again—or during
their frequent meetings with the others. She had found that many overseas Chinese felt strongly one way or another, and with some it was
like talking about their religion.
After they finished eating and Jy-ying gave Little Wei a tidbit from
her plate, they all cleaned off the table. John went into the kitchen,
opened a cupboard, and brought out a Black Forest cake he had bought
at Erik’s German Bakery.
Joy looked at the cake, and at Jy-ying, and at John. “John! Such a dessert with Chinese food. Only a light dessert, such as a small custard or fruit
of some kind, which I have waiting in the icebox, is appropriate.”
John stuck his chin out. “We are not in China. We are in the United
States of America. We are in San Francisco. We are in my home. This
is what I serve. Enjoy.”
He cut the cake accompanied by oohs and aahs from Jy-ying and
Joy, and gave them each a generous piece. He filled three glasses with
chilled milk and handed the glasses around.

222

R.J. Rummel

John sat down, raised his milk glass, and looked at Jy-ying. “A little
toast to your happiness. I know it didn’t work out between you and Sal,
but it’s best that you discovered it now. Anyway, we think no less of
you, and hope that you will be happy working for us over the years.”
They continued to talk about China while eating their dessert. When
they all were finished, Jy-ying looked and Joy and said quietly, “I have
something to tell you that is most serious and most dangerous to me.”
She pushed back from the table, bent over, and reached under her
skirt. When she straightened up, she held a Chinese woman’s traditional six-inch throwing knife in her hand.
Joy was unarmed and wore no armor. In the time it took her to
gasp, she got into as ready a stance as she could while sitting. She
loosely balled her hands on her lap, knuckles up, and automatically arranged her feet under her chair so her upper body tipped slightly
forward over her center of gravity. She was ready to jump defensively
in any direction and immediately attack. She focused her gaze like a
laser on Jy-ying’s eyes. They would tell the intended future of that
knife.
Jy-ying held it loosely in two fingers, slowly placed it in the center
of the table, and rotated the point toward herself.
Joy did not relax. She did not divert her attention to John. There
was not a thought in her head. She was now in a zone, honed and directed by her training. Nothing existed at this moment but Jy-ying’s
eyes.
Likewise keeping her eyes on Joy, Jy-ying even more slowly
reached into her purse, which was hanging from the back of her dining
chair, and extracted with two fingers on the lower grip, as far as possible from the trigger, a Chinese copy of the Browning 9 mm seven shot
1903 pistol.
Joy’s peripheral vision knew what it was; she knew it was pointed
down. She hadn’t moved. Her eyes bored into Jy-ying’s.
Jy-ying carefully placed the pistol alongside her knife, grip toward
Joy.
Jy-ying pushed her chair back a little farther, the scraping sound
almost explosive in the deadly silence, and patted her lap. Little Wei
jumped into it. She cuddled him close to her with one hand, and put the
other one on the table palm-up. “Now for the truth,” she said tonelessly.
“I was a secret agent. I spied on you.”
Shit, shit, Joy thought. For a moment she felt like she’d been hit by
a giant hand and knocked into a black hole, but she immediately recovered her calm and concentration.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

223

Jy-ying’s voice was level and direct, her face intent as she continued. “My real parents were both members of the Imperial Security
Guard, and were Imperial spies in their youth. It was they who began
my training in wing chun and all the arts of spying. They wanted me to
be a spy, like them. While on a mission to Chunking during the Boxer
Rebellion, they were killed by rebels.” Her eyes flickered and her lower
lip trembled for just a moment.
“The Security Guard continued my training. Before the dynasty collapsed, the Guard was reformed as part of the Chinese Security
Ministry. My training didn’t stop. When I was old enough, I was sent
here to attend an American university to perfect my English and gain
knowledge of American customs. I was to return to China and spy on
the American diplomatic officials there and, if possible, become the
concubine of the American ambassador, or some other high American
official.”
“I thought—” John started to hiss, but Jy-ying held up her hand.
John didn’t try to hide his feelings. He looked outraged.
“One year ago, my control, who acted as my father, was sent special orders to spy on your company. Your activity in China, particularly
your contacts in Peking and Shanghai, had raised suspicion. And so . .
.” She hesitated, leaned over and kissed Little Wei between the ears.
“On the luckiest day of my life, I went to your showroom and eventually met both of you.”
Jy-ying choked up and wiped her eyes with her napkin.
Joy had not moved a muscle from her ready position.
Seeming to regain control of her voice and her tears, Jy-ying continued. “I got to know both of you—particularly Joy, through our
sparring. I had been trained to listen to what people say and watch what
they do, but also what they do not say and do not do. You may not believe, Joy and John, how easy it was for me to see that you were not
what you portray. You were either foreigners from a country I did not
know, or you were not of this world.
“I soon saw how you were armed, and I looked carefully at your
disguised armor. While Joy was showering one day after our sparring, I
was able to shave off—with great difficulty—a small piece from the
edge of her armor. I sent it to a lab at Caltech. After testing it, they informed me that it is made of no known material and is incredibly
strong.
“Also, there is Joy’s training in the martial arts. No woman of this time
who is not a secret agent for some powerful country would have had her
training, and I found out she has received training in weapons, as well.”

224

R.J. Rummel

She looked at Joy with her black eyes wide and frank, black eyebrows
slightly raised, chin up. And she said with certainty, “Joy, you and John
had to have come here from the future, for some secret purpose. I could
not believe this at first. It was impossible. But I verified it.”
That was the only thing that could have destroyed Joy’s concentration. She gasped, even louder than John. Incredible! exploded through
Joy’s mind. Incredible. She knows. How could she?
“As a member of your company, I gained access to otherwise confidential information about your incredible wealth and your great
success on the stock market. Almost everything I looked at screamed at
me that you could not be of this time. I also checked into all your trips
and contacts—an easy job of prying. You two do not really know how
to hide secrets. But then, you were never trained to be spies, and never
expected to have a spy like me around.”
Hearing a noise outside, Little Wei jumped off of Jy-ying’s lap and
ran to the low living room window to look out. Jy-ying resettled herself
and put both hands on the table before continuing. “I also asked some
subtle questions of Sal and others, and I found the key to your activity.
It concerned war or democracy, democracy or war. I found out that you
wanted to end war and spread democracy. And Joy gave me the connection. In response to my leading questions, she told me the key—
democracies are the most peaceful societies; they don’t make war on
each other, and their leaders do not murder their own citizens. You are
here to create a more peaceful universe, a more democratic one.”
Her eyes probed Joy’s. What she read there sent a flicker of fear
through her own. She looked away and called Little Wei to her, and
when he returned to her lap, she pulled him close with one hand and
sighed. “I want to help you, if you will let me. You see, Boxer rebels
murdered my parents. I have seen what happens in war. I will not give
you the gory details, but I have seen more bodies and bodiless heads
than both of you can imagine. I love my country and want my people to
be free and at peace.”
She now clasped her hands on the table. “Once I saw that I must
join your mission, I next did two things. I sent an official message to
the head of my Security Ministry, Fong Chao-yang, who was a friend
of my parents and had personally been involved in my training. I knew
he trusted me as a daughter. I told him that I could find nothing about
your company that was dangerous or a threat to China. This actually is
true, isn’t it? I also told him that I was resigning. And that I had fallen
in love with an American. Not quite true, but an adequate justification.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

225

This fits in with the Chinese conception of women being flighty and
easily corrupted by love. He sent me a beautiful pure ivory statute of
Yuh Niuy, the famous swordswoman. Inscribed on its pedestal were the
words, in Chinese, She Lives Again.
“My control is an old man, and ready to retire. Although his being
my father was a cover story, I think he took it seriously and really was
glad that I resigned and that I found love and happiness. He was very
happy playing my father. Anyway, he left for China three days ago, and
left me a goodbye present.”
She bent down over Little Wei, who had fallen asleep, and reached
into a bag she had brought with her.
Joy remained absolutely still, alert, and ready.
Aware of this, Jy-ying carefully pulled out a package and placed it
on the table. She opened it and took out a beautiful jewelry box carved
out of a solid block of jade, with two small compartments and three little drawers. Its craftsmanship was impressive. A note in a man’s
handwriting said This was my mother’s, and then my daughter’s until
she died, and now it is yours. I wish you happiness and a long life.
Jy-ying sat back in her chair, a relieved expression on her face, and
looked at John for a few seconds, then Joy. She put one hand back on
Little Wei and slowly caressed his body as though for assurance that he
was still there.
Joy felt as though she had not taken a breath for many minutes. She
didn’t know what to say. She finally let her breath out, acknowledging
the awful decision she now had to make.
There was no sound from outside or in the nearby apartments. No
clock ticked. Little Wei was still. John didn’t even tap his fingers. The
silence was absolute, as just before a great storm.
As it grew uncomfortable, John asked Jy-ying in a hostile whisper,
“You were a secret agent spying on us for China?”
“I was.”
“And you are no longer an agent?”
“I resigned.”
“So, you are no longer spying on us?”
“That is right.”
“And you are a traitor to your own country.”
“In one sense, yes. But in what is best for my people, no.”
“All that you told us before about yourself were lies?”
“All except what I said at dinner. I am a democrat. I support your
mission to promote democracy and end war.”

226

R.J. Rummel

John asked the only real question, now. “Yes, Jy-ying, but why
should we believe you now?”
Joy had to make a decision. Her head was awash with the awful
tension, the dreadful emotional weight of it. She didn’t think John
could do what would be required. Only she could do it. Only the decision waited.
As another silence dragged on, Jy-ying’s look changed from calm
determination to sad resignation. She had read Joy’s eyes well, warrior
to warrior. She looked down at Little Wei as though for the last time.
She looked up into Joy’s eyes, leaned over, and shoved the gun and
knife across the table toward her. She folded her hands on the table.
She glanced at John, then focused on Joy’s eyes again. Carefully articulating each word, as though speaking to the partially deaf, she said, “I
know you two are from the future. I know what you are doing here. I
know what you have done. If I am not trustworthy, you are in great
danger, and you must kill me.”
It was now spoken—the absolute dichotomy that faced Joy’s mind
and heart.
Speaking normally again, Jy-ying continued, “If I report to the Chinese Security Ministry what I know about you both, they will see you
as a potential danger and assassinate you. Not even your armor, Joy and
John, will protect you against a head shot, fire, or a large explosion. “
Yes, Joy told herself, decide. You must decide, Joy. You can’t let
this go on. Not for John’s sake. Not for your own sanity. Make your
decision.
Joy thought she could see sadness in the eyes of this strong woman.
Sadness, acquiescence of what Jy-ying saw in Joy’s eyes, and the steely
resolve to accept it. Jy-ying carefully said it again, as though to clear
away any question about her intent, any guilt over the result: “You
must kill me now, if you have any doubt about me. Your only other
choice is to believe and accept me. There is no middle ground.”
Joy understood she was right. She realized that was what was at
stake from the very moment Jy-ying revealed she was a spy. They both
knew they could not leave this room without a decision being made,
one way or another.
John now seemed stricken speechless. She glanced at him. He
looked paralyzed, his face pale and slightly mottled. She knew that he
thought of picking up the gun and shooting Jy-ying. But she knew he
could never do it. She could. Only the decision stood in the way.
The absolute silence seemed to deepen and turn unreal, as though
the whole world had disappeared and what remained were Joy and Jy-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

227

ying’s eyes. Now, until she made her decision, Joy would not take her
eyes from Jy-ying’s. And she stared back, as though knowing, waiting,
prepared in mind and spirit, almost sure of the result.
Joy’s mind was in a torment, while her body was completely calm,
as before battle. Which way to decide? What is best? What if I decide
one way and I’m wrong? So much at stake, so many lives. I have to decide. NOW!
Sweat glistened on John’s brow. He looked from Jy-ying to Joy,
back and forth as though at an insane tennis match. He seemed to know
the decision was Joy’s, as one warrior to another, and this simple professor was only a spectator.
Joy came out of it. The sensory bubble surrounding her and Jy-ying
collapsed, and Joy prepared mentally to say what she must.
Jy-ying blanched, as though she’d read Joy’s decision.
Jy-ying looked at Joy with sad resignation. Her gaze seemed to turn
inward; Joy thought she must be saying her Buddhist death mantra.
Joy’s mind trembled at the consequence of this—the words would
not come. Her mind could not twist itself around the decision. She
couldn’t breathe.
Someone gasped, loud in the still room.
“No, Jo—”
It was cut off by an explosive thunk near her. She tore her eyes
from Jy-ying to look.
John had taken out his H&K and thrown it on top of Jy-ying’s
weapons.
No matter. Joy knew this had to be her decision. She had her voice
now; she was ready.
John loudly cleared his throat, another explosion in the dead silence
that jerked her attention to him. His face seemed to light up with a
bright-eyed smile, which was more the result of light reflecting off the
sheen of sweat on his face. He waved his hand at Jy-ying and in a voice
she would never forget, said, “Welcome. Welcome aboard. Now we are
a force of three.”
John’s voice broke into Joy’s mind like a battering ram, and sent
her hardened thoughts and firm resolve spinning away in pieces, to be
reformed into a new configuration deep within her. She let out a deep
breath of relief. It was over. What is done is done.
She reached for Jy-ying’s knife in front of her and a sudden, palpable fear shot around the room. John moved as though to make a grab
for it. She turned it around with the grip toward Jy-ying and slowly

R.J. Rummel

228

pushed it toward her. She did the same with the pistol. Then she pushed
her chair back and took a deep breath. She was mentally exhausted and
physically drained. After a moment she stood and stepped around the
table on shaky legs, arms open to Jy-ying.
Jy-ying got up to meet her. Eyebrows knitted together, lips parted,
she peered into Joy’s eyes for the final assurance. Joy was so tired she
could barely smile. But she nodded at Jy-ying. Moist-eyed, Jy-ying
looked at Joy as though a miracle had happened, and then they hugged
each other.
Joy teared up as she stumbled into the kitchen and filled three water
glasses with Sutter red wine from a half-gallon container. She brought
them into the dining room on a tray and passed the glasses around. Still
standing, Joy offered a toast. “Jy-ying, welcome to our team.”
Jy-ying offered her own toast: “To our mission.”
Her gun and knife were still on the table. Jy-ying looked down at
them and then she looked askance at Joy, as though they were in their
own world. She said so softly that perhaps only Joy heard, “You would
have killed me, Joy.” It was a statement, not a question.
If John heard, he gave no attention to it.
That night, emotionally exhausted beyond thought, Joy cried in
John’s arms. She couldn’t believe how close she had come to destroying, if not their partnership, then what she wanted to see of herself.
“Thank you, dearest,” she whispered to him.

aaa
Jy-ying
Lying in bed with Little Wei sleeping on her pillow beside her
head, his paws hanging over her ear, she thought of what she had done.
The ploy had worked, although she felt guilty over so thoroughly betraying their trust in her. She recognized that no matter how godless
and heathen their beliefs, they were good people trying to save mankind. She felt dirty about what she had done. She had bathed herself
and prayed after coming home, trying to cleanse herself of the feeling.
It had been so close, so close. She’d almost killed Joy tonight,
rather than years from now. Jy-ying knew Joy had been just on the edge
of deciding she should die, and she knew how Joy would have done
it—she would have taken her out of John’s sight, maybe into the
kitchen or bathroom, pointed Jy-ying’s pistol at her, handed Jy-ying her
knife, and then politely told her that she would be her second.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

229

Jy-ying managed a smile. She didn’t know that I had my two-shot
spy gun hidden up my sleeve. All I needed to do was reach into my
sleeve, and she would be dead.
She almost couldn’t lose—either she killed Joy, or she became a
member of their team. It worked out well. The risk had been acceptable.
She was now one of their team and could help them spread democracy and end war; she would be privy to all their plans. While working
to convert John, she would know the right moment to kill Joy.
Jy-ying was getting a little uncomfortable and overheated with Little Wei sleeping against her head. But she did not want to wake the
little guy. She pushed the covers off her chest, and raised one hand and
rested it on his head. Just before falling asleep, her final happy thought
was, I could have been an actress. So much talent; so few lives to live.

Chapter 18
Joy
1908

T

hey’d lived in this “primitive time,” as Joy put it, for over a
year. In spite of their dedication and focus on their mission, they
were in a new world, living new lives, adapting to new surroundings and responding to new experiences. Our new lives are like
billiard balls, Joy often mused, careening in radically different directions as one chance event or another hits us.
One event now would be so profound as to knock them off the table—it radically changed their lives, altered their perception of their
mission, and had absolutely unpredictable consequences.
It began when Joy read in the San Francisco Daily News that Mark
Twain would give a speech in the next month at the Gold Theater. He
was one of her favorite authors. She had read his Huckleberry Finn and
especially A Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur’s Court, which transported chief character Hank Morgan back in time to the court of King
Arthur, where he used his knowledge of the future to make changes in
King Arthur’s time. Joy felt a special affinity to Morgan. She was eager
to see and hear this famous author, and so was John.
Joy had stayed home that day to do some programming on her laptop, and waited until Jy-ying came home to ask her to join them for
Twain’s speech. At Joy’s invitation, she had moved into one of their
building’s empty apartments, and now lived above John’s—and
Joy’s—apartment.
“Happy to,” Jy-ying responded to Joy’s invitation to hear Twain
speak. “Little Wei and I will look forward to it.”
Joy looked surprised.
Jy-ying noted it, and pointed out, “I hate to leave him alone for
hours unless absolutely necessary.” She raised her eyebrows. “He is my
protection.”
Joy glanced down at Little Wei, who was sitting at her feet and staring
up at her with his ink-black eyes. His little red tongue was visible at the
edge of his mouth. She looked back to Jy-ying with a smile. “Of course.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

231

At work the next day, before Joy could stop him, John asked the
guys if they would care to come with them to Twain’s speech. They
declined with one lame excuse after another. “They are, after all, young
men with other things to do besides attend what seems a boring speech
by someone they don’t know,” Joy told him.
Mark Twain’s speech was billed as His Majesty Leopold’s Mass
Murder: Terror and Death in the Congo. Daily weather reporting was a
thing of the future and they got caught in a rainstorm and its resulting
traffic pileup on Market Street. No one was waiting in line at the theater when they arrived, and they caught the ticket man just as he was
about to close his little booth.
When they tried to buy the twenty-five cent tickets at the entrance
to the theater, the attendant would not let Jy-ying in with Little Wei.
She laid down a dollar on the ticket counter, simply saying, “For you.”
“It’s not up to me,” the attendant responded.
Jy-ying laid down another dollar, and smiled. “I hid him from you.”
The attendant grinned, gave Jy-ying a ticket, and waved them all in
Apparently, the topic of Twain’s speech was not wildly popular, for
the theater was about a third full when they entered. The enormously
fat Colonel Henry I. Kominsky, a famous San Francisco lawyer, had
introduced Mark Twain. They found out weeks later that he had been a
secret lobbyist for King Leopold II of Belgium, but because Kominsky
upstaged the Belgium Minister to the United States, the King relieved
him of this very financially rewarding effort. Kominsky had then turned
over to Hearst’s New York American all his secret correspondence with
the King and Congo officials, for publication.
Joy saw Jy-ying twitching her nose at the smell of too many unwashed people in too confined a space, and John held his nose and
looked at Joy. Trying not to grin, she said, “I nose.”
They got seated just as Mark Twain started speaking. His photographs did not well reflect what a vigorous and handsome man he was.
His full head of unruly gray hair and large gray mustache suited his
large and squarish head. His brows hung in a flat plane over his eyes,
except in the middle, where they were notched in an upside-down V
over the upper part of his bulbous nose. He left his soft brown suit coat
open to reveal a tightly buttoned vest and a small black bow tie. He
stood solidly erect, projecting strength and confidence, even at seventythree years old.
He began with a short biography of King Leopold, whom he called
“an unfortunately intelligent man.” Looking frequently into the eyes of

232

R.J. Rummel

his audience, he gestured as counterpoint to his strong voice, which
projected easily to the back of the theater.
“He used his brilliance to wield his kingly authority and prestige in
conjunction with lies and deception,” Twain explained, “to convince
the major nations of the world at the Berlin Conference of 1885 to grant
him exclusive ownership of the Congo in Africa. He was so deceptive
that these nations did not even know at the time that this was what they
were doing. They had no idea they were giving this man an area that
was larger than that of England, France, Germany, Spain, and Italy
combined. They thought, as Leopold deceived them into believing, that
they were acting against slavery and promoting the humanitarian development of the African natives.”
Twain stopped for effect and paced over to John’s side of the stage.
He spied him, Joy, and Jy-ying and glanced back and forth between the
women with a small frown.
Raising his voice, he looked to the other side of the theater. “With
his control over all land in the Congo, which he cleverly called the
Congo Free State, no native could own land; tribes and native empires
that had worked and farmed certain land for centuries no longer owned
their land.” Twain spread his hands wide as through encompassing everyone and everything in the theater. “Leopold owned it all—every
stream and lake, every mountain and hill, every farm and plantation,
every town and village. His!”
He looked back toward Jy-ying and Joy. Lowering his voice, he
continued. “Leopold granted rights to companies in which he secretly
held at least 50 percent ownership. And they proceed to exploit the
Congo’s resources without competition—Leopold would allow none.
He set up police forces and a governance of the Congo under his total
control, and each of the companies were encouraged to set up their own
company police. From then on, profit for Leopold and his companies
were the first, second, and third goals of his administration.”
He stopped and strode over to the other side of the stage. Gesturing
to underscore the evil, Twain shouted, “At the point of a gun, Leopold
turned the Congo, over seventy-six times the size of his own country of
Belgium, into a prison of slaves. No native had any rights. Their only
purpose in life was to serve Leopold’s greed. They were forced to build
a railroad for him; to transport his ships, disassembled into thousands
of heavy and clumsy pieces, to inland lakes; and to produce ivory and
rubber for his companies and his vast ego so that he could buy or build
villas for his teenage mistress, a former prostitute, and build throughout
Belgium monuments to himself.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

233

Twain came back to John’s side of the stage. Seeming to gaze into
his eyes as though recognizing a sympathetic and intelligent listener,
Twain spoke in a soft voice that nevertheless projected to everyone
there. “How many natives has this one man murdered or caused to die
without himself actually seeing a drop of blood? Mr. Edmund Dene
Morel, the foremost expert on the Congo and the editor of the West African Mail, believes that ten to fifteen million have been murdered,
died from disease, or have been starved to death.”
Twain counted on his fingers, “One million lives, two million lives
. . . and ten million lives.” Holding up all his fingers on his right hand,
he almost screamed, “And maybe another five million!”
Joy was stunned. My God, I never heard of this. John never mentioned it. And apparently, the Society that sent us here to eliminate this
very democide missed it entirely.
There was no movement, no sound, not even a cough in the theater.
Twain broke eye contact with John and stepped to the center of the
stage, its wooden floorboards creaking like resounding cracks in the
absolute silence.
He waited there a few moments, scanning faces in the audience. In
a conversational tone, he continued speaking. “All this is very general
and lacks human story. I want to give you one. But it is so gruesome
and brutal that I have to ask any of you who might be sickened by
blood and gore, or who simply don’t want to hear it, to please leave.
Your money will be refunded at the door.”
No one left, not after that introduction.
Twain moved up to the front of the stage, his shoes almost over the
edge, and leaned forward. In a level voice, his hands still for a change,
he said, “This is the story of one man in the Congo village of Malima
two years ago, as he told it to a missionary.”

aaa
The Congo Free State
1906
The white man came at midday. My wife Gili and I were weeding
the village field planted with cassava and maize, while outside her hut,
my sister Abo was making banana flour by pounding up dried bananas.
We saw two men hurry to the Chief’s large hut in the village and soon
Liamba, our Chief, came out and had the drums beaten to summon everyone from the fields.

234

R.J. Rummel

When we all gathered around him, he told us that soldiers with red
caps and guns and accompanied by white men were coming to the village. He said that we should put out food for them so that they would
eat and pass on without bothering us. So we went into the fields and
collected in baskets cassava, plantains, and ground nuts and brought
them back to the Chief’s hut. We also collected chickens and goats
from around the village.
When the soldiers entered our village they gathered the food, chickens, and goats together, and afterward they surrounded the village and
the white man strode up to Liamba and shot him in the head.
At the same time, the soldiers made us sit on the ground while they
searched each of the huts, forcing everyone out, including even the
young children and women nursing their babies. One man tried to escape and a soldier shot him. He cut off the dead man’s hand and put it
into his pocket. We learned later that the hand was proof he had used
his bullet to kill a native. Sometimes soldiers would kill animals with
their guns, and cut off the hands of living people to prove they had not
wasted bullets.
Fida, a friend of mine, at first didn’t understand what the soldiers
were demanding. A soldier prodded him with a knife to sit on the
ground. A white man saw this and commanded a soldier to grab Fida
and drag him by his feet to the space in front of us. A soldier told us to
watch and see what happened when we didn’t obey.
Fida trembled as he was pulled to his feet by two soldiers and
forced to strip. They made him lay face down on the ground, and one
soldier grabbed his hands and the other his feet. A third soldier wielded
what we learned to call the chicotte. This was a special whip made of a
long strip of corkscrew-shaped, sun-dried hippopotamus hide. It had
sharp edges that cut into the skin of those whipped with it.
The soldier started whipping Fida’s buttocks. The first stroke left a
red line. As more strokes lashed his body, Fida writhed on the ground,
and ended up getting his hips and stomach lashed. Some strokes fell on
his genitals, and he shrieked with pain. He began bleeding badly in
huge rivulets. Finally he could do no more than moan. We lost track of
the number of lashes, but surely there were many more than fifty.
Long before the soldier was finished, Fida stopped moving or making any sound. Out of breath, the soldier eventually stopped. He
grabbed Fida’s hair and pulled up his head. Fida had bitten through his
tongue. He was dead.
A man dressed in blue with a white man alongside him told us that
each man would have to collect a basket full of coagulated sap he

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

235

called rubber from a particular vine that grows in the jungle. If we
didn’t fill our basket, we would get whipped like the one dead on the
ground. To make sure that we fulfilled our quota and didn’t run away,
our wives and children would be held hostage.
A soldier handed me a piece of rubber vine so I would know what it
looked like, and had me pass it around. We were told the best way to
coagulate the sap was to spread it on our body as soon as we tapped the
vine. We must not get dirt, leaves and twigs, or stones in it. We were
also prohibited from cutting the vine down, and should do no more than
make a cut to drain the sap.
We were separated from the women. I saw my wife crying as she
and my sister and the other women and children were driven into one of
the large huts. The soldiers packed them all in, and they had hardly
enough room to sit.
The soldiers gave each of us a basket and pushed us with their rifles, telling us to go. They gave us no food, nothing to protect us from
the rain, nothing but a knife.
I went deep into the forest looking for the vine. I could not find any
the first day. When night came, I climbed a tree and slept in a fork in its
trunk. It rained during the night; by morning, my teeth were chattering.
At dawn I started searching again, more to get warm than to find a vine.
I ate berries along the way and found a banana patch and filled my
stomach.
Toward nightfall, I found a thick rubber vine and made three cuts in
its trunk. As the sap came out I cupped it in my hands and smeared it
on my body. Night had fallen by the time the sap coagulated. Pulling it
off my body was painful—the strips took body hair along with them. I
laid the strips in my basket, then searched in the moonlight for tealeaves. I climbed a tree, found a spot to sit, and wrapped the leaves
around my body for warmth.
It took me three more days to fill the basket, since I could only find
two more rubber vines. On the last one I was desperate. I hacked it
down and dug up the roots with my knife to get as much sap as I could.
With my basket full, I headed back to the village, which took two more
days. When I reached it, I handed the basket over to a soldier sitting at
a table with a white man.
The white man emptied the basket on the table and moved the strips
of rubber around. He said something to the soldier, who grabbed my
arm and took me to the hut where they were holding my wife and sister
hostage. Five or six soldiers were sitting around the hut, paying no at-

236

R.J. Rummel

tention to three others who were raping Oleka, a young girl. One was
holding her arms. Another spread her legs. A third raped her. I tried not
to look.
The soldier I was following told me to call to my relatives inside
the hut. I did so, and Gili and Abo, each very thin and weak, crawled
out. I felt weak myself, but I managed to pick my wife up and put her
over my shoulder. With my free hand I lifted my sister by her arm and
half dragged her to the shade of a tree. I got water in a bucket from the
nearby stream and gave it to them, and a soldier gave me nuts and bananas in a pot from which I fed them.
When she gathered her strength to talk, Gili told me that they had
been given only some nuts and a little water, and that two babies, three
children, and two of the women, Ejum and Katinga, had died in the hut.
She and my Abo had been repeatedly raped, as had all the younger
women in the hut. Beautiful Kalonji had fought the soldiers, and had
been knocked to the ground, stripped, and whipped to death with the
chicotte. Her bloody body, “So cut up it looked like bloody strips of
meat all entwined together,” Gili said, had been left for days in front of
the hut as a lesson.
I wanted to kill the soldiers, but what could I do? They had taken
the rubber-cutting knife away from me, and they would shoot me before I could kill one, then as a warning to others they would kill Gili
and Abo. So I swallowed my rage, but could not prevent my tears.
For one week longer the soldiers waited for more rubber to be
brought from the forest. Finally the last man came out of the forest in
the morning, but with a basket only partly full. As soon as the soldiers
saw this, they took the basket away from him, gave it to the white man,
and pulled the man under a tree. They tied his hands behind him with a
long rope, threw the other end of it over a tree limb, and pulled him up
by his tied hands until his toes were barely touching the ground. They
tied the rope to another tree trunk, and left him like that. He watched as
the soldiers brought his wife and daughter out of the hut where they
kept all the women, pulled them over in front of him, and shot each of
them in the stomach so they would die slowly. Husband and father, he
could do nothing but watch them die.
Before walking away, the soldiers chopped a hand off each of the
women for proof that they did not misuse their bullets.
Gili, Abo, and I could only watch, shaking with fear.
The soldiers had brought several large baskets with them. Inside
were rusty chains. The soldiers told us to line up near the baskets. Then

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

237

they clamped an iron collar around each person’s neck, and chained us
together in one continuous line. We were given large, heavy baskets
containing rubber, food, carvings, ivory, and other things stolen from
our village, which they told us to carry on our heads. Some of us also
carried goats. When we were all loaded, the soldiers led us onto the
trail they had followed to our village.
Day after day we walked, stumbled, tottered, and staggered, sometimes pulled forward by our chains, sometimes held back. In the heat,
our sweat made the iron collars chafe our necks, and soon we had open
and bleeding sores around them. The soldiers gave us little food and
water.
We undulated and swayed up and down and sideways, like a giant
millipede drunk from Tembo, its many legs seeming to move in different directions, but the body nonetheless moving forward. I moved in a
daze, tugging with or against the chains, watching my feet so that I did
not trip. The chains made a continuous clinking noise. When one of us
fell, others close by on the chain were also pulled down. Some spilled
their baskets, and as they got up the soldiers whipped them with the
chicotte.
Diur, the woman in front of me, had carried her baby for the first
two days, but when she started to straggle and slow up the line, a soldier jerked her baby boy out of her arms and threw him into the woods,
where the animals would get him.
The older people were having trouble. They steadied the load on
their head with one hand while supporting themselves with a pole or
branch. Knees bent, they lurched along.
The fourth day, our chains pulled us to a stop. Farther back in the
line, old Mobyem sat down and refused to move. A soldier jabbed him
with his gun, but he just sat there looking at his feet. Finally, two of the
soldiers took out their knifes and stabbed him repeatedly, and he fell
over with blood gushing from the wounds. They unchained him, took
off his collar, and chained together the ones behind and ahead of him.
They redistributed the load he had been carrying.
More people died or were killed, and it meant that our loads got
heavier. Each day was more horrible than the last. On the most horrible
of all days, I lifted myself off the ground at first light to eat a rotten
piece of meat mixed with berries, nuts, and squirming larvae that a soldier passed out. My wife Gili would not get up when he kicked her. I
leaned over her and gently called her name.
“My lovely Gili, I said, “please get up. The soldiers will kill you.”

R.J. Rummel

238

She didn’t move. She was dead.
The next day my sister Abo went mad and tried to run for the forest,
but she only dragged the rest of us off the trail behind her, and fell
screaming. A soldier shot her.
After two weeks we reached the large village of Nyangwby by the
side of a lake. There were many white men around. The soldiers led us
up to a large white man’s boat. Black smoke billowed out of a big pipe
sticking out of the top of it. Men on the boat removed our iron collars
and chains, and led those of us carrying rubber onto the boat. They told
us to dump the baskets into a very large hole.
Different soldiers took us to a large hut where strangers from another village fed us. Afterward, with soldiers standing around us, the
strangers branded us on the leg with a hot iron. They also told us we
would be slaves of the white men in the village, and that if we tried to
escape they would whip us to death with the chicotte.
That evening, members of the strangers’ kingdom attacked the village. They used arrows and knives, and killed many soldiers and white
men during the battle. I escaped into the forest. Two days later Mr.
Sestok, a white Protestant missionary, and two Congo converts found
me on a trail. I was almost dead.

aaa
Jy-ying
Twain stopped talking for a moment and slowly looked around at
the audience. “The fellow’s name was Nzanba,” he finished in a sad
voice. “He died three days later from an infection that developed in the
wounds the metal collar made on his neck. Before his death, he told his
story to Henry Sestok of the Baptist Missionary Society.”
A number of women were dabbing at their eyes with handkerchiefs,
while the men looked stern-faced—in this age, men did not cry. Jy-ying
blinked back tears and looked at Joy and John. There were tears in their
eyes, too.
After waiting a decent few seconds, Twain described the Congo Reform Association, headquartered in England and headed by Edmund
Dene Morel, the same man he had mentioned before. He summarized
the Association’s work and said that Morel’s weekly journal, West African Mail, had been revealing to the world the horrible atrocities in the
Congo Free State. With a tone of deep devotion in his voice, Twain ex-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

239

tolled Morel as the foremost humanitarian of the times. He worked tirelessly to end the slavery in the Congo, and to focus the attention of the
world on the evils going on there.
“I have tried to help their effort,” Twain concluded. “Because the
United States was the first nation to officially recognize Leopold’s
takeover of the Congo, and played an instrumental role in Leopold getting approval from other nations, I have been working on President
Roosevelt and Secretary of State Elihu Root to pressure European nations to deny recognition of the Congo Free State.
“If you also would like to contribute to the Congo Reform Association’s great humanitarian work, there is a box in the lobby labeled with
the Association’s name. Any contribution you can make will help to
end this evil slavery and mass murder. Thank you for coming.” He
bowed.
The audience clapped, and as people began to leave the theater, a
few approached the front of the stage, some asking for Twain’s autograph. At the back of the group, John and Joy waited to talk to him, and
Jy-ying stood a little apart, holding Little Wei. Finally there only remained an especially persistent old woman dressed all in black, who
wanted to tell Twain about her great American novel. She insisted that
he would not be able to put it down, if he would only start reading it.
Twain nodded his head and was otherwise noncommittal until the
woman pulled her beaten-up manuscript out of a large crocheted handbag, and tried to hand it to him. He held up his hands and told her in a
firm but friendly tone, “I have too much to carry as it is, but thank you
for bringing your book with you, and thinking of me. If you will send
the manuscript to my home address, I will read it when I can.” With
that, Twain clearly dismissed the woman and looked at John.
John started to introduced himself, but Twain spotted Little Wei.
“Oh, what a handsome little dog.” He reached out his hands and Jyying handed him over. Little Wei sniffed Twain’s hands, coat, and face;
apparently satisfied, he permitted himself to be held.
“What kind of dog is this?” Twain asked, petting him.
Jy-ying replied, “A West Highland White Terrier.”
Twain sighed. “Wish I could have a dog, but I travel so much it’s
not practical. Anyway, I’m sorry. I’m being rude.” He gave Little Wei
back and looked at John.
John started again. “I’m a businessman and investor.” With a little
wave to Joy and then to Jy-ying, he introduced them. “This is Joy
Phim, my assistant, and Khoo Jy-ying, her assistant.”

240

R.J. Rummel

Twain shook John’s hand, and bowed to Joy and Jy-ying, saying,
“My pleasure, ladies. Are you two twins or sisters?”
Joy seemed confused for a second, but Jy-ying responded, “I regret
to say that we are unrelated, but we share so much that she could be my
sister.”
That distracted Joy. John seemed nonplussed.
Twain was still looking curiously at Joy and Jy-ying. After a moment John said, “Thank you for your excellent speech and for your
efforts in communicating the horrible conditions of the natives in the
Congo. We are very much involved in trying to rid the world of such
evils, and hope you can join us for drinks, to talk about what we can do
to help you.”
Twain took a long moment to reply. He looked carefully at John, at
Joy and Jy-ying, and back to John. Jy-ying had the feeling he had gone
through this routine with people in his audience wherever he had given
this speech, and that the results were not always happy.
John took out a roll of bills that he kept for emergencies, and
counted out ten one-hundred dollar bills. He handed them to Twain,
saying, “This is my sincerity contribution, my first, to your work of
freeing the Congo.”
Twain was shocked by the amount, but recovered. Eyebrows still
raised, he said, “Thank you, indeed, sir. That’s an incredibly generous
contribution.” He took the money and asked with a smile, “Is it real?”
John blushed and Joy looked embarrassed.
Jy-ying wondered. They must have millions in counterfeit bills, as I
do. Is that what he gave Twain? No, not John.
Twain came down from the stage. “Let’s go,” he said.
Kominsky, who had set up the talk, had been seated while Twain
worked through all the well-wishers after the speech. Now he pushed
himself off his seat with some difficulty and lumbered over. Twain introduced the three of them to him, simply giving their names, and they
all walked together to the lobby, where Twain picked up the Association’s contribution box. He pushed John’s bills through a wide slit in
the lid.
“Wait a moment, “Jy-ying said, seeing a chance to score points with
John. She took two five-dollar bills from her purse and put them into
the box. Can’t overdo it. He would wonder where I got the money.
Twain told Kominsky that he would be going with them, thanked
him for setting up the talk, and mentioned that he would call him tomorrow. It was clear that Kominsky wanted to come along, but they all

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

241

waited for him to leave. When it became too obvious, he tipped his hat
to them, picked up the box, and waddled off to his own car.
Twain asked, “Do you have someplace in mind?”
“Yes,” John said. “Our Mercedes is a couple of blocks from here,
and I’ll drive us all to the Liberty Café, a pleasant bar you’ll like.”
From then on, the four of them never stopped conversing. During the walk to the Mercedes, at the café until it closed, and in the
lounge of the St. Francis Hotel where Twain was staying, they
talked until almost daylight. They were fascinated with what Twain
knew about the Congo, about Leopold, and about Morel’s work.
Joy and John were particularly interested in the politics of it—who
was influencing whom and had what power. Twain had talked to
President Roosevelt about it and they wanted to know the details of
the exchange.
At first Twain seemed to be feeling his way around them, and appeared guarded in some of his personal evaluations. But as he became
increasingly aware of how much they knew about atrocities elsewhere,
and about international politics, he became more and more excited.
Jy-ying was supposed to be ignorant of the future, and in this exciting and animated discussion could barely prevent a slip of tongue. This
decolonization was necessary to open these poor people to Islam and
Sabah. She knew the history of the New Universe, which Joy and John
did not, since they were just beginning to create the world in which she
had been born. Now, in the third universe they were creating, she could
make it even better for Sabah. But she had to watch her tongue. Her
solution was to say as little as possible and seem to devote most of her
attention to Little Wei.
When they were about to part, Twain promised to be John’s gobetween with Morel. “We’ve had some disagreement, “ he said cryptically, “but we’re still friends. I’ll help in any way I can.”
John asked, “Could I ask you to send a telegram to Morel about me?”
“I would be happy to do so, sir,” Twain replied.
John again pulled out his money to give Twain more than enough to
cover the cost, but Twain put up his hand and said, “Thanks, but you’ve
given enough.”
Within several months, it was obvious that the contact John initiated with Morel that night would change all their futures, including that
of Morel himself, in a way so unimaginable, so unpredictable, that for a
long time afterward Jy-ying sometimes entertained herself and Little
Wei by thinking aloud about what their life would have been like, had

R.J. Rummel

242

he not done that. Or had Joy not read about Twain giving a speech. Or
had Twain not decided to come to San Francisco when he did. Or had
John’s car broke down on the way to the theater. Or . . . .

aaa
Joy
After Joy and John said their goodbyes and returned home, they
couldn’t sleep. They had to discuss what they had learned, and what
they could realistically do about it.
“You didn’t know about this at all, did you?” Joy asked John.
He looked mournful. “I and the whole field of genocide studies in
the Old Universe missed this. There was no book on genocide and mass
murder in history or in the twentieth century that contained more than a
rare paragraph on this. One of the surprising things is that every general
book has an extensive description of the German genocide against the
Herero tribe from 1904 to 1907, in the German colony that became
Namibia. They massacred perhaps fifty-five thousand Herero. That was
awful, but now we find out that up north in the Congo, Leopold was
killing many millions. And Twain said that similar massacres are going
on in the French Congo.”
John shook his head in exasperation. “I can’t believe that all of us
missed this, but we did. You know, my figure for the number murdered
by governments in the twentieth century is about 174 million. I had
found out about some of the killing in the European colonies, and believed it might amount to about a million murdered since 1900. But as a
result of what I’ve learned from Twain, I’m going to have to reevaluate
the colonial toll.”
John rolled out of bed and picked up a message pad and pencil.
“Lets see,” he said. “Where exploitation of a colony’s natural resources
or portering was carried out by forced labor—in effect, modern slavery—as it was in all the European and Asian colonies, the forced labor
system built in its own death toll from beatings, punishment, coercion,
terror, and forced deprivation. There were differences in the brutality of
the system, the British being the least brutal and Leopold and the Germans, Spanish, and Portuguese being the worst, with the French
somewhere in between. We know what the Soviet gulag was like.
These colonizers turned Africa into one giant gulag, with each colony
being like a separate death camp.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

243

John made a list of the colonies and estimated their 1900 native
populations, and for each colony listed the least possible death toll and
the most probable. He added up his figures, and said, “As a guesstimate, over all of colonized Africa and Asia, 1900 to independence, the
democide may have been something like fifty million. This is way
above my original one million estimate. Even fifty million may be too
conservative. If this figure were roughly close, however, it would raise
the total murdered by governments in the twentieth century from 174
million to 223 million.”
John looked utterly depressed. Joy hadn’t seen this look on his face
since they found out how many Sabah may have killed in his nuclear
attacks. He wiped his face with his hand, and looked down at the floor.
He said, “These mass murderers were the most advanced and supposedly civilized nations in the world. And if anything illustrates the role
of power, Leopold II, the king of Belgium, does. He was an intelligent
and otherwise civilized man. He talked constantly about ending slavery
in Africa and about the freedom, education, and development of the
natives. But when the United States and Europe gave him by treaty the
most absolute power over perhaps thirty million people, he enslaved
them. And he murdered millions.”
Joy took a moment to think about it. “Okay, here we are with incredible resources. What can we do?” she asked.
He put his pad down and said, “For one, the Society didn’t know
about this massive colonial killing and didn’t put that into their plans.
Second, we have to remember that we have the Mexican Revolution,
the First World War, and the Russian Revolution to prevent soon—”
“Megalomaniacs? Us?” Joy interjected.
John gave her a sour grin and continued. “You know, baby, I feel
helpless about this. Colonialism is not an event or an episode that we
can prevent like the Mexican Revolution. This colonialism involves
thousands of officials, hundreds of companies, armies of soldiers, a
whole system of rule, and a mind set among the people of the colonizing country. The English, for example, feel that they are involved in a
great effort to uplift, educate, and bring into the modern world the people in their colonies. They are proud of their role in ending slavery and
see their colonies as protection of their natives against Arab and indigenous African slavery. It’s impossible for us to change this
perception, even with our resources and knowledge of the future.”
John looked so sad, slumped on the bed, staring at his hand. “There
is nothing we can—”

244

R.J. Rummel

Joy reached over and put a finger on his lips. “We’re both tired.
Let’s sleep, and talk about what to do tomorrow, when we’re refreshed.
No more now, okay?”
Neither one of them could sleep right away; their minds were too
busy. But their tired bodies finally defeated their active minds and they
slept, although fitfully.

Chapter 19
Joy

T

hey were chained to a caravan of African natives struggling
over a narrow rope bridge hanging above a deep gorge. When
the first prisoner in the caravan lost his grip on the rope rail and
fell off the swaying bridge, his weight and the chains began to pull
those behind and in front of him into space. She could see the bodies
falling one after another, as if in slow motion. The undulating chain
reaction slowly approached them, and she tried to pull back on the
chain to prevent them from falling, to no avail. The chain started dragging John off the bridge. She could not hold him back. She felt the
heavy tug—the chain was pulling her after him.
She screamed.
Joy woke up with a start. John put his arms around her and held her
close as her heart thudded in her chest and she shuddered and cried and
held him tightly to her. He caressed her wet cheeks and hair and whispered, “You’ve had a bad dream, baby. Everything’s alright.”
The dream remained with Joy for days. It was so vivid, so real. It
was more than the images one might see on TV or in a movie. It was
living the caravan, feeling the metal collar on her neck and the pull of
the chain, hearing it rattle, tasting the sweat; it was feeling the terror in
her knotted stomach and racing heart; it was knowing death was approaching John and there was absolutely nothing she could do about it;
and it was knowing her own death would follow. And she knew, as she
felt she knew anything, that this nightmare had been reality for some
loved ones in the Congo.
While eating a late lunch, they discussed what they could do about
intervening in the Congo and other colonies, and the possibilities of
success. They realized that they would not be able to stop much of the
killing, and that a lot of it had already occurred. But one thought was
uppermost—saving some lives was a universe better than saving none.
Even if their intervention prevented the deaths of one thousand human
beings, they would be successful. With that driving them, they discussed what to do.

246

R.J. Rummel

That evening Joy rechecked all the research materials and chronologies on this period that the Society had put on CDs for them. She
found only one reference to Morel and his success in forcing Leopold
to turn over the Congo Free State to his country, Belgium, in November
1908 to administer as a colony. It was a one-paragraph biography of
Morel, as there was for every minor name mentioned. Aside from what
they already knew, they found out that he was in his mid-thirties and
was married to Mary Richardson; they had five children.
Joy and John discussed whether one or both of them should go to
England to see Morel. John argued, “I will not be separated from you
for that eternity. No. Period. End of discussion.”
Stupid, Joy thought. He still has much to learn about me, if he
thinks he can make his point that way. Aloud she explained, “I fear that
our whole mission might be ended if our ship is sunk in a storm or it
suffers some other disaster, or if our train has an accident. Jy-ying can’t
do it alone, even if she knew what to do. I think it’s dumb to take such
risks. Dimwitted. Brainless. Idiotic.” John wasn’t going to beat her at
definitives.
John’s face resembled a block of carved wood.
She ignored it. “There is always a risk, in this age of accidents. Our
overall mission is too important to put in danger. I know that Morel’s
project also is important and will accomplish much to help reform the
Congo, and by implication, colonialism generally. But our new mission
of saving maybe two billion lives, preventing nuclear terrorism, and
perhaps preventing the end of democracy is infinitely more important.”
“No, baby! We travel together.” John crossed his arms over his
chest and recarved his wooden face to emphasize a jutting chin.
“Well then,” she countered, “just in case we get killed traveling together, I’m going to put in my will that our epitaph read Here lies a
village idiot and his brilliant assistant and translator.”
“He should come here.”
Joy stared. “Yes,” she said.

aaa
The next day John telegrammed Morel, expressing his profound interest in doing something about the Congo, asking him and his wife to
make an all expense paid trip to San Francisco to discuss how he might
contribute to Morel’s efforts, and promising to wire in two days a good
faith contribution of $10,000 for his Congo Reform Association. John
stated that any date convenient for Morel was fine with him.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

247

Three days after they wired the money, John received a telegram
stating simply, We will arrive on May 24 in San Francisco by train on
track 14 at 3:42 p.m. Morel. John wired back that they would pick
them up, and could he send by express mail back issues of his West African Mail and whatever other material he could spare on African
colonization.
They had two months to prepare for Morel’s visit. With Jy-ying
helping, they borrowed from public and college libraries whatever they
could find on the Congo, and made index card notes of relevant news
items in the local and national newspapers, particularly The New York
Times.
Shortly before the visit, Joy and John discussed what funding to offer Morel. The Society had secreted undetectable counterfeit money,
real currency, gold coins and bars, and jewels in the capsules they sent
back in time. “Let’s see,” John said, “We have about two billion dollars
to work with overall.”
Joy smiled at that incredible wealth. She’d never calculated it in its
current value. She got out her calculator and keyed in the amounts. “Do
you realize, love, that we arrived in 1906 with the equivalent of about
38.4 billion dollars? And since our arrival, we’ve been accumulating
more millions through your stock investments. And we can increase
this even more by setting up separate brokerage accounts for the guys,
Jy-ying, and me. We could also bet on horse races, baseball games, and
the like. We have all the results of the major races and games.” Grinning widely, she concluded, “We’re fantastically rich.”
John ignored that, waving a cautioning finger. “If we increase our
investment, it has to be done with care. If we won too many bets too
often, we would create suspicion, even if we tried to lose a certain proportion of the bets. As large as it is, the stock market will allow us to
win millions without drawing attention. Here also, however, we have to
continue to lose on some stocks, if our brokers aren’t to see us as incredibly lucky or smart.”
“Obviously,” Joy responded, bothered by the wagging finger. “All
our calculations must take into account the massive allocation of present and future resources to our mission. Oh yes, and Sabah. Especially
Sabah.”
She stopped for a moment, suddenly feeling the mammoth weight
of what they had to do. In a subdued and somber tone, she reaffirmed
what neither of them had mentioned in many months: “We must, absolutely must prevent Sabah’s nuclear attack and blackmail—even if it
means our death.”

248

R.J. Rummel

His lips compressed into a tight line, eyes grave, John nodded.
No words. They just let that fill their souls.
After a moment, John said, “For all our interventions, we have
to build up more field offices for our company, and a larger staff.
The company itself probably will turn a small profit eventually,
and we do know what to buy and sell to fit the popular interest for
this and future decades. Still, for a while we’ll have to subsidize
the company.”
He took out his budget and began to jot down some rough figures.
Joy could never get him to do his “arithmetic” on his laptop. She got
out her own laptop and worked on her Excel spreadsheet. She tried to
balance anticipated company expenditures and income against their total resources and likely stock market profits.
After some time, John said, “I’m done. You still working at it?
What’s taking you so long?”
Joy answered with a little asperity, “I’m being thorough. What did
your doodling come up with?”
“How about ten million dollars to help end colonial slavery and exploitation. That’s about the equivalent of 192 million in year 2000.”
She looked at her spreadsheet, hit the sum button, transferred that
amount to the surplus line, summed that, subtracted the estimated costs,
and arrived at $9,674,000 they could offer Morel.
She shook her head, looked at John with exaggerated pity, and said,
“You’re off, John. You’ve got to learn to use a spreadsheet. But ten
million is a nice round number. These are all estimates anyway, so
what the hell, let’s go with that.”
Suspicious, John slid over to the laptop and said, “Let’s see what
you got.”
“Oops. Damn. I hit the quit and not the save keys when I was turning the laptop so you could see,” she lamented. “Well, anyway, we’ve
agreed on your figure. So ten million dollars it shall be.”
John shook his pencil and pointed out, “We should put this in context. We know that King Leopold will gain probably a little over one
billion dollars in profit from his Congo Free State. Much of this he will
use to lobby for foreign support, and against his critics. We will be
playing in a very big league, baby, and we’ll have to use as much of our
resources as we can.”
Joy couldn’t agree more.

aaa

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

249

Joy recognized Edmund Morel and his wife at the train station
when they arrived near sunset. Morel had sent them a photo, and his
wife carried a red bag as she’d promised in their exchange of telegrams.
Morel was stocky; at first glance, he looked like a prizefighter.
John walked up to Morel, introduced himself, and shook Morel’s
hand. Then he put his arm around Joy’s shoulder and introduced her. “I
would like you to meet my assistant and translator.” He hesitated a
moment, and those dimples formed at the corner of his mouth. Joy noticed, but before she could crush his foot with her heel, he added,
smiling possessively, “But foremost, I’m very happy to say that she is
my best friend, soul mate, and partner.”
Joy’s eyes widened. I love him.
Morel introduced his wife Janet as “The best assistant, companion,
and friend I could ever have desired.”
Joy frowned slightly. The Society had listed his wife as Mary
Richardson. Oh well, an error. She gave a mental shrug.
The Morels were somewhat taken aback when they saw Joy was
Asian, and even more so when John introduced her as his partner. The
implication was obvious. Working in and about Africa, they had probably known many unmarried black-white couples, but Joy and John
seemed to be the first Oriental-white couple they had ever met, and the
first interracial couple they had ever seen in the United States. Joy had
the feeling that their opinion of John went up as a result.
As they left the station, Joy and Janet followed behind the men. As
a conversational opening to what she was sure Janet could talk about
for hours, Joy asked, “Do you have any children?”
She answered laconically, “No. Don’t have the time for them.”
Joy was surprised. The Society had made not only an error in Mrs.
Morel’s name, but also in their having five children. In the great amounts
of information the Society had prepared for them, this was a minor item,
but Joy was quite astonished that these mistakes had been made.
They invited the Morels to stay in their guest apartment, but they
also had made a reservation for a hotel room, just in case the Morels
preferred more privacy. Janet said they would be glad for the extra time
with Joy and John, and they went to John’s apartment for a meal. Since
the Morels had had a long and tiring two-week trip, Joy and John kept
to small talk for the rest of the day.
They knew about Edmund Morel’s age and were still surprised at
how young he looked, given all his accomplishments in fighting King
Leopold. He was only eight years older than John. During the first

R.J. Rummel

250

minutes of their meeting, Ed put them on a first name basis. He had a
square-faced, solid British look that he must have inherited from his
English mother. His father had been French, he said, and had died when
Ed was a boy. He combed his wavy black hair away from a center part,
and sported a huge, bushy black mustache of the type popular in this
age, one that completely hid his mouth. His eyes were deeply set and
intense and his chin was firm and slightly rounded.
Janet was a lovely and vivacious woman, fully involved in Ed’s
crusade against colonialism. She may well have contributed to or
helped author some of the articles and books he published. It was also
obvious to Joy as a woman that Janet loved Ed deeply and that they
probably had a happy home life together.
The day after their guests arrived, once they’d had a chance to recover from the long and tiring train ride, Joy invited Jy-ying to join
them. Jy-ying brought a Chinese red bean paste dessert she had made.
Little Wei was an instant hit with the Morels, and with all their strange
smells, they were a hit with him as well. John introduced Jy-ying as an
important member of the company with a strong interest in the Morels’
work in the Congo, and then John went through the now customary explanation that Joy and Jy-ying were not sisters.
That night, after the Morels had retired early, John threatened both
Joy and Jy-ying, “I swear I’m going to make stickers for both of you.
Joy’s will read, ‘No, she’s not my sister,’ with an arrow pointing to the
left; Jy-ying’s will read the same, with the arrow pointing to the right.
Then just be sure you stand on the correct side of each other.”
“And I’ll make sure you stand between us,” Jy-ying said, laughing,
and Joy patted her on the back.

aaa
Jy-ying
Life never corresponds to fiction, for one simple reason—what
happens in life is too unbelievable to put in fiction. On this day such
would happen to Jy-ying, and leave her breathless at the improbability.
They all sat around John’s waxed-cloth-covered dining room table
enjoying coffee, tea, and cookies. It was time to get serious. Looking at
Ed, John began. “Since we started receiving the back issues of your
journal and copies of articles you and Janet had written, we’ve read
about nothing but the Congo and colonialism in Africa and Asia. We

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

251

also read all we could find from the local libraries which, I must say,
wasn’t much. Could you summarize for us where all your anticolonial
work stands now?”
Ed leaned forward. “ I will, but first I want to say that Mark Twain
had written us about you two . . . ”
Jy-ying liked the way he included Janet. Little things like that
made a big difference to her, especially because of the attitude of Chinese men toward women. She had noticed that John also always
included Joy, and it was one of the things she liked about him.
“ . . . He was very impressed and urged us to fill you in on our
work. He thought you would be of much help in our effort. Now, most
of all, we want to express our profound thanks for this trip here to your
lovely and great country and state. Most especially, we’re greatly indebted to you for your gift of $10,000 to our reform association.”
John answered, “We couldn’t have given the funds to a more deserving effort and pair of humanitarians.”
Jy-ying did the mental calculation and realized that amount of
money was near the equivalent of $192,000 in 2000. This was an incredible amount for Ed and Janet to be gifted. They must have been
puzzled, therefore, when the first thing they saw was Joy and John’s
lower middle class clothing. The Morels probably were even more surprised when they saw John’s modest, middle class apartment. They’d
certainly expected to see a huge mansion in the middle of hundreds of
acres, with butlers, maids, and dozens of gardeners bent over beautiful
flower gardens.
Besides what Joy and John had told her, Jy-ying had done her own
research on Ed. She knew he was originally lower middle class, a clerk
in Liverpool working for the Elder Dempster’s shipping firm. With his
father dead and an ailing mother, Morel quit school to work when he
was fifteen.
She could see that Joy and John’s informality and friendliness also
must have been a surprise. It had almost immediately relaxed the Morels. As far as Ed and Janet knew, however, Joy and John were only
wealthy amateurs with an idiosyncratic interest in Congo reform,
among many other things. After all, the Morels had been involved in
this reform movement for a decade and had never heard of them before.
Jy-ying sat back to watch how John would handle this.
After Ed summarized where their work stood, and after some discussion, John said, “We are informal people and are not concerned
about acquiring material goods or exercising conspicuous consumption.

252

R.J. Rummel

We are, however, filthy rich, due to what each of us has secretly inherited, our financial dealings, and our investments in the stock market. I
only tell you this to explain our wealth, not to brag. I trust you will
keep this secret.”
Jy-ying rubbed her nose to hide her grin. What a liar. He is almost
as good as I am.
“We are humanitarians and wish to spend our present and future
wealth wiping out war and mass murder, and fostering democracy and
human rights. This is our lifelong mission. You should view our Tor
Import and Export Company as one of the means through which we do
this. We view our support of your efforts as part of our mission.”
Janet held up her hand to stop John. “Surely you’re interested in
profit. Isn’t that the bottom line?”
Joy leaned toward Janet, looked into her eyes, and said firmly, “No
more than it is for you and Ed. We know that you two have used every
spare penny for your reform efforts and derive no material profit from
them. Such are our own efforts. Whatever our company makes in
profit, if it ever does so, will go into our mission.”
Joy narrowed her eyes; her lips tightened in determination. “We
have already sacrificed more for our mission than you would ever believe. We have committed our very lives to succeed, and would
welcome death tomorrow, if it meant our final success.”
John picked up on that to further describe their mission, but at this
point the men and Joy did not exist as far as Jy-ying was concerned.
Janet was staring at her. Jy-ying stared back, puzzled.
There is something about her. Something . . . strange. No. Not
strange. Familiar. Uncannily familiar. Ahh, she is hiding something.
But what?
Janet held the stare, unblinking, as a cat will focus on a bird in the
grass. They became isolated in an emotional, intuitive bubble. Jy-ying
could not describe this any better to herself; their communication bordered on telepathic. They sat there, their eyes locked, until finally Janet
nodded and shifted her eyes to Joy, who was watching Ed and seemed
oblivious to Janet’s exchange with Jy-ying.
Soon Joy and Janet seemed involved in their own communication.
After several seconds, Janet reached across the table and took Joy’s
hand.
Ed and John had glanced curiously at Janet through her silent exchange with Jy-ying, and when Janet took Joy’s hand Ed raised an
eyebrow. Janet turned to him and said simply, “Trust them.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

253

John cleared his throat, and continued what he had been saying.
“We intend to set up a trust fund in a Swiss bank in the name of Edmund Dene Morel and Janet Baker Morel. The annual interest is to be
used as you see fit to reform the Congo and European colonies
throughout Africa and Asia. As best I can guesstimate, the death toll
since 1900 and far into the future will be about fifty million natives
unless something is done to stop the killing, exploitation, and slavery.
We place only one condition on these funds—that you focus as much
on the human cost of colonialism in general as you will on the Congo.”
Ed hesitated, then responded sadly, “We want to thank you for
whatever contribution you will make, but just the Congo is a big task.
If I try to deal with these other inhumanities, I won’t have the time to
do much for them, and it will take effort away from the Congo. What
contribution do you have in mind?”
“Ten million dollars as your trust amount. Presumably the trust
would invest this in bonds and various government securities, so that
you could expect out of this about $300,000 a year, with the principle
available for great opportunities or emergencies.”
Jy-ying almost fell out of her chair. Sabah, they’re crazy—$300,000
a year.
There was a long silence as the Morels sat frozen in their chairs,
eyes like saucers. They stared at John as though he had said he was Jesus Christ.
Ed finally croaked, “Excuse me, did you say ten million?”
“Yes.”
“This is a practical joke?”
“No,” Joy said, looking at Janet. “We mean ten million.”
His voice still showing his amazement, Ed exclaimed, “Ahh, yes.
Quite. What do you want me to do with all that bloody money? Buy
bloody Africa?”
John waved the question aside with his hand. “Remember our one
condition. You just don’t focus on the Congo, but on all European colonialism. Of all people, you know how to organize reform. Both of
you are so well organized personally that you now produce an unbelievable amount of writing and correspondence. Moreover, you have
many contacts throughout Europe and in the United States. So, we
leave the organization of the effort up to you. We will not micromanage
the use of these funds or second-guess you. You can set up institutes or
centers to study and detail the evil deeds, create newspapers, hire reporters, lobby legislatures, send to colonies investigative commissions,

254

R.J. Rummel

send people like Mark Twain on speaking tours, and so on. You know
the possibilities. This organizational and disbursement freedom will be
in a contract we will draw up.
“With your background, Ed, I know you will understand that, for
legal and security reasons, written into the trust agreement will be an
annual independent audit of your use of whatever funds are disbursed
to you during the year. The only purpose of the audit is to protect you
against any possible claim, legal or otherwise, that you are misusing the
funds for personal reasons. We will also write into the trust contract
yearly salaries for you and Janet of $10,000, indexed to the rate of inflation in England.”
Ed just sat still, trying to absorb it. Janet looked stunned. After several seconds Ed rubbed his glass with his thumb, still deep in thought.
Joy stood and offered them all drinks. Janet and Jy-ying asked for
tea while the men accepted cold Michelob beer right off the ice block.
Joy had one herself after the tea was made.
Jy-ying was studying Janet thoughtfully when she turned and returned her look, and held it. Jy-ying’s intuition was now screaming
at her—Janet was hiding a great or nefarious secret. She had to find
out what it was. Too much was at stake to risk a later surprise.
Her eyes still on Janet, Jy-ying spoke up for the first time, her melodious intonation reflecting her Chinese language. “I am sure that John
has ideas as to how you could best use this generous endowment—did I
say generous? This goes fantastically beyond generous.” She looked at
John. “What are your ideas?”
John seemed happy for the excuse to lecture. “As you said, Ed, you
are the people on the front lines of reform. We can only make abstract
suggestions, which you may or may not find helpful. But we do know
the world. Under different names, we have professional backgrounds. I
was a professor of history. Joy has a degree in government, and Jy-ying
is a linguist.”
Ed listened intently, but Janet nodded absently without breaking
eye contact with Jy-ying. John may as well have said, “I like tea.”
“We would emphasize what I will call the 5-D plan,” John was saying, “deprofit, disgrace, delegitimize, derecognize, and delegate.”
He began to lay this out and had Ed’s full attention for the next
half-hour. John was clearly enjoying being the professor again. As he
described their ideas, Joy’s eyes were riveted on Ed, apparently trying
to gauge his response.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

255

But Jy-ying’s eyes remained fixed on Janet’s, as though probing
behind them to read her mind. Okay, she thought, time for confrontation. In the kitchen—where else, for women?
When John stopped for breath, Jy-ying suggested that she get the
dessert that she had brought so they could eat while he continued. Joy
was about to get up, but Jy-ying waved her down. Knowing John had
been a professor, Jy-ying believed he might be at it for another hour or
so. She got up, stepped over sleeping Little Wei, and looked at Janet.
She nodded toward the kitchen.
Janet rose and followed her. In the kitchen, Jy-ying started making
dessert tea for everyone. She set the kettle on the range and prepared to
turn around and say to Janet, “You can share a secret with me. What
are you hiding?”
Close behind her, Janet beat her to it. She leaned over Jy-ying’s
shoulder and said in a low voice, “Sabah rules.”

Chapter 20
Jy-ying

J

y-ying jerked around to face Janet, and automatically responded to
what in this era would have been nonsense to anybody else except
Joy and John. In two words she told Janet that she had guessed
right: “Abul Sabah.”
“Yes, Abul Sabah, the Prophet,” Janet intoned, her face now glowing with excitement.
Nothing more need be said. She was from Jy-ying’s time. And the
reverential way she had said Sabah’s name suggested she was a believer. The right side of Jy-ying’s brain was happily flabbergasted. She
never believed for a moment that there would be someone else from the
future who knew Sabah, and if so, that they would meet. On the left
side of her brain, however, her security training kicked in and she was
wary. Janet could be an enemy, sent to this time to follow up on the
message to kill Sabah, and a deadly threat to Jy-ying.
But it cannot be. I’ve studied her. She does not have the muscles
and grace for combat. She stands and moves like a lady, not a warrior.
She brought no purse in with her and there are no telltale weapon
bulges.
She decided paranoid was best. Carefully watching Janet, she acted
out her shock. She opened her eyes wide, let her mouth hang open, and
while leaning on the counter for apparent support, she brought the other
hand up to her cheek. She gasped, “You are from my future.”
“Yes, 2003.”
“I’m from 2001.” She reached for Janet to hug her, but the other
woman beat Jy-ying to it. Putting her arms around Jy-ying and struggling to restrain her voice, Janet exclaimed, “Am I ever glad to meet
you, Jy-ying! I’ve been so lonely. Ed has no idea I’m from the future.
Do Joy and John know?”
“No.” Jy-ying was also fighting to control her emotions. She put a
finger to her lips to stop any further response, and said, “Wait. Later.”
Janet picked up the forks and tray of desserts and tried to steady her
hands. Jy-ying put a hand on her arm and smiled. That helped.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

257

Jy-ying followed Janet into the small dining room. John was still
in his lecture mode, so Janet quietly passed the desserts around
while Jy-ying sat down. Janet stood for a moment when she was
done, looking like she wanted to say something, but then silently sat
down in her dining chair next to Ed, who was listening attentively to
John.
Joy looked at them briefly, smiled at Jy-ying in acknowledgement
of the dessert, and returned her attention to John. But when the tea kettle whistled, she got up and went into the kitchen to make the tea.
Jy-ying had no appetite, but ate her dessert to avoid any questions.
She saw Janet do the same. After Joy passed the tea around and everyone had finished their dessert, Jy-ying gave a small piece of what she
had left to Little Wei and, looking around in apology, said, “I’m going
to have to take the little guy for a stroll.”
She got up, and Janet followed her lead. She also stood and asked,
“Can I join you? He’s so cute. I always wanted a little Westie, but a
dog isn’t practical for us.”
John was so intent on his conversation with Ed that Jy-ying didn’t
think he noticed that they were leaving. Joy gave a little wave and
smile, and turned back to the conversation. Ed seemed to except their
leaving as a matter of course.

aaa
Janet
As they rushed to Jy-ying’s Rolls, almost tripping over confused Little Wei, Janet kept thinking, I don’t believe this. It can’t
be true she’s from my time. Then she remembered that her father
had been trying to send a man back to prevent the one who had received the message from Santa Barbara from killing Sabah or his
parents.
Oh God, she must be the one who received the message. She must
be the one out to kill Sabah. She knows I’m Sabah. She’ll kill me. How
stupid I am! I don’t even have a gun.
Janet stopped, and started backing up. “Who are you? Really,”
Janet hissed, ready to turn around and run back into the apartment.
Jy-ying did not answer immediately. She turned and looked at
Janet, confusing Little Wei further. Barking, he jumped up and down
on her leg, twisting the leash around her dress.

258

R.J. Rummel

Janet saw this and realized she could get a good start if she ran. She
backed up another step, and stared at Jy-ying warily, ready to flee instantly. “Dad. Dad,” she said, feeling some relief from uttering that key
word she hadn’t had to use in over a decade.
They were in the gravel alley between the apartment building and
the garage. Jy-ying sat down on the gravel, let the leash remain twisted
around her dress, and picked Little Wei up. She put him on her lap and
held him there, although he struggled to get back on his feet. He was
getting a little panicky. She said softly, “I’m sorry I frightened you. As
you can see, I’m no threat, so please come closer so I don’t have to
shout.”
Much relieved, Janet took several steps closer and waited, her body
still tense, her breathing coming in short gasps. She took a fast look
around to see if anyone was watching from the windows of the apartment building, and noted that this seemed to be a service alley and
probably not much used.
Janet was beginning to shake. Her head throbbed. She had gone
from the height of sudden joy to the depths of fear, all within minutes,
and her body was suffering from the resulting chemicals that had
flooded her bloodstream. Janet saw that Jy-ying looked pleased, as
though Janet’s fear told her something.
Finally Jy-ying spoke up. “I know why you are frightened. You
think I’m a danger to you, perhaps out to kill Sabah when he is a baby.
I am a captain in the Sabah Security Guards. As you may or may not
know, the infidels sent two time travelers to this time on a mission that
inadvertently made Sabah’s Great Victory possible. After the victory,
the infidels sent these time travelers a message that Security assumed
instructed them to prevent his success by killing Sabah or his parents. I
was sent here to save Sabah.”
Janet nodded warily. She could still be lying. She could have been
the one to receive the message.
Jy-ying paused for effect. “I have proof who the two time travelers
are, and I have seen the message they received. They are Joy and John.
They will try to kill Sabah.”
Janet was aghast. Her knees felt weak and she dropped down on the
gravel about a step away from Jy-ying with a huge sigh. “This explains
so much. No wonder they are so rich, although living such ordinary
lives. No wonder they can toss money around like pennies. No wonder
he is so successful. But I knew something was strange about them.
They are like people from my own world. For this age, they are too re-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

259

laxed, too informal, too colloquial, and their English—even their awful
American English—doesn’t fit into this time. And John treats Joy as an
equal. But then, I thought, without the leveling effects of television,
radio, or movies, anyone from two hundred kilom . . . miles away may
appear strange.”
Janet’s trembling had stopped. She stood and brushed the dirt off
the back of her dress. She took a step to Jy-ying and put out her hand to
help her up. “Shall we go where you were going?”
Jy-ying put Little Wei on the gravel and let Janet pull her up. She
untwisted the leash and, still holding Janet’s hand, she said, “I believe
you are here to save Sabah also. Yes?”
“I am dedicated to saving Sabah. That’s right. But as to my being
sent here, that’s another story.”
“Hold onto it. I’m going to take you to a pleasant place where you
can tell me.”
Jy-ying drove her to a well-tended park, much like Regents Park in
London, and explained that this was Golden Gate Park. “I come here
often on picnics with Joy and John, or with Little Wei, just to read or
think.”
They easily found a shaded park bench. Jy-ying unleashed Little
Wei, who scampered off in bouncing happiness to smell and explore.
She asked, “You are a Muslim?”
“Yes, a Sabah Muslim.”
“So am I, just to state what is obvious.”
Janet was back in the clouds. “I’m so happy, Jy-ying. You can’t
imagine how lonely I’ve been for someone to share this burden and my
fear. God is Great. I love Ed very much and he fulfills me as much as is
possible for one with my religion and passionate purpose. Oh, Ed is
Christian, but tolerant of my religion. I go to my Friday sermons at the
Ahmedi Mosque and do my prayers, and he goes to his St. Thomas
Church on Easter and Christmas. He’s almost agnostic, and I think
that’s the secret to his tolerance.”
Jy-ying was almost giddy herself. “Why are you so much involved
in his Congo project?”
“To speed up decolonization and thus facilitate missionary Islam
and eventually, the truth of Sabah. Also, I think the way these native
peoples are exploited and murdered is a sin before God. And, Jyying, I also love Ed. I can help him in what he passionately believes
and that is complementary to my own faith. And it gives me time to
prepare.”

260

R.J. Rummel

Her face flushed and her voice took on a sharp intensity. “Six years
from now, Sabah will be born. While helping Ed I also have been taking classes in self-defense and weapons. I thought I would be well
prepared in a few years to travel to Uighuristan to protect Sabah’s parents and Sabah. As long as I have a breath in me, no one is going to
eliminate him.”
She took Jy-ying’s hand. “Now I’m not alone. I know who wants to
kill him—Joy and John. Incredible. Now we can stop them together.
Sabah be praised. It’s a miracle that we found each other.”
Jy-ying nodded. “Don’t do anything rash without planning it with
me,” she warned. “We must act together. We have a world victory to
save, the soul of mankind. We must be careful, and we have years for
this. Tell me, why were you sent here?”
Janet turned toward Jy-ying and put her hand on the bench and
leaned on it. “I wasn’t sent.” She instantly plunged from joy into abysmal grief. The emotional shift felt as if she were falling off a cliff. She
drew in a sharp breath, and swiftly covered her mouth to smother a
groan. Her voice quivered as she forced the words out between her fingers. “Horrible, horrible how I ended up here.”
She put her elbows on her knees and her head in hands, and shook.
Jy-ying rubbed her back. She finally sat back, turned her wet eyes toward Jy-ying, and moaned, “I refused to think about it for years. I’ve
buried as much as I could. Now, it’s all coming back. I’m sorry for the
display.”
Jy-ying nodded sympathetically.
Janet looked off into the space of her memories. “I must start with
my father, Bur Wadi.” She choked on his name, and her eyes overflowed with tears. She began to sob. “I’m sorry, “ she said again, “I
haven’t said his name since I came to this age, so many years ago.”
Jy-ying put her arm around Janet and held her close. “I’ve lost my
Mom, Dad, and sister in civil war,” she said. “Cry as much as you like.
I know how you feel.”
Janet put her head on Jy-ying’s shoulder, still crying. “He was
Egyptian. I’ve been able to keep him in the back of my mind, although
there is a sacred part of my heart where he will live for me forever. He
was a great man and the greatest father—I am what I am because of
him. He brought me up, after my mother was killed.”
Janet stopped, deep in memory. Little Wei had returned from his
exploration. Sensing Janet’s grief, he jumped on the bench and tried to
lick Janet’s face, but she had buried her face in her hands again. Jy-ying

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

261

held him off. Several passersby looked curiously at them, and one
woman stopped and was about to come over, but Jy-ying motioned her
on.
At that moment, a policeman appeared in front of their bench, and
since Janet’s face was buried in her hands, he bent down and looked
closely at Jy-ying. “Is there something I can do for you ladies?”
Jy-ying’s own eyes were wet. She lifted them to the policeman and
replied in a shaky voice, “Thank you, officer. My friend has lost her
father and mother and I’m trying to comfort her.”
“If there is anything I can do, let me know. My mother died in the
fire and your friend has my sympathy.” He moved out of hearing, and
stood with his arms crossed, signaling people not to bother them.
Finally Janet pulled back, took a handkerchief from her purse, and
wiped her face. She shook her head and said, “Thanks. I’ve been alone
with this for so long, so out of my time, so unable to tell anybody about
this, I can’t tell you how much meeting you means to me.”
Tears trickled from Jy-ying’s eyes. When Janet raised her eyebrows
questioningly, she murmured, “My turn. You reminded me of what I
have not thought of in a long time—my father’s crumpled body, my
mother’s face destroyed by bullets. I . . . No, another time I’ll tell you
about it. Now I must hear about you.”
Janet gave a huge sigh. “Yes, my father. I have to begin with him.”

Chapter 21
Janet
Liverpool, 2003

J

anet had gotten up unusually early this morning. While her father
grabbed a donut and guzzled his coffee, she hinted that she would
like to see the afternoon experiment. He just nodded, kissed her on
the cheek, and rushed off.
Her father called her from his cell phone about an hour after he left.
“Hello Dad, what’s happening?”
In a deep voice, he answered, “Are you free this afternoon, Janet?
We are going to run our first experiment with a human being, and I
thought you would like to see it.”
“Thanks, Dad. What time should I be there?”
“Try to make it before 1:30. See you then,” and he clicked off.
As she put the phone down on her bedroom dresser, her eyes fell on
her mother’s photo, next to it. It was the only photo of her mother remaining in the house. Dad had destroyed all the others soon after her
mother was captured and executed as a rebel.
Janet hardly thought of it anymore. She still loved her mother, but
she had deserted them to fight against what they believed. Janet was
sure it was the English blood in her—always prone to rebellion. Why
she married an Egyptian Arab Janet did not know, but her mother and
father were very close until Sabah’s Great Victory. When Dad told her
mother he was a Sabah, although of the reformed sect, and she found
out Janet shared that belief, she left within a week.
Janet picked up the photo and for the thousandth time kissed her
mother’s face. They didn’t know what happened to her until her father
was secretly informed by a friend in the security police that she had
been captured attacking Imam William’s house and would be publicly
executed in Sabah Stadium. She had changed her identity, but the
friend recognized her prisoner’s photograph. As the top Sabah scientist
in the country, Dad was afraid to try to communicate with her. He said
he was worried about drawing attention to them. Sometimes in the case
of terrorism, whole families of a captured rebel were executed.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

263

While her father demanded that she stay home on her mother’s execution day, he went to the stadium dressed as an old man, and managed
to get a seat near the front so that she might see him and know that he
still cared and that she did not die alone. She saw him. She smiled at
him. And she was hanged along with nine criminals.
Janet put Mom’s picture down, and looked out the window at the
garden outside their suburban house. So peaceful, so quiet. How many
families, she wondered, have such horrible secrets as ours?
It was almost noon. Janet hurried to take a shower to commit ablution. After toweling herself, she stood on her prayer rug facing
southeast toward Mecca, and announced to herself her intention to observe the Noon Contact Prayer. She looked at the clock. It was noon.
She raised her hands and touched her ears with her palms facing forward, then dropped her hands to her side, intoning, “Allahu Akbar—
God is Great,” to make contact with her creator.
She recited the Key in Arabic that unifies all Muslims, and bowed,
placing her hands on her knees. “Allahu Akbar,” she said while bowing. “Subjaana Rabbiyal Azeem—Glory be to God, the Great.”
She continued to recite her prayers as she stood up, prostrated herself, stood up and prostrated herself again. As she got up the second
time she said, “Sabah is His Prophet” and assumed her final sitting position. She looked to the right, as though someone was there, and said,
“Assalaamu Alaikum—Peace be unto You.” She repeated this while
looking to the left, and then she was done. Mind at peace, her body
rested, she felt at one with God and Sabah.
After lunch Janet drove to the newly constructed Schawlow Laser
Institute, which was now the center of her father’s work on the time
machine. She enjoyed the pleasant drive from Liverpool through the
woods and fields to the Center. She drove along a little stream until she
crossed a small bridge, then drove through a clump of trees to the onestory brick building that stood on a small knoll.
The lovely setting used to be ruined by thick electrical cables looping into the building from nearby transformers on high voltage towers.
But they had been placed deep underground to eliminate their vulnerability to rebels. Below the knoll, almost out of sight, a barbed wire,
electrified fence protected the building. It had only one large gate, with
guard posts on each side manned by three guards. An armored vehicle,
always occupied, sat back from the gate. The perimeter of the fence
was graveled and patrolled at odd hours.
The guards at the gate knew her by sight and waved her in.

264

R.J. Rummel

She looked in her father’s office for him, but as usual he was on
the lab floor. She found him talking to two scientists, and waited a
respectable distance away until he saw her. She looked around at
the crazy machinery, some pieces the size of a garage, with black
cables snaking between them. Off to one side stood the first human-sized model of the time machine. The scientists still had much
to do on it, but they had already tested successfully a small-scale
model. And they had picked a former British Special Forces man to
send back to 1906 to find the infidel assassin planning to kill Sabah. He was undergoing training in the culture and technology of
1906 San Francisco. She’d met him at a party her dad hosted for
the scientists. He was so handsome, she tingled when he said hello
to her.
A humming noise filled the lab, seeming to resonate through the
concrete floor. As Janet looked around, the sound increased in intensity, and her father broke off talking to the scientists, who hurried to
their consoles.
Dad saw her, smiled, and joined her. “We’re almost ready,” he said.
“We have a volunteer standing by.” He motioned to his assistant scientific aide, Walter Keel, who was waiting by the open door of the time
capsule. Walter gave her a little wave. “If all goes well, he will end up
in a nearby glade, one week ago.”
Walter was her boyfriend. She had been introduced to him when
she visited the lab months ago. They’d chatted, and he called her two
days later and invited her to have dinner with him. Since her dad usually came home very late in the evening and she had to eat dinner by
herself, she’d jumped at the chance to eat out, and in the company of an
interesting young man. They had dated several times after that. But
nothing serious yet.
Janet was surprised. Walter had mentioned nothing to her about his
volunteering for this.
A speaker blared, “Thirty minutes. Clear the floor. Initiating countdown.”
Her father pointed to a booth. “We’ll go there at minus five
minutes.”
She followed him and listened as he went from console to console,
checking that everything was in order for the test.
“Minus fifteen minutes.
“Minus ten minutes.
“Minus six minutes.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

265

The low-pitched rumble from the machines now increased to an uncomfortable level. Janet thought she heard rapid popping sounds and an
explosion, barely audible above the noise. It must be part of the experiment.
Her father froze for a second, then jerked his head around to look at
the door, eyes wide. He ran to her, grabbed her arm, and pointed to the
concrete observation booth. He started tugging her toward it. Janet almost fell as he pulled her past Walter and the capsule.
Two explosions, one after another, blew aside the locked doors to
the lab. Two men, covered head to toe in black with only their eyes
showing, rushed onto the floor with their weapons firing. Her father
swung her forward, putting his body between her and the gunmen.
Through their joined hands, Janet felt his body jerk as he was shot
down.
She stared in horror at her father’s prone form, then looked up for a
moment to see two of the scientists who had been sitting at the largest
console now hunched down beside it, violently gesturing for Walter to
get into the time capsule. She didn’t care; it didn’t concern her. Her father had saved her life and now he was dead. He lay on the floor in a
growing pool of blood. She knelt down and took his head in her hands
and kissed him. She would never leave him. Crazed with anguish, she
had no thoughts—just the overwhelming desire to die with him. She
waited for death and Paradise as she held her father’s head in her hands
and stroked his cooling cheek. Bullets whizzed around them.
Walt suddenly grabbed Janet under the arms and jerked her away
from her father. As she screamed, “No. No!” he threw her into the time
machine and started climbing in after her.
His head exploded. He fell against the open door, slamming it shut.
Terrified, gasping for breath, Janet reached for the door, wanting
only to get out. She heard bullets hitting the capsule as she tried to push
the door open. Just then, the machine roared louder and louder, painfully louder, until she covered her ears with her hands. She felt a
tingling sensation, and dizziness transcended her horror.
Abruptly the roaring stopped, and with it her tingling and dizziness.
Bullets no longer struck the capsule. No sounds penetrated its walls.
She was left heaving short, terrified breaths, seeing only the awful images of poor Walt and her father, dead.
Shaking all over, mind fogged by horror, she could only curl up in a
ball and sob. She wept until there were no more tears. Her body was
burned out, her mind mush. It must have been hours later and more

266

R.J. Rummel

time still before she gathered her senses enough to accept that she
might no longer be in the Center. But instrumentation had not yet been
installed in the capsule and she had no way of knowing where she
was—or when.
Janet remained huddled in the bottom of the capsule. She was afraid
to move, terribly afraid to open the door. She was not afraid to die. She
was afraid of what world would suddenly blast through the door when
she opened it. She drew her knees up to her chin and shuddered. Never,
never could she have imagined this. If this was a nightmare, it was the
most horrible one possible.
She screamed. She screamed louder. She put her hands over her
face and screamed into them and held it as long as she could. Her throat
burned, but she did not wake up. It was real. She put her head in her
hands. Her heart pounded in her ears.
Eventually her mind began to emerge from its emotional wreck.
She had to do something. And there was only one something to do.
Trembling, she raised a weary hand to the door latch and slowly pushed
open the capsule door. Fresh air caressed her face and she heard birds
chirping and the rustle of branches. The sky was light blue, with puffs
of white clouds. It was so bright that her eyes flinched shut and she had
to squint until they adjusted. There was the smell of woodland, of
growing things and rotting leaves and wood. She was in a small, grassy
glade with oak trees all around. Through the trees she could see a field
and, in the distance, two low, mud-brown houses with what looked like
thatched roofs. A horse was pulling a cart across the field.
There must be a road there, she thought, the first evidence her mind
was beginning to function beyond pointing to the door.
She was somewhere at some time, but she didn’t know what to do.
If she stayed in the machine she would die. If she left the machine, she
might soon die as well. She had no clothes other than those on her
back. Her purse was on the floor back in the lab. She had no money, no
identification, no job, and knew no one.
Janet closed the door and scrunched herself in the bottom of the
capsule again. She rubbed her eyes with both hands, and tried to think.
Dad is dead. The anti-Sabah guerrillas killed him to stop the time machine. Maybe they were the same guerrilla group Mom belonged to.
Don’t think about that.
“Why am I here?” she asked herself out loud, hoping the sound of a
voice—even hers—would steady her. “Because Dad was testing this
time machine. Why was he doing that? Because Imam William set up

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

267

this project when he heard from Dad that the Peking project might have
been a failure.”
There’d been something said about a power drain at the worst moment in the time travel. Her father had been doing research on time
travel ever since he heard rumors that an American had been sent back
in time, and that a message might have been sent to the American since
Sabah’s Great Victory. He went to Imam William’s Palace, argued that
he should undertake a British attempt, and was given a blank check on
resources.
“Why?”
Janet thought through all her father had tried to tell her in his sweet
way. He really didn’t confide in her as an adult, but in his broken sentences and monosyllables, it became clear over the years that this
research and experimentation was not for the sake of science. It was to
protect Sabah. God be praised. The Imam, as did the World Council of
Clerics, believed the message sent back in time contained instructions
to kill Sabah’s parents before Sabah was born, or kill Sabah soon after
his birth.
“Yes,” she said aloud. “That’s the reason that Special Forces man
was chosen for the time travel. He was going to go back and protect
Sabah. Dad never put it in those words, but I guess that protection
meant killing the time traveler who received the message.”
She really had not thought about it much before. She stared at the
door, trying to relate it all to her horrible predicament. Science and
Dad’s work was another world. I was interested in Walt. I wanted to be
a good Muslim. I wanted to marry and have children and a good husband.
Dad is dead. He died trying to save Sabah. Sabah the Prophet. My
Holy One. All that is left of his project is . . . me.
Her mind focused on that. I am all that remains of his mission—
Dad’s great mission. I could finish it for him. I could be the one that
saves Sabah.
Her mind centered on that like a flashlight beam on a black night.
Tighter and tighter she focused; larger and larger it loomed in her mind.
I can save Holy Sabah. Me! For Dad. For all the Sabahists of the
world. For Islam. For God. God is great.
Janet could feel the emotional transformation as her mind reconstructed itself. It had been like disparate pieces of torn and ripped metal
strewn all over her mental field by the devastating hammer blows of
her father’s murder, then Walt’s. Then this incredible time travel.

268

R.J. Rummel

The sudden realization that she could save Sabah and fulfill her father’s mission was like a magnet, pulling all the metal pieces of her
mind together and aligning them with her emotions. She had a vision of
them all forming a deadly arrow pointing toward the time traveler who
would kill Sabah. She could feel that arrow, she could see it in her
mind. It began to burn and vibrate. It took her over completely and
drove her with one thought: She would be the one to protect Sabah. She
would be the one to kill his enemy. She would be the one if she had to
crawl on her stomach to find him and use her nails and teeth to kill him.
She yelled, “I will do it for you, Dad. And for Sabah!”
She could not prostrate herself in the capsule, but she could bow her
head. She went through her Dawn Prayer—this was the dawn of a new
life for her—imitating the proper body motions as best she could. She
ended with, “Ash-Hadu Allaa Elaaha Ellaa Allah, Wahdahu Laa
Shareeka Lah—I bear witness that there is no other god beside God. He
alone is God; He has no partner.”
I am reborn.
Janet firmly opened the door and stepped out of the capsule. Without looking at the bullet-dented exterior, she slammed the door shut.
She pointed herself toward the road, and started pushing through the
trees. She no longer feared this new world or how she would survive.
God was on her side. She just had to take one step at a time.
It was not easy to get through the trees. Low-lying bushes, broken
tree limbs, dead trees, and vigorous undergrowth hampered her, but finally she stumbled onto the field. It was even worse. It had not been
plowed for some years, and was full of brambles, potholes, low vines,
and stringy bushes that eagerly trapped her feet and tore at her skin.
She wore only her light leisure shoes, and the field kept trying to steal
them from her. A denim dress worn above her knees, and a sleeveless
blue shirt were no protection. By the time she hobbled to what was a
narrow dirt road, her legs were badly scratched and her feet were sore
and bleeding.
Janet looked up and down the road. Civilization! What next?
It was pleasantly warm, even though more clouds had shadowed the
sun. But now, as she stood in the middle of the road waiting to meet the
denizens of this new world, she started to shiver. The scratches on her legs
and the cuts on her feet began to sting. She put her arms over her chest and
thought again of what she had to do, and invented one key word that
would put any danger or fear in perspective. It was “Dad.” That would be
her key word, and as she focused on it, she stopped shivering. But she
couldn’t help the tears as she waited for what would come.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

269

Finally she saw a beat-up wooden cart drawn by a tired looking
mule coming toward her. An old man whose head almost disappeared
beneath a wide-brimmed hat and an old woman with a shawl over her
hair sat on the cart’s narrow wooden seat. Janet immediately thought of
the woman as someone’s grandmother. The man reined in the mule
when she waved at them.
Janet could tell how awful she looked when the grandmother
quickly reached into the back of the cart and grabbed an old buggy lap
robe, with what she supposed was hay and other things adhering to it.
The woman scrambled down from the cart despite her age and rushed
to wrap it around Janet’s shoulders. It hung down, covering her bare
legs. Janet just stood there, afraid to say a word. The man just sat holding the reins and watching with large eyes.
The grandmother put her face close to Janet’s and asked with compassion, in an odd accent, “What happened to you, girl?”
She speaks English. Great! Janet had given no thought to what she
would say, but the words tumbled out. “I don’t know. I found myself
on the ground in the field,” and she waved her hand toward it, “and
don’t remember how I got there or anything else.”
She began to cry. She really didn’t have to fake it. The grandmother
put her arms around her shoulders. Through her tears Janet asked,
“Could you take me to a hospital, please?”
Finally, the old man spoke up. “The nearest one is in Liverpool, too
far away. Take us all day to get there. I’ll take you to Doc Hawkins.”
They sat her between them on the uncomfortable seat and she was
so exhausted she put her head on the grandmother’s shoulder and fell
into a half sleep as they bumped, bounced, and swayed down the road.
She thought she could walk faster, but she was now going somewhere
in England with English-speaking people, and she had an explanation
for her condition. She no longer had any fear. She was on her way.
They entered a small town with one stone road down the center, a
few two-story stores, a pub, and perhaps ten or more small houses.
They stopped at the largest one, which had a white picket fence in front
and a little white sign with Dr. Jeremy Hawkins in black lettering.
Grandmother helped her down from the cart, took her hand and led
her into the house. Inside it looked like a small clinic. The living room
had been turned into a reception room, with a parlor divan, three hardbacked armless chairs, and an ancient desk behind which sat a trim,
middle-aged woman in a white smock. A pregnant woman sat on the
divan and a man with worn and torn coveralls waited on a chair, with
his heavily bandaged foot thrust so far out they had to walk around it.

270

R.J. Rummel

The pregnant woman greeted Grandmother with smile, and the man
automatically tried to stand in greeting, but Grandmother told him,
“George, if you get up I’ll stomp on your foot.” George gave up the
attempt and doffed his sweat-discolored straw hat.
Grandmother approached the desk with Janet, said, “Hello
Mary,” to the woman behind it, and told her, “This poor girl has had
some kind of accident. She stopped us on the road by Simpson’s
farm.” She pulled the blanket away from Janet’s legs in a way that
the man would not see, and said, “Look at her legs, and her feet are
bleeding. She doesn’t remember what happened. She must have lost
her outer clothes, also.” Grandmother leaned forward and whispered,
“Or they were taken from her.”
Mary look alarmed. “You don’t recognize her at all, Helen?”
“No. She must be from far up the road, or maybe even from Liverpool. Her English is strange, so maybe her parents are foreigners. I
think the doc should look at her.”
Mary nodded and said, “Wait a moment, and I’ll give you your robe
back.” She stood and took Janet’s hand, and led her into a bedroom.
She took a clean sheet out of a pile on a white metal table near the door
and replaced the blanket with it. “Wait here,” she said.
But with the sheet around her, Janet followed Mary out, and said to
Helen as Mary was handing the blanket to her, “Thank you for picking
me up and bringing me here.”
Helen gave her a grandmotherly smile, and left.
Doctor Hawkins treated Janet’s scratches with iodine. Janet gritted
her teeth and refused to cry out from the pain. He diagnosed her inability to remember as a reaction to what had been done to her. He didn’t
ask Mary to examine her for rape, which Janet gathered they would
only do with the permission of her parents.
God be praised. She was a virgin.
She was given a room at the clinic, treated nicely, sometimes ate
with Mary, who turned out to be Dr. Hawkins’s wife, or sometimes ate
with both of them. Mary found clothes that almost fit her, and she was
able to wear them in some comfort. They tried to help her with her
memory by answering all her questions, even those that normally
would have been absurd.
The year was 1888. She was in the little village of Fearnhead, about
twenty kilometers east of Liverpool.
The doctor sent a young boy to the county sheriff, describing
Janet’s amnesia. In a week the sheriff visited the clinic and questioned

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

271

her. He shook his head and said, “We have checked around the county
and I have written a circular on you and sent it to neighboring counties
and Liverpool. No one has a missing girl even near the age of sixteen.”
That was the age Dr. Hawkins guessed she was.
The sheriff contacted the Women’s Protective League in Liverpool
and a week later he told her, “The League has arranged for a family in
Liverpool, the Wilsons, to take you in until your own family reports
you missing, wherever they are. The Wilsons’ two sons are grown,
married, and now living in London. I recommend that you accept their
offer, although by law you have no say in the matter. Janet accepted.
Janet couldn’t have been luckier. James and Ester Wilson were a
wonderful foster family. They had always wanted a daughter in addition to their sons, but the two that were born had not survived their first
year. Janet even had her own private bedroom, which had belonged to
their sons. The Wilsons were lower middle class, Mr. Wilson being a
freight foreman on the Liverpool docks. They didn’t have that much
money, but they were more than happy to help her buy suitable clothes
and necessities.
They were Christians, really Anglicans. They thought the Christian
Crusades had been a holy effort and regretted that they had not succeeded in converting the Muslim heathens. More than heathens, they
saw Muslims as savages. Janet secretly prayed in her bedroom when
she could, and she was sure that God understood and allowed for such
exceptions, just as He did for soldiers in time of war. She went to
church with the Wilsons every Sunday, and did what they did at the
service. In her mind and heart, when everyone prayed, hers were to her
own God Allah and to Sabah. She was sure that God would understand
as well.
Girls did not ordinarily go on to secondary school, for that was
thought unnecessary for their work in the home. But this was the era of
educational reform and girls in increasing numbers were going on to
complete high school, and a few even went to college. Since she was
thought to be sixteen, she could complete the last years of high school
and requested of the Wilsons that she be allowed to do so, and they approved. This would give her a chance to learn about life and customs in
general in this era, how people dressed, and so on. Janet could learn
only so much from Mrs. Wilson. She also could begin the background
work for her studies of Islam and Middle Asia in preparation for protecting Sabah, and about the United States to aid in her search for the
one who would try to assassinate him.

272

R.J. Rummel

They enrolled her in Liverpool High School beginning in September of 1888.
For the first school day, Ester Wilson wrote a note to the school
pointing out Janet’s lack of memory, and stating that she would need
special help. This was circulated to her teachers, who informed her fellow students. From the beginning, she had help from her classmates,
who treated her profound ignorance of things they knew so well with
tolerance and kindness.
The boys treated her with the teasing that all the girls got and she
soon learned by watching the other girls how to respond to it—with
giggles, feigned horror, and sometimes a serious kick or punch the
teachers would not see.
After high school she had to go to college to specialize in Middle
Asia. With perfect grades and her doctor’s written description of her
amnesia and his recommendation, she was one of the few women admitted to Liverpool University. But she had to pay her way. Her foster
family did not have the money, nor the position in society for her to get
the proper recommendations for a scholarship. Anyway, she was a
woman, and since not many women went to college, such aid for
women was rare. So were ordinary part-time jobs.
Janet was determined to go to college. She had to learn about Middle Asia, where Sabah was born. She had to learn his language. Two
years in this old world had not lessened her desire to save him, to do in
his memory what her father wanted done. That arrow of emotion pointing toward saving Sabah had only strengthened and grown with time.
High school girls hear things. Janet found out that some of the rich
boys were bragging about a whorehouse they had visited. She made
friends with one of the boys and got him talking about where he had
been while at the same time fending off his hands. She had the name,
but could only get the address when she let him put his hand under her
sweater.
When she graduated from high school and was ready to attend college, she knew what she had to do. She refused to waste time and put it
off, regardless of her fright, embarrassment, and shame. When the day
came, she first prayed and asked God for strength, and asked Him to
understand that she was doing this to save Sabah. She asked for His
forgiveness. She completed her prayers with “Allahu Akbar” and,
while bowing, “Subjaana Rabbiyal Azeem.”
She asked her foster mother if she could borrow one of the family
horses for the day, to look for a job in Liverpool. With an answering

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

273

“Good luck,” she rode off to Madam Camille’s house in Seaforth, a little town on the outskirts of Liverpool, along Liverpool Bay. It was a
three-story home with a splendid view of the Bay that had been built by
a wealthy shipper some fifty years before. It had a four-column porch,
high porticos in the four corners, and from what Janet could see from
the outside, many bedrooms. She lifted the large doorknocker—a happy
man’s face in solid brass—and was surprised at the heavy thump it
made when she released it.
A large, dark-skinned man with a gray beard and turban opened the
door and looked at her strangely. Janet nervously asked to see Madam
Camille. The turbaned man looked her over in a tired way, and waved
her in with a bow. “Wait here,” he said, and left her standing in the
foyer.
Janet heard voices in another room and edged toward the door so
she could look in. She saw a living room of a size comparable to those
in most homes. Above a huge fireplace hung a large painting of a beautiful young woman in a ballroom dress. Heavy chenille drapes covered
the windows, and there was a bar in a corner of the room. Five women
lounged on red upholstered easy chairs and heavily cushioned divans
and couches. Two were chatting and laughing, two looked bored, and
one was reading. No men were present.
An attractive young woman in a loose housedress came out of a
side room and approached her. Janet saw immediately that she was the
one in the painting. Her face had none of the makeup customary for this
time period’s prostitutes. She had well brushed sandy hair curled
around her shoulders and piercing eyes that gave her a confident look.
She approached Janet and said, “I am Chastity Camille. Can I help
you?”
Janet’s eyebrows shot up and she inhaled sharply, momentarily
stopping her knees from shaking. The woman was no more than
twenty-one. Janet was so nervous her voice wavered and she stuttered,
“Excuse m-me, you are Ma-Madam Camille?”
Camille laughed. “You find me a little young, perhaps. Now tell
me, younger lady, why are you here?”
Dad! Janet thought, hoping her key word would help. It did. She
visualized the neon arrow pointing toward saving Sabah. “I need a job.”
She threw the words out.
Camille slowly looked her up and down. Janet straightened and
raised her chin. “I need money to go to the university.”
Camille looked into her eyes and nodded. “How old are you?”

274

R.J. Rummel

“My real age is twenty. Recorded age is eighteen.”
Camille took her arm and led her into the room she had came out
of. It was a friendly room, with a teak secretarial desk and two hardbacked chairs near the door, an ordinary four poster bed with a Roman
lounge next to it, a large seascape on the wall behind it, and more seascapes on adjacent walls. Lacy curtains were pulled back from
windows that looked onto Liverpool Bay. There were gaslights on three
of the walls, and several five-prong cathedral tabletop candleholders
held pink candles. Janet liked the room. It could have been hers, except
for the cross hanging by the bed.
Shutting the door behind her, Camille motioned for Janet to sit
down in one of the chairs while she sat on the lounge. “Tell me about
yourself,” she said.
Janet told her about her amnesia, her foster parents, and her schooling. She told her about her interest in Middle Asia and her desire to get
a degree in it, and maybe a graduate degree in London afterward. But
she could do nothing without money, which her foster parents did not
have. Camille was friendly and sympathized with Janet’s amnesia and
the loss of her real parents.
“You are a virgin?”
“Yes.”
“How far have you gone with boys?”
Janet could feel her face getting hot. “My breasts.”
“What did you do with the boy?”
“What do you mean?” Janet barely got out, looking down at her
hands clasped on her lap.
“You didn’t touch him.”
“No,” she squeaked.
Camille leaned back on her side and supported her head with her
hand. “Janet. Look at me,” she said softly. “Are you absolutely positive
you want to let men—some old, some fat, some stinking like a pig
pen—do anything they want with your body? Are you sure you will do
anything, any-thing, to make them happy while they are with you?”
Janet was sweating and couldn’t help the tear that started down her
cheek. Let me die, she thought. But she swiped at the tear, lifted her
head up, and tried to look Camille squarely in the eye.
The word would not come out. Please, God!
“Yes,” she barely croaked. Then firmly, “Yes!”
“Here is the deal, if I accept you. I can give you room and board,
the cost to be taken out of your weekly earnings. Or you can live elsewhere, and come in to work on a fixed schedule. As an apprentice for

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

275

six months, you would get 25 percent of what the men pay me. After
that it is 50 percent. But if you become popular among the men and
some women that visit us, if you attract new clients, I will increase that
to 60 percent.
“Any freelancing and I will immediately fire you. If you fall in love
with a client, I will fire you. If you fight with another girl over a client,
I will fire you. When working, you will wait in the living room. Men
choose there. If you are chosen you take the man to your appointed
room, and do whatever they ask. Period. Men can reserve you for a certain time, but it costs them extra. Otherwise, it is first come, first
choice, so to say.
“I have two doctors come in once a week to check all my girls for
disease.
“Virginity is special and among my clientele, it cannot be faked. So
I would auction you for the highest bidder, with a privately circulated
announcement. I will be auctioneer, and you will be on display at my
side, fully clothed and modest-looking, of course. This is so special I
would give you one-half of the highest bid. Agreed so far?”
Janet nodded, much too vigorously, but she couldn’t trust her voice
Camille sat up and said, “Take off all your clothes.”
Janet almost gasped, but controlled it. She stood and removed her
clothes with shaking hands.
“Turn around.”
Janet almost twirled.
“Slowly, girl.”
Camille got up behind her and felt and squeezed her breasts and
buttocks. “Okay, lay on the bed.”
Shivering with embarrassment, Janet did so. Camille poked and
prodded her, and asked her to take various positions.
“Okay, get dressed. You are in your prime, with excellent looks and
a trim and healthy body. And you are clean. You have taken care of
yourself. When my clients see your beauty and hear about your body
and talents—which my girls and I will train you in—men are going to
be rutting for you like bulls among cows in heat. I like you. You’re no
cheap whore off the street. Nor are you some stupid kid out for thrills,
or to spite some lover. I respect why you want the money.
“One more thing. You have too much hair down there. It would all
have to be shaved off. Can’t hide your jewel, can we?”
When Janet was dressed and standing in front of her, Camille took
both her hands in hers and smiled. “I offer you work,” she said. “Will
you take it?”

276

R.J. Rummel

Janet was close to fainting. She nodded.
Camille hugged her and kissed her on both cheeks. “Welcome to
my home. I will introduce you to my girls after you sign this.” She
went to her desk and pulled a form out of a drawer. “Read this. It details what I said. It is protection for both of us. I am legal; I can take
you to court or you can sue me. But I assure you, I run a respectable
house, and I am fair and honest with my girls and clients. No drunks
are allowed. No man is ever permitted back here if he ever hits or
abuses my girls.”
Janet signed, her hand surprisingly steady.
The bidding brought in ten pounds, paid by an India Company top
executive, for a full night with Janet. Her share paid her university tuition and living expenses for one month. From then on she lived at
Camille’s and worked two nights a week. Her foster family thought she
had a part-time job as a secretary in a shipping firm, and lived in a
small apartment in town.
She majored in Asian studies—there was only one course on Middle Asia—and took all the courses she could on Islam and other
religions. There were no courses on the Uighur language, but she hired
a Uighur student in medicine to tutor her.
For some reason having to do with her hearing, French was more
difficult for her than Uighur. But, she had to learn French to graduate,
so she hired a French tutor. His name was Edmund Dene Morel. She
soon discovered his anger over the mistreatment of the Congo natives,
and that he intended to do something about it. That this lowly clerk was
going to fight Goliath attracted her to him. When she also found out
what a good man he was, she fell in love with him. But she kept it contained. She had to finish her studies and she had to continue her work
for Camille to do so. Ed was poor and could barely support himself.
Six months after meeting Ed, she moved into her own cheap apartment, while continuing her work for Camille until a month before her
final exams. The last day she went in to work, the house was empty of
men and all the girls were waiting for her. It was a graduation party for
her. One large banner was hung across the fireplace: Congratulations,
Janet.
Camille gave a long toast to Janet: “How naive and innocent she
was when she first came to our house, and now she is teaching me
tricks. With Janet leaving, the clientele will fall off by 50 percent. But
Janet has found the love of her life. No, not the French condom with all
the rough, knobby protrusions, but a man. We should all take pity on
him, for Janet will kill him from exhaustion in six months.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

277

After the toast, Camille’s turbaned butler, who always seemed to be
nearby, carried into the living room a large, flat, gaily wrapped package. He handed it to Camille, who handed it to Janet. “For you, dear.”
Janet unwrapped it to reveal a sensual painting of a long boat and several two-masted sailing ships on a shimmering, choppy sea. She could
almost smell the salt water. And it could have been a view of Liverpool
Bay through a window of Camille’s house. The painting bore a plaque:
Claude Monet; The Entrance to the Port of Honfleur.
A small pink card was attached: Hang this on a nice wall, and always let it remind you of our love for you. Our fondest hopes for your
happiness and success—Camille and Girls.

Chapter 22
Jy-ying
San Francisco, 1908

J

anet looked into the distance, deep in her own story. “I married Ed
a year after graduation. My love for him has only grown greater in
the years since.”
Jy-ying had to ask. “Did you tell Ed about your work for Camille?”
“No, he knew nothing of that. I suppose I could have told him.
He never asked me about any lovers, which my lovemaking must
have told him were many. He just accepted it. I just told him that I
did not remember anything before sixteen because of my amnesia,
and that I was working my way through college as a secretary. I
didn’t want to take a chance with his love for me. Men are funny
about this, and hard to predict. So this has been one of my many secrets from him.”
“Like Sabah?”
“Yes, like Sabah.”
Jy-ying asked quietly, “Now that you are happily married to a man
you love so much, what about your resolve to save Sabah?”
Her voice grew steely with determination. “I will do all I can to
save him. Nothing can change that. Nothing, Jy-ying. Nothing.” She
looked down at her clenched fists on her lap, and visibly tried to relax.
But her vocal cords graveled her words. “In our work on the Congo, Ed
is often gone on trips for many weeks at a time. Because of my major
in college, he will understand if I want to make a trip to Uighuristan,
and I was going to arrange it so that he would have to go somewhere on
a trip of his own. I knew I would be there for years, and that he would
increasingly wonder, and demand my return. I hoped that I could return
to him eventually.”
Her voice softened to a whisper. “Also, you know, I have refused to
have children, although I know Ed wants many. I couldn’t. I want his
children, Jy-ying. Oh, I want them. But it would be too much of an
emotional burden on top of having to leave Ed, perhaps . . . forever.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

279

Her tears started to flow again. “And it wouldn’t have been fair to the
children if I got killed, even though they probably would be grown by
the time I left to do what I must.”
Her voice firmed again. “I have a duty to my father, to that young
assistant, Walt, to the scientists who died sending me off, and . . . ” She
thrust her chin out. “Excuse me for getting corny . . . to humanity.”
She wiped her face with one hand, and looked at Jy-ying for the
first time in many minutes. “But now, Jy-ying, with our finding each
other, all that is changed.”
Jy-ying stood and moved in front of her. She leaned over and took
Janet’s head in her hands and kissed her forehead. She looked into
Janet’s eyes and said, “Janet, we are partners. You are not alone in your
duty. We share it. We will do it. It is as though God brought us together. With my skills, your Middle Asian expertise, particularly on
Uighuristan, and our dedication, we are the perfect team.”
Jy-ying sat down and, holding Janet’s hand, she described her own
background, her lover Shu Kuo, her maneuvering for the time travel
here. She said her present mission had changed after she found out
about Joy and John—save Sabah, to be sure, but also promote democracy and end war, for that provided the fertile ground for the rise of
Sabah and his Great Victory. And she agreed that Janet’s work with Ed
for decolonization contributed to this.
Janet asked, “You had no relatives, nothing to hold you there except
your lover?”
“That’s right, and I now realize that I loved Shu Kuo more as a man
than a person. There could be other men, but only one person. You
found yours; I have yet to find mine.” I think I have, she thought. In
John.
“What happened to your parents?”
“Neither one was a Muslim. My father was a teacher of wing chun
kung fu, and started teaching it to me at an early age. Both my parents
were caught in a rebellion and killed. I was at home with them when
the soldiers of the democratic forces led by anti-Sabah General Li Tu
seized Anyang. They started raping and looting. Two soldiers burst into
our home. I was eighteen years old. My father ordered my sister and me
to hide in the attic. I wanted to stand with my dad and fight, but I never
saw him so angry as he demanded I climb to the attic, so I did. I found
a little crack and watched what happened. My father tried to fight them
off with his skill, but they shot him. They raped my mother, and shot
her in the face afterward.

R.J. Rummel

280

“I became a Sabah Muslim as a result. I lied about my age and
joined Sabah’s Security Service as a teacher of wing chun. I was later
promoted to other jobs in Security, the last being to help protect the
time travel effort.”
Little Wei was asleep on the walk by the bench, his little toes
twitching with his dream.
Jy-ying got up and said, “Shall we return?”
The policeman was still standing by them, and they walked over to
him hand in hand. Jy-ying told him, “That was very nice. Thank you,
officer.”
He tipped his helmet and walked off. They went to the Rolls and
Jy-ying drove them back to the apartments.

aaa
Joy
When Jy-ying and Janet walked in, John, Joy, and Ed were still sitting at the table talking, and stopped to greet the two. Janet’s eyes were
puffy and red, and her cheeks flushed. Ed was about to continue the
discussion with Joy and John, and stopped. He asked Janet, “Are you
okay?”
“I’m okay,” she responded, smiling broadly. “Just got dust in my
eyes.” Ed nodded.
John looked at Janet and Jy-ying, and then at Joy. Nodding his head
toward the two, he raised an eyebrow, but said nothing. He looked at
the Swiss cuckoo clock on the wall, saw it was near dinner, and suggested that they all go to the Fior d’Italia, a new Italian restaurant on
Union Street, for dinner.
Everyone agreed, and retired to their respective apartments to
freshen up beforehand. As soon as the others left and closed the door
behind them, John confronted Joy. “Okay,” he said, “what’s going on
with Jy-ying and Janet?”
Joy responded immediately. “There is something strange going on
here. Janet is an unusual person, and my intuition tells me there is
something more to her. Then that long absence with Jy-ying. It’s hard
to explain why Janet, with her great involvement and interest in Ed’s
work, would absent herself so long from our discussion.”
John was silent, and scratched his head. “Maybe it’s Little Wei.
You know how women are about little dogs. She might just have found
it more fun playing with him than jawing with us.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

281

“Okay, why did she look like she’d been crying?”
John smiled at that. “Guess she got something in her eye, as she
said.”
“Hmmm,” Joy mused, frowning.

aaa
Janet
Ed and Janet changed their travel plans so that they could stay in
San Francisco for a month. Ed had many telegram exchanges, trying to
reschedule his meetings and appointments in Liverpool, and adjusting
his publication deadlines for the West African Mail. John also told his
office manager that he and Joy would be taking a month-long vacation
immediately, but to call if there was a problem or an important decision
to be made.
They asked Hands, Sal, and Dolphy to come and meet Ed and Janet.
Dolphy brought his new girlfriend, Mariko, whom he’d met at college.
Janet noted that there was some tension and distance between Sal and
Jy-ying. When Janet had a moment with Joy, she said, “Sal seemed to
avoid Jy-ying during the evening. Is there a problem between them?”
“Yes. They had a close relationship for a short while and Jy-ying
broke it up. Personality differences, I gather. Although Sal has said he’s
over it, that’s still not quite true.”
“Obviously,” Janet responded.
After that the Morels and Joy and John spent much time together,
touring San Francisco, having relaxing picnics that included Jy-ying,
and discussing their missions. Janet and Jy-ying also had frequent private discussions about Sabah, China, and England, and about their
experiences in this “primitive” world. But mostly about Joy and John.
Janet was growing close to Joy, who always seemed interested in
what she had to say, especially about her amnesia and subsequent education. She finally told Joy about her work for Camille, and Joy was
sympathetic. What she seemed to have difficulty understanding was
Janet’s majoring in Middle Eastern studies, a rare field for a woman.
Joy kept asking how her interest in that field developed—what
“sparked it,” in Joy’s words. Janet was having a hard time with this,
and was getting uncomfortable with her lies. It was becoming difficult
to keep her stories straight.
But if she had difficulty, Joy’s lies were so creaky as to fall down
like termite-eaten outhouses if Janet gave them a slight push. But she

282

R.J. Rummel

didn’t. She knew Joy was lying about being born in New York of SinoVietnamese immigrants, her father training her in martial arts, university schooling in government and applied math, her job with the Tor
Import and Export Company when it was started in New York, her
growing close relationship with John, and the death of both their parents and their large inheritances when their parents died. But Janet
listened attentively and asked appropriate questions. And she laughed
about it all with Jy-ying when describing Joy’s open-eyed, sincere look
when telling her lies.
“It’s a circus of lies,” Jy-ying murmured unhappily. “Me to Joy,
John, Ed, and the three guys; you to them all; and Joy and John to you,
Ed, and the guys.”
Janet looked away, into her own thoughts, and mentally sighed. I
hate it. But it comes with my pledge to my dead father and to Sabah.
It’s what I have to do, like working at Madam Camille’s.

aaa
About a week before Ed and Janet were scheduled to leave, Janet
lamented to Jy-ying, “I don’t want to kill them. I really don’t. I like
them. They have good hearts. But I know—they have to die to save Sabah. And it would be my father’s wish. I’ve never killed anyone, Jyying. I’ve never killed anything, not even a rat. I hate to step on cockroaches in the kitchen. But I’ve got to. We’ve got to.”
Jy-ying nodded with understanding. She told her, “Let us think
about this. They are doing what we want them to do in preparing the
world for Sabah’s Great Victory. But,” and Jy-ying smiled, “John is the
historian and is the one who knows what to do for their mission. Joy is
his guardian and keeps him happy in body and soul. I could replace her
in that. So, she is dispensable. The question is how to get rid of Joy
without alienating John.”
Ah ha, thought Janet. I knew she had this growing thing for John.
I’ve got my love Ed. She has only Little Wei. Cute as he is, he’s no replacement for a man. But still, she’s right. We need only eliminate Joy.
Jy-ying continued with, “We must kill her in a way that will look
natural, given their mission. There are many ways of doing this. We
have to think about it.”
Now that it had come down to actual killing, Janet was emotionally
repelled and morally queasy. She could not do it directly, nor even be
present at the killing. Oh merciful God, Jy-ying’s got to do it.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

283

They were in Jy-ying’s apartment. Little Wei had his forepaws on
the front windowsill and was barking at a bird that had landed on a tree
branch close to the window. Janet was glad for the distraction and
watched him as he leaped up against the window several times.
Deep in thought, Jy-ying ignored him. Thoughtfully, she put her
fingers alongside her mouth with her thumb under her chin. Her eyes
narrowed. “Do you have any contacts in Mexico?”
The question appeared irrelevant to anything they were discussing
and surprised Janet, but she responded, glad for the different topic.
“Why, yes, many contacts. Especially among the Indians, who feel that
they live under Spanish and French inherited colonialism. Some of the
rich with Indian blood in them have been contributing to Ed’s work.
They see his Congo Reform Association as the only major effort to deal
with colonialism and—”
Jy-ying held up her hand to stop the flow. “Well, I now know
enough about Joy and John to say that the sooner we kill Joy, the
better.”
Oh God, Janet thought again.
Jy-ying finally realized that Little Wei’s barking was distracting.
She got up, went to the window, and picked him up. As he struggled to
get back to the window, she placed him on the floor by her armchair,
wagged her finger at him, and commanded, “Dai—Stay.”
His ears partly back, tail down, he settled on his stomach, put his
head on his paws, and looked up at her sadly.
Jy-ying immediately turned to Janet. “I have an idea.”

aaa
Joy
The three of them—John, Joy, and Jy-ying—saw Ed and Janet off
at the train station with much hand-shaking and kisses. Joy had grown
close to Janet despite the strangeness she sensed about her, and John
and Morel had also become good friends. They saw each other as warriors, together fighting the evils destroying so many lives.
Joy was surprised that, given all the powerful toes Ed had stepped
on, no one had yet tried to assassinate him. She told John about her fear
and together they armed Ed and Janet. She would carry a holster purse
and a gun identical to Jy-ying’s, who helped her buy it. Joy could not
find an appropriate purse, even in the many cowboy equipment stores,

284

R.J. Rummel

and Jy-ying said Chinese Security had made hers. So Joy bought a
purse of roughly similar design to hers and hired a tailor to rebuild the
inside into a holster, while leaving space for the normal female clutter.
Getting a good shoulder holster for Ed and a military Browning
1903 to put in it was no problem.
Almost every day, Joy and John had taken the Morels and Jy-ying
to the weapons range to practice. Ed and Janet were now well over the
stage of “What is this little curved piece sticking down with a metal rim
around it—a trigger, you say. What’s it do?” Joy was also happy to see
that Jy-ying knew her own Browning 1900 pistol very well, and was an
excellent shot with it. To Joy’s annoyance, Jy-ying tried to instruct
John on the proper shooting stance. With an amused glance at Joy, he
continued to get it wrong.
Jy-ying often challenged Joy to shooting contests, to the amusement
of the others, and neither one turned out clearly superior. It was clear to
Joy that Jy-ying considered it more than a sporting contest, the way she
concentrated, and her sour mood when she lost.
Joy also was growing concerned about their martial arts sparring—
it was getting too serious. While John watched one session, Joy had
barely blocked a hard knuckle fist to the face. It had landed on her
shoulder, which was sore for days afterward. Then Jy-ying had thrown
Joy so hard to the mat, she heard her joints crack. She was also sore
from that. She had gotten tougher herself as a result, but they couldn’t
get much tougher with each other without serious injury. Joy didn’t understand why Jy-ying had gotten so competitive lately.
Joy had watched John carefully during their practice with the Morels, and felt she still had a few things to teach John about weapons and
martial arts—she was not about to leave that to Jy-ying. But until his
speed and accuracy improved, she’d stand behind him and wear her
armored vest during his target practices.
After Janet and Ed left, it was back to work for Joy and John. They
had neglected their company and John had put off his investments. It
was not as bad for Joy, since Jy-ying had continued working and had
taken up some of the slack for her. Now they had much to do, including
preparing for their first political intervention in Mexico.

Chapter 23
Joy
1908

B

y September, Joy and John were ready for their first foreign
intervention to promote democratic peace. Their goal was to
prevent the Mexican Revolution of 1910–1920, which in the
Old Universe had cost about two million lives, many killed in cold
blood.
They traveled to Mexico City and there arranged to have Pancho
Villa and Emiliana Zapata assassinated. Those two assassinations
saved tens of thousands of Mexican lives. They also supported democrat Francisco Medero with twenty million dollars, and in 1911
he was elected president. To General Victoriano Huerta, who had led
a successful coup against President Medero in 1913 in the Old Universe, they made an offer to immigrate to Spain that he could not
refuse.
On their way home with Sal, who had set up their office in Mexico
City and had made many useful contacts, Joy almost regretted how well
it had gone. Having been trained as a warrior from the age of four, she
wanted to be tested against more than incompetent sex slavers or thugs
with bats. She’d been sure she would have this test in Mexico, but John
had persuaded her that they should not perform any assassinations
themselves.
Joy’s opportunity came in a totally unexpected way.
With no first class accommodations on the Mexican train they took
to return to the United States, they were stuck in a coach. It smelled
like a San Francisco homeless shelter on a windless August night, and
looked just like the train cars seen in old cowboy movies.
In the desert in the State of Durango, the train came to a sudden
stop. They couldn’t see anything but desert outside the windows, but
Sal was immediately concerned. He got up and hurried to the coach’s
vestibule and looked out. Rushing back, he warned them, “Trouble.
Rough looking men on horses have stopped the train. They’ve all got
guns. It’s probably a holdup.”

286

R.J. Rummel

They all checked their guns. Then they waited. John and Sal looked
nervous; John’s leg shook slightly where it touched hers. She did what
she was trained to do. She breathed deeply, relaxed her muscles, sharpened her awareness of everything going on around her, and centered
her energy. This was as natural to her as a driver getting into his favorite car, an artist picking up his brush, a violinist lifting his instrument to
play a concerto. This was what she did.
In minutes, four men with dirty sombreros, sweat-soaked bandanas,
and dusty shirts and leggings came into the coach. Three of them
started taking money and jewelry from the passengers, while one kept
his gun trained on them.
John whispered to Sal, “How many do you think there are?”
“Probably about a dozen.”
“Will they all be on the train, or will some be on their horses waiting at a little distance?”
“I think some will be watching the train while the others are inside.” Sal looked at Joy and whispered, “They will try to rape you and
take you with them. That’s what they do to young, attractive women.”
Joy smiled easily. “Thank you, Sal. Nice compliment.”
He gave her a strange look, and returned to watching the men coming down the aisle.
Joy and John had left their armored vests in their luggage. It was
very hot in the desert, and they had not thought there would be danger
on the train. Joy silently cursed their stupidity as she slipped her magnum onto her lap and set her purse over it. The only way they would
get her body was when she was dead, and not before a fight.
Meanwhile, John doubled over and coughed with one hand over his
mouth to hide his movements as he tucked his .45 against his hip, between himself and Joy. Sal, who was sitting across from them, put his
gun under a Mexican magazine he had been reading.
Soon it was their turn. With one of the bandits watching the rest of
the car, three others approached their seats. The bandits were stereotypical, as though playing the role in a B-grade Western movie of the
era. They were short, stocky, rough-looking, dirty, and stank like rotting meat. One of them had a black curly beard, and another a bushy
black mustache. The third one had a livid scar down the side of his
face. Joy suspected he shaved so that the scar would be prominent. A
skinny boy, maybe in his early teens, nervously guarded the rest of the
coach. He carried a rifle in addition to his pistol.
Black Beard saw Joy sitting at the window and with raised eyebrows quietly studied her. Then he looked at John, and back to Joy. He

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

287

turned his head to Mustache and said something in Spanish. Mustache
nodded, and Black Beard looked back at Joy and made some laughing
remarks. Joy glanced at Sal, across from her, and saw his face change
from a look of surprise to angry red.
Black Beard was the closest to her. Holding his gun loosely in one
hand, he bent over and reached across John to feel her breasts.
She shot him in the chest and John pushed his collapsing body into
the other three bandits. Mustache tried to get clear of the dead man and
bring his gun up. Joy exploded his head with a shot to the forehead and
John shot Scar Face in the heart. Sal had his gun pointed at the boy; as
he hesitated over shooting one so young, the boy brought his rifle
around. John shot him as he almost had it pointed at Joy.
Two more bandits rushed in from the vestibule behind them. Sal
saw them and shot one in the chest, but the second got a shot off. It
grazed John’s scalp. Joy whipped around and shot the bandit in the
head.
“Holy mother,” Sal exclaimed.
John let out his breath with a Pheeeuu and looked around in disbelief. Six dead or near-dead bandits lay around the coach.
“Okay,” John said, “no time for celebration. If Sal is right, there are
still six or seven bandits in and around the train, and we now have a
war on our hands. We have only a few minutes to take action.”
Joy saw the blood on John’s head and blurted, “Shit, you’re
wounded.” She pulled a handkerchief out of her purse and wiped his
face and head, and was relieved to see that the bullet had only grazed
his skin. While it bled a lot, as such wounds do, it was not serious.
John took out his own handkerchief and wiped her blood-spattered
face with it. She ignored him and reloaded her magnum from the box
she carried in her purse.
One of the passengers in the front of the coach, an American, approached them. He had a Derringer in one hand—a useless gun except
at close range, and even then, his was only a one-shot. He started to go
through the dead bandit’s pockets. “I’m after my wallet,” he said.
John pointed his gun at him and told him to get back to his seat and
stay there until this was over. Sal stood and yelled in Spanish, instructing everyone to get down on the floor and stay out of the aisle.
At that moment, the bandits outside opened fire on their coach. Bullets whizzed by; window glass and pieces of wood flew. They dropped
to the floor.
“Just like an old Western movie,” John yelled.

288

R.J. Rummel

This was not the place Joy wanted to fight from, but surprisingly,
John took the initiative. He hollered above the noise, “They can come
at us from three directions. They can ride up to the windows on their
horses and shoot at us inside. They can come down the coach cars from
the front or come at us from the rear. We can’t wait for them to do
that.” He looked at Sal. “Sal, you have a full magazine of eight rounds,
minus one?”
“Yes.”
John looked at Joy. “You’ve got a box of fifty cartridges, minus the
three you’ve reloaded, right baby?”
“Right.”
“I have nine left in my magazine, with another magazine in my coat
pocket. Still, we can’t waste bullets. We also have these pistols the
bandits were carrying, although I don’t know how many cartridges they
have left.”
Joy asked Sal to hand her the rifle the young bandit had been carrying. “This is a bolt action Springfield 03. They must have stolen this
from the American Army.” She took out a magazine and checked it.
“It’s got seven rounds.”
Another volley of shots came through the sides and windows of the
coach. Ducking down, John shouted, “I’ll cover us from the front coach
vestibule. You take the back one, baby, and Sal, you try to get them
from the windows. Keep them guessing by moving around.”
I’ll be damned, Joy thought. He may not know how to throw a knife
or aim a gun, but he’s a natural combat leader.
John kissed her quickly and duck walked rapidly up the aisle. Joy
lay on the seat and unbuttoned and removed her skirt and petticoat.
They restricted her movement too much, especially if she had to use her
knives or her hands. She also removed her hat, leaving on her blouse
and her Old Universe white cotton panties. She took out fifteen cartridges from her box and put them in her handkerchief, twisted it, tied
the ends in back of her neck, and unbuttoned the top of her blouse
enough to let the handkerchief pouch hang over her locket inside.
One last thing. She took her red headband out of her purse, turned it
inside out to show a lightning bolt against a red background, and put it
on. Then she waved goodbye to Sal, who had been watching her in
amazement, and headed toward the rear vestibule.
She knew that one of her most vivid memories of this battle, if she
survived, would be Sal’s face when he saw her bare-legged, knives
strapped to her hip and leg, armed with her magnum and the Springfield as she crept over the bodies of two dead bandits and into battle.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

289

There were no windows in the vestibule, just exits on both sides
with three steps to the ground. Opposite Joy was the door to the next
coach. She entered the vestibule just as a bandit was coming in from
the outside. He hesitated, taken aback by how she looked, and she shot
him in the head. He fell out of sight and another bandit rushed into the
opening, shooting with pistols in both hands. He thought Joy was
standing. She had dropped on the floor. She shot him in the chest. He
screamed and fell away. With the .357 hollow points she was using, a
body shot was as good as one between the eyes.
Joy heard shots coming from the front of the coach, but she
couldn’t take a chance on looking. What bandits she could see outside
were just dismounting from their horses at what they thought was beyond handgun range. They lay down on their stomachs with their rifles.
Clearly, they intended to wait them out until nightfall, and sneak up on
them in the dark.
Shit on that.
She duck walked through the back two coaches, making sure they
were free of bandits, and headed toward the caboose. The passengers
all were aghast at the sight of an armed and half-clad woman creeping
slowly past them, wisps of black hair falling over her face and her head
no higher than the armrests.
Just as she got to the last row of seats before the caboose, a bandit
reared up from behind a seat with his rifle aimed at her. She threw herself forward and while still in the air got a shot off at him with the
magnum. The hollow point blew his head apart.
Joy landed and rolled. A bandit hidden between the seats across the
aisle shot and missed; she came up, more hair whirling loose from her
bun, and saw through the raven strands his gun, pointed at her. Throwing herself sideways, she shot him in the heart. His gun went off and a
bullet dug a furrow in the floor.
Joy dashed into the caboose and jumped over the trainman lying
dead on the floor. She scurried out the rear, down the steps, and into a
gully along the right side of the rails, zigzagging down the gully to
avoid flying bullets. When she was out of range, she ran up a little hill
that overlooked the train and the bandits lying on the ground facing it,
keeping the rifle along her left side and pointed down so that the bandits wouldn’t see it. Since her legs were bare, she wanted them to think
that she was trying to escape a rape.
One of the bandits rushed to his horse. No fun letting a woman get
away, he must have thought. This was just what Joy wanted. She im-

290

R.J. Rummel

mediately fell on her stomach, hastily wound the rifle sling around her
left arm to anchor it, planted her elbows solidly, and sighted the Springfield carefully on the man now riding toward her. She slowly pulled the
trigger.
The rifle went off with satisfying recoil and the bandit slumped
forward and slowly fell off the horse. She jerked the rifle’s bolt back
and forth to reset another cartridge, sighted on one of the three bandits
lying down facing the train, picked him off, and with rapid bolt action
she picked off the other two in succession. The last one ran for his
horse, and she brought him down as he tried to jump on it.
Joy ran down to the dead bandits to get their rifles. One was not
dead yet, and rolled toward her, pistol in hand. She shot him in the
chest with her magnum. She picked up their rifles and ran to the coach
with them in her arms. When she got to the front vestibule of their
coach, she threw them in with a loud clatter and shouted for John.
When he stuck his head out she yelled, “Here’s their rifles. Pin the bandits down on the other side of the train.”
Joy had only a few rounds left in the Springfield. She picked out
another rifle and rapidly checked its magazine—five rounds left.
John yelled at her, “Wait, I’m going with you.”
She released the knot holding her handkerchief pouch of cartridges
to her neck, quickly reloaded her magnum. Finished, she shouted,
“Don’t be stupid. I need you to keep their heads down. Sal isn’t
enough.”
“No.”
Retying the handkerchief with the remaining cartridges around her
neck, she yelled, “Goddam it, I know what I’m doing. It’s riskier with
two of us. Stay and shoot.”
Without waiting for a response, she ran up the train toward the engine as Sal, and then John, returned to shooting at the bandits. Rifle in
one hand, her magnum pointed in front of her, Joy ran around the
train’s engine and into the gully on the other side of the tracks. The remaining bandits hadn’t seen her. She moved down the gully about five
hundred feet. Crouching, she climbed out of the gully and tried to come
up on the bandits’ flank. She couldn’t move behind them for fear of
being accidentally shot by John and Sal.
As Joy crept toward the bandits, she heard their voices. They were
still too far away for her to shoot them and she had no high ground. She
got down on her stomach and shoved the magnum down the back of her
panties to rest on her rear; she turned the pouch of cartridges to rest on

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

291

her back, and did the same with her locket. Then, with the rifle in the
crook of her arms, her chin almost dragging on the baked earth, she
slithered on her elbows toward the voices. She softly gasped several
times as she badly scratched her legs and stomach, but this was the only
way.
Joy heard shots from the train, and loud shouts from the bandits,
doubtless choice words that it was just as well she didn’t understand.
Sliding forward little by little, she finally saw the bandits lying on the
ground in a slight depression, facing the train. Their horses were about
one hundred feet away, hitched to some desert shrubs.
The bandits were arguing about something and gesturing at the
train. Keeping her elbow down and one cheek on the ground, she
inched her magnum out from the back of her panties, gripped it with
two hands, and with her chin now propped on the ground, she aimed
and gently squeezed the trigger.
Bang. The closest bandit threw up his hands and collapsed backwards.
She shot again but missed the second one when he jerked away. Stupid, she thought as he raised himself to run. She shot him in the side.
The third bandit got up on his knees and was bringing his rifle to
bear on her when he suddenly jerked, screamed, dropped his rifle, and
fell sideways at the same time she heard a rifle shot from the train.
Joy was not going to take a chance of being shot by friendly fire.
She slowly got up and waved her rifle at the train while keeping her
eyes on the bandits’ bodies. Now certain she was recognized, she cautiously approached them.
The one she’d shot in the side was still alive, watching her. His organs were peeking out of the large exit wound the hollow point created,
and his slow, painful death was certain. She pointed her magnum at his
heart, drew her finger across her throat, and looked at him with raised
eyebrows.
Pain distorted his voice as he croaked in mixed English and Spanish, “You ángel el vengarse?” Joy thought he was asking if she were an
avenging angel. He lay back and relaxed, and with a resigned expression weakly pointed to his chest.
Joy shot him.
She stood shakily and stared at the three bodies. It’s over. I can’t
believe it.
She pulled her locket around to her front and rested the rifle against
her leg. Holding the magnum loosely in her hand, she opened the locket

292

R.J. Rummel

and kissed the picture of her mother. Her voice husky, she said aloud so
that her mother’s soul could hear, “Thanks for the training, Mom.”
Joy closed the locket and let it hang outside her blouse. She twisted
the handkerchief pouch with the cartridges around to her front and
when it touched her right breast, she discovered that it was painfully
bruised. Shifting the handkerchief to her left, she opened it and again
reloaded her magnum. Rifle and magnum hanging loosely in each
hand, she took several steps toward the train then slowed to a stop as
her legs began to shake uncontrollably.
Oh my God, am I tired.
She was feeling the steep energy collapse as the adrenaline drained
from her body. She was also bleeding from numerous scratches and had
a nasty cut on her stomach that she hadn’t noticed until now. The pain
in her right breast felt like a rib had been broken. Her white blouse and
panties were dirty gray and blood-spattered. Her elbows were rubbed
raw. Her long hair was all over the place, several thick strands hanging
over her face, her headband almost hidden by them. Her knife sheaths
stood out like bands of blood on her dirty leg and hip.
But Joy had been tested, survived, and won a warrior’s battle. I
can’t say I’m happy, she thought. I’m . . . pleased. Yes, that’s the right
word. Pleased.
A crowd of passengers had already left the train and more were descending the steps from the vestibules. John and Sal rushed toward her,
still carrying their own guns. John got to her first, and lifted her up in
his arms and carried her to the train. As they passed through the crowd,
people started clapping and several of the men tried to approach and
thank her. Sal refused to let any of them near and roughly made way
through the crowd for John and Joy. When they got to their seats and
John put her down, Sal brought her skirt and petticoat. She was
sprawled against the window. John stood looking at her in amazement,
as though she had turned into a fire-breathing dragon.
John at last broke the spell, and wet his shirt with water from their
jug. He tried to clean Joy’s scratches and cuts. He said not a word.
Sal finally emerged from his own paralysis, and went to check on
the train’s engineer.
When John finished cleaning her, he gave her a long kiss, which
elicited more clapping from people watching them from both vestibules. Holding her shoulders and looking her in the eyes, he said in
mock gruffness, “Show-off. Anyway, what took you so long?”
“I’ll remember that,” she mumbled.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

293

The banter suddenly went out of him. He pulled her to him and held
her so tightly Joy could hardly breathe. Her breast hurt. “I love you,” he
said. “I thought I lost you. I love you so much.”
She kissed him in return then, realizing they were still being
watched, she pulled back and murmured, “I’m a wreck. I had better get
dressed.”
Joy pushed John away when he tried to help her dress. She found
the pins she had taken out of her hair, pinned it up into something she
hoped resembled a bun, and put her wide-brimmed, flowery hat on it.
Sal came back about fifteen minutes later and said that the engineer
and coalman were dead, and he couldn’t find anyone who knew how to
operate the train. Sal looked at Joy and quipped, “You don’t know how
to operate the train, do you?”
She couldn’t even smile.
John muttered something about being surprised, and suggested that
he would take one of the bandits’ horses and ride up the line until he
found a station from which he could call for Mexican troops.
Weakly, Joy objected, “No. Sal and I are going also.”
“Are you crazy? You rest here with Sal while I go.”
“Not on your life. I’m going and so is Sal.”
John gave her a long look, sighed, threw up his hands and said,
“You’re hopeless. Let’s go.”
He and Sal got their things together and found their luggage. Sal
explained to the people nearby what they were going to do and asked
them to tell the others. They rounded up three of the bandits’ horses,
and John and Sal tied their luggage on one. John got up on the biggest
horse, and told Joy to get up behind him.
Joy was too exhausted to argue any longer. She put up her hand,
and he pulled her up behind the saddle. She circled him with her arms
for support and rested her head on his back. Two hours later, they
found a police post beside a railroad crossing and little train station. By
then Joy had some of her energy back.
Sal told the policemen, as John translated his Spanish for Joy, “Our
train was attacked by bandits. The trainmen are all dead.” They called
their captain.
The captain came galloping up on his horse about fifteen minutes
later. Sal repeated the story and added in Spanish, “There were sixteen
bandits altogether.” That was the number John and Sal agreed on while
on the way. “They were going through the train, stealing everything
people had. They are all dead now.”

294

R.J. Rummel

The captain looked surprised. “All sixteen?”
“Si.”
“I didn’t know Federal soldiers were around here,” the captain said.
“Do you know who commanded them?”
“There were no troops,” John responded in Spanish.
Joy didn’t know what he said, but she recognized his patented mischievous grin. She watched the captain’s face for his reaction. He
looked confused.
“How did they all die?” the captain asked.
John and Sal had been waiting for this. Both of them pointed at Joy,
who at that moment looked liked she had been gang raped and abandoned. Looking glib, Sal said in flippant Spanish, “She killed them.”
The captain looked at Joy in utter disbelief. At that moment she
didn’t look like she could fight off a child. His expression grew knowing, and with half a grin, he repeated, “She killed them?”
“Si,” John and Sal said, now with unmistakable pride in their
voices.
John added in English, “We killed three. She got thirteen.”
Playing along with what he thought was a joke, his grin even wider,
the captain asked in English, “She killed thirteen?”
“Si,” John answered, somewhat tartly.
Joy put her hand over her heart and tried to look demure. She whispered, hoarse with fatigue, “Me? Look at me, captain. How could I
possibly kill a chicken? They’re joking.”
With that the captain laughed uproariously, and said in English, “Of
course.” He told Sal that he would send an engineer and troops, and
that they could wait for the train in the station.
Sounding a little irritated, Sal responded, “Thanks, we will.”
John lifted Joy off his horse, and Sal turned all the horses over to
the captain. With the help of one of the captain’s men, he lugged their
suitcases into the station. John had carried Joy there already and had
laid her down on a hard bench with her head on his lap. Joy was asleep
in half a second.
The train arrived about four hours later, the noise of its arrival waking Joy. She felt much better. She walked with John and Sal toward
their coach, but were stopped by an outpouring of passengers who surrounded them. John told her they were being thanked for what they did.
A troop of Mexican soldiers gently pushed the passengers back and
formed a line leading to their coach. They were the ones who had been
sent to the train, and saw the bodies. The passengers had told them
what happened.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

295

The captain, now very solemn and apologetic looking, walked up to
Sal and said, “The passengers have taken up a collection for your beautiful Amazon, and asked that I give it to her. Would you please explain
while I hand this to her?”
He turned around to the man behind him, who passed him the box.
He took it, turned stiffly, and offered it to Joy with a bow while Sal explained that it contained thank-you gifts from the passengers.
Joy took the box and looked around at the crowd. They looked back
at her expectantly. What could she say? Most of them were poor Indians and peons probably visiting their relatives, with a few obvious
middle-class Mexicans mixed into the crowd.
Joy opened the box, and amidst coins and Mexican pesos were little
figurines and homemade art objects that she knew would be precious to
their owners. She held the box close to her, bowed to them all, and said
in the only Spanish she knew, her voice breaking, “Gracias, mis amigos. Gracias mucho— Thanks, my friends. Thanks much.”
They clapped and the captain turned to his men and said, “Attention. Salute these warriors.”
As the two lines of Mexican soldiers saluted them, Joy, John, and
Sal walked between them to their coach. Tears ran down Joy’s cheeks,
and John and Sal’s eyes glittered.

aaa
Joy didn’t recover her energy until they returned home. That surprised her. This had been her first serious combat and she had
thought beforehand that her conditioning through regular jogging
and martial arts practice would, barring wounds, see her through
short-lived combat without loss of energy. John calculated later that
the whole affair with the bandits, from the time the train stopped until the last bandit’s death, had taken about thirty minutes. She felt
afterward as if it had been twenty-four hours. She had not counted
on the effect of the chemicals flooding her body in response to the
danger, or what absolute focus and the total alertness of combat
would do to her when it was over.
Yes, I was cool and composed throughout, she thought back later,
but fear was there like a dim shadow, ready to show itself if invited.
The cut on her stomach became infected during the trip back, and
John got increasingly worried about it. As soon as they got home, he
rushed to their medical capsule and treated it with an antibacterial

296

R.J. Rummel

ointment and gave her a shot of penicillin. Joy put the ointment on his
head wound as well and he strongly protested as she cut his red mop
around it to do so. For several weeks he wore a golf cap at the office.
Of course they planned with Sal to get together with Jy-ying,
Hands, and Dolphy as soon as they could to brief them on the trip.
But beforehand, Joy and John decided the wall between Jy-ying and
Sal was getting bothersome. Joy talked to Jy-ying and John to Sal
about it.
Jy-ying told Joy, “Regardless, for the sake of the company, my
friendship with you and John, and our mission, I’ll try to put our broken relationship behind me.”
Sal was the most difficult As John told Joy, he was almost in tears
as he’d said, “I thought she was perfect for me and I was falling in love
with her. It hurts. But I’m a big man. There are billions of chicks.
Anyway, you know these Chinese gals—flighty, so insecure they can’t
stand a real man.”
“Don’t let Joy hear you say that.”
Sal smiled. “She’s different, you know—Sino-Vietnamese, she
keeps telling us.” Sal perked up. “That reminds me. I told Dolphy and
Hands nothing about what happened on the train. Let me handle that.”
When they all gathered in John’s apartment, Jy-ying and Sal still refused to sit near each other at the dinner table. Sal had brought with
him a Spanish newspaper and a self-satisfied expression on his face.
Joy glanced askance at Jy-ying and saw her dour expression. She was
hugging Little Wei to her on her lap and he seemed happy with the attention.
What’s with her? Joy asked herself. She’s the one who broke up
with Sal, and it’s been quite a while.
Once they were settled and Joy had given Jy-ying tea and the rest of
them cold Anchor Steam beer, Sal held up his hand to stop their idle
conversation about the temperature in Mexico. He slowly opened the
newspaper and pointed to the large, bold, front page headline. Only
John and he could read it. Sal exclaimed, “Well, what do you know?
Isn’t this amazing. I’ll be doggoned.”
Dolphy urged in exasperation, “Get on with it, Sal. Enough of the
elephant cr . . . patties. What’s it say?”
Sal hesitated. “Okay, if you really want me to read this from the Sol
de Durango—”
Before Hands could slap his shoulder, Sal started freely translating
the double column news item.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

297

AMERICAN WOMAN ANNIHILATES BANDIT GANG
Durango, September 26, 1908. An American woman
exterminated the famous Toraido gang that has been operating in Durango for ten years. Twenty-five members of
the gang, including Toraido himself, were found in and
around the train by Federal troops after the woman’s
companions directed them to the stalled train. The gang
killed three of the trainmen.
Passengers said that the woman shot several of the
gang members when they were aboard the train. Then she
decided to fight the bandits on their own ground. She
prepared herself by taking off her clothes in order to distract them and jumped from the train, guns blazing.
Passengers who saw the battle from their train windows
say that, armed with a rifle and a pistol, the woman ran
nude from one side of the train to the other in a hail of
bullets, shooting the gang members down one by one.
She had numerous wounds. One shot grazed her
stomach. After she killed the last bandit, her wounds were
so serious that she had to be carried back to the train by
her companion. As passengers averted their eyes, her
companions treated her wounds and dressed her.
The names of the woman and her companions are unknown. Governor Cesar Velasco of Durango has asked
for help in finding this incredible woman so he can present her with a gold medal and make her an honorary
citizen of the state.
With a smirk, Sal stopped reading and waited.
Hands asked, “So?”
“You must have been on the train, “Dolphy said with interest. “Did
you see all this stuff happen?”
Sal just sat looking smug. Joy glanced at John, and he looked
smugger.
Where do men get this look? Joy wondered.
Dolphy looked at Sal, at John, and finally at Joy’s utterly innocent
expression. He looked away for a moment, did a double take, and
looked back at her sharply. With growing amazement he pointed at her
and said, “Joy?”
Hands said, “No! Our Joy?”
Sal nodded haughtily, and Joy saw John’s smirk cleave his face.

298

R.J. Rummel

Dolphy exclaimed, “Well, I’ll be God . . . darned.” He and Hands
sat there staring at her.
Finally Hands said, “Nude, eh. Any pictures?”
“I’m selling them for ten cents each,” Sal said, laughing.
“What? Only ten cents each?” Joy said, straight-faced. “You have
no sense of value, Sal.”
Hands replied, “What? Ten cents? Way overpriced. I’ll give you
two cents.”
Joy gave Hands a look that frosted his eyebrows.
John could not let this opportunity go by. “Actually,” he said, “the
story was incorrect. It was so hot she rode naked the whole trip. And
when she ran outside to fight the gang, she only had a .22 caliber handgun. And the count is wrong. There were fifty of them.”
This all was too much for Joy. She punched John in the shoulder
and banged Sal on the head. He cringed and yelled, “Help! Keep her
away from me.” Hands only got away by leaping off his chair.
“Are you guys having fun?” she asked. “Really, there were only
sixteen of them, and I only shot thirteen. And without Sal and John, I
couldn’t have done anything. They set it up for me and kept the bandits’ heads down so that I could . . . ” Suddenly realizing what she was
admitting to, she finished lamely, “. . . help.” She felt her face get hot.
“Yes,” John said in a pseudo-serious voice, “it is nice having a
woman along who can give us men some . . . help.”
Joy punched him again and they all broke up in laughter. John and
Sal then told Hands and Dolphy the whole story.
Joy noted that Jy-ying had been surprisingly quiet throughout the
exchange. Joy winked at her.
Jy-ying gently put sleeping Little Wei on the floor and got up and
came around the table. She put one hand on Joy’s shoulder, and her
head close to Joy’s ear. She whispered huskily, “Congratulations, Joy.
You are a true warrior and you do us proud. Let’s get together whenever.” Squeezing Joy’s shoulder, she added, “I would like to hear the
details. I have much to learn from you.”

aaa
When they were alone in bed that night, Joy and John talked about
their battle with the bandits. Joy remembered each shot, her position
during each phase of the battle, what the desert felt like under her feet
and stomach, and even the heat of the sun on her back. She was like a

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

299

tennis pro who, when asked about her winning volley in a second set
tiebreaker, can recall it exactly.
John asked, “Did you know what the black bearded bandit said
when he was looking at you in the coach?”
“No, and why should I care?”
“I don’t know. I had forgotten about it until Sal brought it up. He
said, ‘Ella es la’—she is the one.”
“I am the one what?”
“I don’t know. Maybe he meant something like ‘She is the one we
should rape.’ Or, ‘The one to save for later.’ Whatever. Who can read
the minds of those savages, anyway?”
Joy waved the whole question away.
John was quiet for several seconds as Joy cuddled up to him. His
body was pleasantly warm in the cooling evening air.
He asked, “Have you ever killed someone before we were attacked?”
“No,” Joy murmured.
“Have you ever seen a person killed before?
“No, “ she sighed. I wanna sleep.
“Have you ever seen a dead body before?”
“No.” She put a finger on his lips. “I’m sleepy.”
He took her finger away from his lips and whispered, “You’re so
beautiful and so feminine. You’re a passionate and loving woman.
Nothing cold or steely about you at all. Yet, and I can’t get over this,
you killed those bandits with cold calculation, without hesitation, without a tear, as though you were a professional executioner. Even Sal
hesitated before killing the boy, and I couldn’t shoot him until he
looked like he was going to shoot us.”
He stopped for a moment and she felt him shift to his side, brush
her hair back from her face, and lift himself to one elbow. She opened
one eye a slit to see him staring at her.
“What ya want?”
“You killed thirteen bandits. Thirteen. And afterward you acted as
though you had pulled up a patch of weeds. This is no criticism or
complaint, baby, God forbid. But it’s just that I’m having difficulty
bringing the two sides of you together.”
Joy opened both eyes, pulled his hand from under his head, and
watched his head flop onto the pillow. “Okay. I don’t sleep; nobody
sleeps.”
Joy really hadn’t given this any thought, but he was right about the

300

R.J. Rummel

cold-mindedness. So she did think about it, and after a few moments
she responded, “I have been trained through countless repetitive moves
to disarm or disable when attacked and to kill if my life is threatened.
It’s almost as automatic as breathing. But as far as my emotions or tears
are concerned, these bandits were to me like all the actual or potential
mass murderers we will have to deal with. They were like those that
murdered my mother’s and Gu’s husbands, and tens of millions more. I
was not sorry to have killed them. Not at all. They were evil and I was
happy to rid the world of them.”
John nodded, but they had been so close now for over two years
that Joy could sense a new reserve in him. As though trying to cover it,
he took her in his arms and said, “I guess I was as cold-blooded. I suppose it’s kind of sexist. Men are the warriors and our culture expects
them to go into battle and climb over the dead and dying with cold eyes
and fierce concentration. It’s just that I have difficulty seeing my loving
and feminine partner being such a warrior.”
He paused, and she could see his eyes getting moist. “Anyway,
sweetheart, again you saved yourself from sexual slavery and death.
And you saved the lives of Sal and me. He and I had talked about this.
We knew what would happen to you if they took you off the train. If
they had tried to do that, we would have died shooting, but each of us
would have saved one bullet for you. Do you understand that one or
both of us would have shot you dead before we died?”
Joy put her head on his shoulder and he put his arm around her. “I’d
have done the same for you, my dearest. It is the very greatest we can
do for each other.”
He continued, “Thanks to you, we are all alive, my sweetheart. And
thanks to your training, and to your mother. She was right. The world
can be an ugly place and someday, you did need the training.”
Joy idly moved a finger through his orange chest hair. “We are now
even, you know. We’ve saved each other’s life.”
“How did I save your life?”
“I’m surprised you’ve forgotten. In the warehouse. I was just about
to kill myself. You stopped me.”
John pulled her head off his chest, turned on his side, and put his
hands on both sides of her face. He brought her eyes close to his and,
looking into them, he said, “You know, baby, I am the luckiest man
alive.”
Joy kissed him and told him the truth. “My dearest, you are no

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

301

luckier than I am. And the bandits? I could not have done what I did
without you and Sal. Honestly.”
John lay back with his arm around her and she lay on his shoulder.
She waited patiently and he began to snore. She gave him another minute, and poked him hard in the ribs.
He jerked awake. “Huh? What?”
“I didn’t say ‘Good night,’ dearest,” she purred, and was soon
asleep before he fell asleep again.
She put that Mexican newspaper article in her scrapbook the next
day.
John never complained about her training methods again. And after
finding out that he was a natural combat leader, she never again felt
like being sarcastic about his efforts to learn.

Chapter 24
Jy-ying

J

y-ying and Janet had been corresponding with each other regularly, conveying through hints and innuendo the progress of their
personal mission to save Sabah. As to their secondary goal to
promote decolonization and democracy, they could write about that
openly. But as soon as Jy-ying found out about Joy’s safe return from
Mexico, she did not want Janet to remain ignorant of it until a letter
from Jy-ying arrived weeks later. A day after Joy and John’s return
from Mexico, Jy-ying sent Janet a personal telegram.
Dear Janet:
Thank you for your help on my little project. Did not
work out. Have other ideas.
Keep in touch.
Jy-ying
Jy-ying knew from talking to Joy that in 1909 she and John would
make their next intervention in Japan, but Joy had been unclear about
their subsequent moves. Japan offered Jy-ying no opportunity to have
Joy killed. She had no contacts there outside of the company office that
Joy was setting up, and being Chinese, her traveling secretly to Japan
would probably be fruitless, if not too hard to hide.
But if their intervention also involved a trip to China, that surely
would be the end of Joy. Still, Jy-ying reminded herself, there was
no need to hurry this. She would know when they would try to
eliminate Sabah’s parents or kill him. At that point, Jy-ying could
kill Joy herself.
As to John, he turned her on whenever they all got together. He obviously loved Joy, and Jy-ying envied the special attention John gave
her during their meetings or socials. So Jy-ying had made no overt
move, except to show wide-eyed interest in whatever he said. She was
increasingly lonely in spite of Little Wei, but that was not why she
would now seduce John. She told herself it wasn’t because he was a

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

303

man she hungered for, but because he was . . . John. And he and Joy
were not married. It wasn’t as though she would be seducing Joy’s husband.
The next day, she went to Joy and John’s offices and asked their
secretary, Agnes Hammond, if she could see John.
She looked up at Jy-ying in surprise and immediate appraisal. Jyying had been careful to cultivate good relations with her, and had
given her an inexpensive carving of a dragon for her birthday. Her expression changed from appraisal to approval. “Don’t you look
scrumptious,” Agnes said, raising a finger and waving it in a circle.
“How do you keep the men away? And for a moment there, I thought
you were Joy. You two should each wear a different colored ribbon on
your wrists.”
Jy-ying had studied Joy’s dress and hairstyles, and tried to be as
different as possible while maintaining a certain decorum. She wore her
favorite yellow and black Chinese cheongsam with red accents. It had a
modest slit halfway to the knee—any more and she would look like a
Chinese whore. It was open at the neck to display a jade necklace. She
wore no hat. And while Joy was currently wearing her hair piled up and
fluffed out in a Gibson girl look, Jy-ying had spent half an hour combing and brushing her long hair. She paid special attention to parting it
so that it framed her face like an open curtain before falling to her
shoulders and down her back to her waist.
She knew how risqué she already looked. In this age women let
their hair down just before their lover took them to bed or as a bold hint
that he should. But this was the company and people close to Joy and
John, as Agnes was, knew John, Joy, and Jy-ying were counterculture.
Anyway, John was from Jy-ying’s time; she wasn’t trying to make it
with some man from this age.
Jy-ying had spent more time brushing Little Wei’s hair, resolving
by the time she was through to only adopt a short-haired dog next time.
She put a shiny new red collar around his neck and stepped back from
him to get a good look at the result. He wagged his tail and looked back
at her with his round black eyes, the tip of his little red tongue sticking
out of his mouth. She told him, “You are quite a handsome fellow, you
know.”
Now, responding to Agnes, Jy-ying said, “I have an important
meeting with an exporter after seeing John.” She laughed. “I am trying
to seduce a concession out of him.”
Agnes twittered. “Careful John doesn’t mistake you for Joy.”

304

R.J. Rummel

“Would that be bad?”
The secretary rose behind her desk, leaned toward Jy-ying, put her
open palm next to her mouth, and whispered, “Joy would kill you.”
Jy-ying thought, She could only wish. Instead she said, “I hope that
she doesn’t get any mistaken ideas.”
“Well, I won’t be passing on any,” Agnes whispered with a conspiratorial grin. She waved at John’s door. “Just knock and go in. I’m
sure he won’t mind, if it’s you.”
Jy-ying stepped to John’s office door and knocked, opened it,
looked in, and said, “Can I come in?”
“Yes, why do you ask?”
Jy-ying entered with a smile.
John looked up from the ledger on his desk and asked with a little
exasperation, “Baby, what are you doing? And why are you dressed
like that?”
“I’m Jy-ying.”
John gaped. When he recovered, he explained, “I’m sorry, Jy-ying.
The lighting beyond my desk is not too good and you kind of look like
her.” He chuckled self-consciously, and reddened as he took in her
dress and hair when she approached the desk.
Little Wei walked around the desk and stood up to put his paws on
top of John’s leg. Thankful for the distraction, John gave him a couple
of scratches behind the ears. “Hi Little Wei.” He looked at Jy-ying.
“Ahh, what’s up?”
“I don’t mind the endearment,” Jy-ying said sweetly.
“What endearment?”
“Baby.”
John got redder.
She sat on a padded office chair next to the desk, letting the slit in
her dress show more of her leg. He now considered her their friend and
partner, and she didn’t have to wait for his invitation to sit.
Here goes. Plan A, tactic 1A. Clasping her hands on her lap and sitting straight, she told him, “I know we are getting close to our
intervention regarding the Japanese colonization of Korea. And soon
after that we will intervene in my former homeland—I really consider
myself American, now. But,” and she looked down at her hands and
softened her voice, “I’m so ignorant of history. All my studies have
been technical. I really don’t understand what we are doing—the history of it.”
She tilted her head and looked at him from under her lashes. “I
really want to understand.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

305

John’s face was recovering its normal pale hue. “Joy can fill you in.
Have you asked her?”
“Well, I have talked to her and she knows so much more than I
do.” She hesitated, looked up and directly into his eyes. “I do not want
to take anything away from her. She is so good at what she does. But,
she does not have your knowledge and insight into history, and that is
what I need.”
John seemed to mull that over. “I suppose we could get together to
go over our chronology of future events and I can give you the background on them, and their relationship to our mission.”
“Oh, would you? That would be so nice.”
John furrowed his brow and rubbed his hands together. “There is so
much there; I’ll need more than just an afternoon. Let’s see, how can
we do this?” He mulled it over. “Hmm. Joy and I always eat lunch together, so that time is out. I have some stuff here, but I’ll need what I
have at home, and I don’t want to bring that to work. Well, let’s try
this. Why don’t you come down to our apartment in the evening about
seven, and we can spend some time on it, and do as many evenings as
you need to catch up on this.”
“That is so nice of you, John. But my humble brain is muddled by
evening. I am a morning person, and will fall asleep over anything so
deep in the evening. May I make a suggestion?”
“Why, yes.”
“You are so patient with me. Since Joy and I sometimes spar on
Monday morning, maybe we can set aside that time on the other weekdays for me to be your pupil.”
“No, we have been using some of that time for Joy’s training of me.
That and part of the weekends. I’ll tell you what. If your eyes won’t
glaze over, how about three days in a row in the afternoon, beginning
tomorrow at three. If we need more than three days, I’ll put them
aside.”
Jy-ying beamed at him. “Oh, you’re so kind. How can I ever thank
you?”

aaa
Joy
While they were eating their usual takeout of egg foo young,
stuffed tofu, and vegetables from the Kin Wah Restaurant in New

306

R.J. Rummel

China Town—Joy prepared the hot rice—John commented, “I don’t
know whether Jy-ying told you, but I will be teaching her history in the
late afternoon for the next three days, at least.”
“She told me.” Her lips tight, she roughly split the stuffed tofu on
the center plate with her chopsticks and put half on top of the rice in her
bowl. With her chopsticks she picked that up with a dollop of rice and
with such concentration it might have been her last meal, she put it all
in her mouth, chewed three times, and swallowed.
Is he really so stupid? she wondered. She put her rice bowl down
and looked up at John, trying to read his expression.
He cut his egg foo young with a fork and put it in his mouth. He
picked up some rice with his fork and shoveled that in behind it and
chewed it all while looking at her, his eyes so bland he could have been
watching a detergent commercial. Swallowing, he twiddled his fork at
her and in a flat voice explained, “She needs it to understand what we
are doing—our interventions—so she can help us better.”
“I gathered that,” Joy responded, her tone even flatter.
“We’ll be doing it here, since most of what I need will be here.
Ahh, in mid-afternoon.”
“I assumed so,” she replied, as crisp as burnt toast.
John took the other half of the stuffed tofu, put rice in his mouth
and the tofu in after it. After chewing and swallowing, he asked, “Is
something wrong?”
“Whatever gave you that idea?” She brought her rice bowl up to her
mouth and scooped the rest of her rice into it with chopsticks until not a
grain remained. She shoved her dining chair back with a scraping noise,
sprang up, grabbed her plate and bowl, and dumped them into the sink
with a clatter. She turned around, propped one hand on the sink, put the
other hand on her outthrust hip, and glared at him.
She didn’t try to keep the icicles out of her voice. “I was coming
out of my office and saw what she looked like when she went into
yours. She could have been on her way to a Chinese beauty contest.
She has the hots for you, John, and you stupidly helped her set up her
seduction ploy.”
John looked amused. “Baby, she dropped in to see me before an
important appointment she had with a Chinese exporter, so Agnes said,
and—”
“She is my assistant, John. She had no appointment.”
As though answering a student’s inane question, John replied,
“Well, Jy-ying must have got it wrong. Number one: she needs to be

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

307

given the historical background on our interventions. She will be able
to help us all the better. Number two: she has to know how much I love
you, that I would do anything for you. And conversely, I would do
nothing to hurt you. Ever! Number three: I love you. And number four,
I’m not some teenage boy, a walking hard-on whose quest is only interrupted occasionally for food and sleep.” He gave Joy a big smile at his
metaphor.
She glared at him. “She looks like me, John. You could easily, very
easily, think she was me. She is a trained agent, a former spy. I bet she
could have you believing she was me and lead you by your . . . nose
into her bed. No, our bed, since it will be afternoon. Jesus, John.”
Joy took a long, growling breath. John was beginning to look like
he had swallowed a spoonful of vinegar. He raised an eyebrow and his
face hardened. “Yes, I remember in the Old Universe the first time you
came to my university office and our ride to your mother’s dinner
party. You vamped me and that’s why—well, almost why—I’m here.
But that doesn’t take away my love for you.”
He slapped the table, just missing his plate, and glared in return.
“Enough of this, Joy! You’ve insulted my love, my heart, my loyalty,
my steadfastness, my intelligence, my man—”
“Cut the crap,” Joy spat.
John ignored her. “In short, I see beneath your ambiguous rhetoric
and its elusive meaning. I deduce that you don’t trust me. I wish you
would stop beating around the bush.”
She glowered at him. “This isn’t funny, John.”
John went on inexorably, “And I would have thought by now that
you would trust me in a room full of naked virgins, beckoning me with
various parts of their bodies.”
Joy could not help envisioning that and fought down the mirth trying to bubble up. She was not about to be humored on this.
John continued relentlessly. “I was going to cancel this thing with
Jy-ying so as not to worry you when, with my typical insight, I saw
how you interpreted it. But now I’m going to go ahead. Just to show
you what a granite rock I am about my love for you.”
He stood and picked up the empty food dishes. Bumping Joy aside
with his hip, he dropped them in the sink and ran hot water on them. As
Joy scowled, he started washing the dishes.
She stomped out of the kitchen and refused to say another word to
him the rest of the evening. When she got into bed that night, she lay
with her back toward him, and as close to the edge of the bed as possible without falling off.

R.J. Rummel

308

He tapped her on the shoulder. “Sweetheart, let’s talk.”
He talked to her back and soon she turned around and nodded, and
sighed with relief.

aaa
Jy-ying
Jy-ying moved her arm carefully as she got ready for her meeting
with John. During sparring this morning, Joy had put an unusually hard
twist on her arm during a throw. She had apologized afterward, and Jyying told her to forget it. Still, it hurt, and now she could hardly lift it
above her head.
Now that she had gotten this far, Jy-ying decided subtlety was best.
She would wait a meeting or so before brushing against him and initiating the first gentle kiss. Unless, of course, he shows more interest.
She dressed in her comfortable Chinese house clothes—baggy gray
slacks and long blue shirt with short, wide sleeves—but she still
brushed her hair and let it fall free. She also brushed Little Wei and
dressed him in his black collar for a change.
At five minutes after three—mustn’t seem too eager—she left her
apartment, descended the stairs, and knocked on John’s door. He
opened the door and waved her in with a big flourish, wearing a huge
smile that almost split his head in half. She stood at the door for a moment, stunned. He only had his robe on and it was open to the waist;
she could see his reddish chest hair and his belly button. He seemed
totally naked underneath.
“Hello, hello,” he bellowed. “Whatcha waiting for, Jy? Come in,”
and he whispered, “said the naked virgin to her boyfriend.” He laughed
uproariously.
Confused by John’s dress and behavior, she followed Little Wei
into the living room. John ostentatiously locked the door and followed
close behind her. She didn’t know whether to sit on their new gondola
couch in the living room or at the dining room table for her lessons, and
turned to see what he wanted her to do.
He was close behind her when she turned, and said with his smile undiminished, “Here we are. You and me. Alone. Shall we get right to it?”
Perplexed, she asked, “Where do you want me to sit?”
“Sit? Is that how you screw? Sitting? Well, that’s something new.
I’m willing to try anything!”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

309

“Screw? I do not understand.”
John leered. “Fuck.”
Jy-ying could not have been more shocked if she had put her finger
in an electric light fixture. She stood gasping, trying to clear her mind,
her hand over her mouth. Beyond her control, the words tumbled
through her fingers. “How could you? What kind of woman do you
think I am? What kind of man are you, trying to cheat on Joy?”
John ignored her and crooned, “Oh Jy, to bed. Oh, to bed we go. I
have a camera set up.” He grabbed her arm as though to lead her to the
bedroom.
She pulled away and stared at him. “What are you doing?”
He gave her a lascivious grin. “I want to see your asshole Jy; that
turns me on.”
“You are crude.”
Then she heard, “He’s not as crude as I am, honey.”
Jy-ying jerked her head around, and saw Joy leaning against the
bedroom doorjamb. She had a sexy grin on her face similar to John’s
leer, and she was dressed in her own robe, also open past her navel,
with one breast almost showing.
Little Wei had run over to Joy and was jumping up and down on
her robe. Joy leaned over to pet him, her breast almost slipping free of
the robe, while keeping her smile and eyes on Jy-ying.
Jy-ying could not believe this. She gaped bug-eyed at John and
back to Joy. Unconsciously, she put her hand back on her cheek, where
it seemed to be spending most of its time. She couldn’t get the words
out.
Little Wei scampered back to Jy-ying, looked up at her, sat on his
haunches, and barked once. That helped. She brought her hand down,
stiffened her back, and thrust out her chin. Her eyes narrowed and she
closed her mouth and compressed it into a thin line as she composed
herself. She huffed, “I am not that kind of person. I’m shocked—” She
ran out of words.
John was laughing so hard he could hardly stand up. Laughing as
well, Joy came over and put her hand on Jy-ying’s shoulder. She instinctively pulled away.
With an apologetic grin, Joy said, “We got you, Jy-ying. Come sit
down at the table and we’ll tell you what’s going on.”
She gently pulled Jy-ying to the table and pulled out a chair for her.
She and John tightened their robes around themselves and sat down as
well. Joy and John looked at each other, still amused.

310

R.J. Rummel

As if by mutual agreement, John spoke first. “I love Joy and would
do nothing to hurt her. I am unavailable. I can understand, however,
why you want to seduce me. Were I a woman, I would—”
“John!”
John grinned at Joy, and continued. “Our little act was our way of
showing you that we know what you were trying to do, and I am not
seducible. Also, I tell Joy everything.”
Jy-ying felt her face getting red hot. Her rage boiled up. She looked
at Joy and let her fury show.
Joy had stopped laughing and looked at her calmly. “I know that
you want him. I know that you were trying to seduce him, although today was only the beginning. I don’t blame you. He is a lovable man.”
John looked smug. Her eyes narrowed to slits and her voice became
lethal. “But he is mine. I love him with all my heart. I would die for
him, and with our mission, maybe sometime I will. Without an iota of
regret.”
Joy reached across the table and took Jy-ying’s stiff hand. She
smiled and relaxed her eyes. “I want you to continue to work for us, for
me. I want you to continue to be our partner. I hope you’re not too insulted to forgive us for our little play. True, it was at your expense. But
after all, you were trying to seduce my man.”
John waited a moment, as if hoping for more of these delicious
words. He finally added, “If I spurned your hints or outright suggestions, Jy-ying, if I simply told you I was not available, you might have
thought you could eventually break down my resistance. It might have
been a challenge to you. I think that you are like Joy in that a ‘no’ is a
wall to scale. You are beautiful, with a great body, and I’m sure you
know that, since you seem to emphasize its best parts. You might have
thought yourself irresistible in time. So, our stupid play was just to
convince you that I am unavailable. But other than that, I want to continue to work with you. We both like you as a person; we have much in
common. We enjoy your company. And above all, you have been helpful to our mission.”
He put out his hand to shake hers.
Jy-ying’s emotions swirled through her stomach and muddled her
thoughts. She was angry. She was insulted. She felt guilty over what
she had intended to do with John, over her deceiving them, and over
what she eventually intended to do to Joy. She was a trained warrior;
she was a security officer; she was a spy; and she was ashamed.
The sobs came out of nowhere, beyond her control. She cupped her
elbow in one hand and the other up to her face and sobbed into it. “I’m

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

311

sorry. I’m so sorry,” she cried, knowing they would not know the full
extent of her sorrow and apology. Little Wei was whining and jumping
up and down on the side of her leg, and she reached down and pulled
him up on her lap. As he tried to lick her face, she hugged him and
shook with her tears.
Joy came around the table and put her arm around her. “Let’s forget
it and move on,” she said. “We have too much to do.”
John let his outstretched hand rest of the table, and said loudly, “It’s
almost supper time. We have rice, Bavarian ham sausage—Joy’s once a
month concession to my tastes—veggies, and a huge salad. Come join
us, Jy-ying.”
Jy-ying soon stopped crying and Joy got her tissue from the bathroom to wipe her face. She turned to look into John’s eyes. She could
see how sincere he was. She took his still outstretched hand and shook
it, reveling in his touch. She nodded to him, reached out for Joy’s hand
with her other one, and shook both of them. “So,” she whispered, “Do I
also get my history lesson?”
That night, after a bath and her prayers, she cuddled around Little
Wei in bed and cried herself to sleep. She had never been so embarrassed in her life, or so guilty. Or so very alone.

aaa
Joy
That same night in bed, as Joy lay with her leg across John’s, she
whispered, “That was your idea. Did you think of what you would have
done if she had accepted your crude proposal?”
“I know character, baby. No way would she have accepted it.”
“Hypothetically, what would you have done?”
“I would have taken her to the bedroom where you were waiting,
and said to her, ‘Whoopee, Joy will be joining us.’ Then what would
you have done, baby?”
Joy imagined the situation and laughed. Through her laughter she
tried to ask, “Before or after I broke her leg and turned you into a
eunuch?”
John briefly joined her laughter, and asked again, “Seriously, what
would you have done?”
She didn’t need to think about it at all. She said simply, “Dearest,
let’s just be happy it worked out.”

Chapter 25
Joy
1909

T

hey soon started planning their next intervention, which would
be Japan. “We will intervene in the first of a series of events
that led to the Japanese invasion of China in 1937, and her attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941,” John told Jy-ying.
“Well,” Joy added, to prevent him from falling too far into lecture
mode, “we have a base of operations—our new office in Tokyo, thanks
to Mariko.”
“Yeah, “ John said, turning to smile at Joy.
Mariko had enlisted the help of her father during a trip home to visit
her mother. As assistant foreign minister, Mariko’s father was eager to
help Japanese foreign trade, to which he saw the company his daughter
worked for contributing. The office now had seven Japanese employees. He had also helped them work through the Japanese bureaucracy to
establish a similar office in Korea, which hired mainly Japanese employees. Joy and John had tried to get her to accept some money for her
work, but all she said was, “Dai jobu. Shimpai nai—It’s okay. Don’t
worry about it.”
John had asked Dolphy to be sure she understood their appreciation. Dolphy smiled and said with a wink, “Oh, I’ll make sure she
knows how appreciative you are.”
Now John asked Joy and Jy-ying, “Have you both recently looked
at the chronology the Society’s researchers prepared for us? It’s clear
from that how dependent later events and indeed, the growth of militarism in Japan, was on what happened in these early years—”
Joy, raising her finger, finished the sentence for him “—particularly
in Korea and with regard to China. Right?”
“Yes. We’ve got to stop the Korean assassination of Ito Hirobumi,
the Japanese statesman and member of the governing inner circle. That
killing, above all, gave the military an excuse to not only demand annexation of Korea, but to increase their power over the politicians in
Japan.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

313

“I know, dearest,” Joy responded dryly.
“I do too,” Jy-ying threw in. “I got that in your second lesson,
John.”
“We’ll soon be off to Japan and from there to China,” Joy said,
“where we’ll try to provide funds for the Korean Righteous Army—”
Now John interrupted to conclude her sentence: “—in its struggle
against Japanese occupation of Korea.”
Joy replied with a little exasperation, “Okay, we’ll concede history
to you, since we’re your superiors in everything else.”
“So you wish,” he replied.
Jy-ying asked, “Have you picked your ship yet?”
“Yes, it’s one carrying lumber from Oregon. That should help keep
it afloat if it begins to fill with water during a bad storm.”
Shaking her head, Joy said, “I don’t think it makes a difference,
love.”
He replied with a touch of concern, “It’s more dangerous crossing
the Pacific than it is the Atlantic. The voyage is longer and there’s the
danger of typhoons. I’ll take a good look at weather reports before we
leave.”
Little Wei had an old pork bone he’d brought downstairs to John’s
apartment with him, and Jy-ying started tugging on it as the little guy
got a good grip with his teeth, growled, dug his feet into the throw rug
and tried to jerk the bone out of her hand.
Smiling, Joy and John watched. John yelled, “C’mon, little guy,
pull, pull. Grrr.”
Still tugging on her end, Jy-ying asked, “When will you be in
China? I don’t remember you mentioning dates.”
“We plan on being in Peking on March 8th,” Joy responded, “then
we will be going down to our office in Shanghai for our business. We
do have a business; it’s sometimes hard to remember. And then a week
on vacation to play tourist. We’ll be shipping home on the 25th.”
John looked up from watching the tugging contest. “Say, did I
mention that Dolphy is raring to go with us? How about Mariko?”
A happy note, Joy thought, and replied, “Mariko can’t wait. Her father gave her permission for the trip, and although he was concerned
that Mariko and Dolphy’s rooms are next to each other, he gave his approval when her mother told him in a non-Japanese manner, ‘Do it.’
We would have a hard time without Mariko, since she’s the contact
with our office, and can help us getting around Japan.”

aaa

R.J. Rummel

314

Jy-ying
The day after Joy and John left for Japan, Jy-ying traveled to Gibb
Street in New Chinatown, to see Lin Huifeng. He was the major source
of opium and heroin for Chinese and, she had found out, the major contact for the San Francisco Sue Yop tong, who itself had contacts with
the leaders of the most notorious secret societies in China. She had left
Little Wei whining behind the door in her apartment. She could not
take a chance on his being stolen and eaten.
After settling with Lin on what she requested, paying him an advance of $6,000 in real money—she did not want him, of all people,
discovering she had given him counterfeit money, no matter how remote—she sent a wire to Janet:
Dear Janet:
Sabah be with us. Joy and John off to Japan and
China. My little project looks
good. Wish me success.
Jy-ying

aaa
Joy
Halfway through their voyage to Japan, during dinner at the captain’s table—there were only five cabins available for passengers, and
passengers always ate with the captain—Dolphy told them, “Mariko
has proposed to me and I accepted.”
Mariko hit Dolphy on the shoulder. Blushing, she said, “Iie—No.
Warui—wrong. He get down on both knees and beg me marry him. If I
say no, he say he would throw himself off ship. So I am—what you
say?—Jiha-bukai.”
“Merciful,” Joy translated.
“Yes, merciful. I say yes.”
They all laughed. John looked at Dolphy, whose whole face had
collapsed into a grin, and asked, “What took you so long?”
Mariko was twenty years old and a Japanese beauty. She was majoring in an ad hoc collection of courses that would later in the century
evolve into American Studies. She had hoped to get a job in the Japanese Foreign Ministry when she returned. If she married an American,

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

315

however, that would not be possible, and most likely she would try for
a job in the United States as a translator.
With pleasure, Joy told her, “You always have a good a job with us.”
Oddly, Dolphy managed to speak through the huge gap his grin
created in his face. “Yeah, she can be my assistant and translator.”
“Of course,” Joy pointed out, “a job filled only by the best.”
They made it to Japan without incident, just missing by several
days a powerful typhoon that spun through the central Pacific. The captain did not think they would have survived it if it hit their ship directly.
All John could say to Joy for a week was, “You see? We should have
traveled separately.”
Joy’s response was always, “You see? It didn’t hit us, did it?”
In Japan, they had their meeting with the venerable Japanese
statesman and oligarch Ito Hirobumi, the critical historical pivot. This
had been arranged by Mariko through her father and, as far as she
knew, was part of their company business.
When Joy and John were alone with Ito, they warned him that a
Korean would try to assassinate him in October at Harbin, and this
would be the pretext for Japanese annexation of Korea.
After much discussion and with a proper offer of financial compensation in dollars for his canceling the trip to Harbin, they overcame his
doubt about their motives. They also secretly provided ten million dollars for Prime Minister Saionji’s democratically oriented political party
and for use in bribing the oligarchs into conceding more power to parliament.
Afterward, while finally alone together in the evening, Joy told
John, “I hate to lie to Mariko and Dolphy about what we’re doing in
Japan, you know.”
He replied sadly, “I know, but we have no choice.”
During the rest of the week in Japan they toured the historical sites,
especially in Kyoto, and had a lovely visit with Mariko’s mother. What
a sweet woman, Joy thought. She’d seemed to like Dolphy right away.
It helped that Mariko had taught him to bow properly before he met
her.
They sailed for Shanghai on the new Japanese passenger ship Tenjo
Maru. From there they took an incredibly old train to Peking—even
older than the ones they rode in Mexico.
Through their office in Peking they had arranged an appointment
with General Jung Il Han, a Korean Righteous Army general who was
seeking aid to free Korea from being a Japanese imposed protectorate.

316

R.J. Rummel

While the train puffed through Shandong Province, Joy wrote down
what she remembered, then hid it. She fidgeted. Across from her, John
was reading Volume Two of Edward Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire. Finally, she could wait no longer and kicked his foot.
When he looked up at her, she said above the chugging of the train and
the almost hypnotic clickity-clack of its wheels, “Where’s my lecture?
I’m bored.”
His brow furrowed. He looked around, as though wondering where
this strange woman sitting across from him had come from. He looked
back at her. “You want a lecture?”
“On Han.”
“You’re asking me for a lecture on Han?”
“Yes.”
“I must be dreaming.” He mimicked pinching himself. “No. I’m
awake.” John studied Joy’s face suspiciously, but she was very attentive. “I can’t believe this,” he mumbled. “You just want to say, ‘I
know,’ a million times again.”
“No, I promise. No I knows.”
“Not one?”
“Not one!”
John peered at her. “Okay, you asked for it. Here goes. Now, listen
carefully.
“Now, Han is in Peking meeting with foreign diplomats, but they
are reluctant to aid him and thus anger the Japanese. Anyway, except
for China, which doesn’t have the means to provide aid, no one, including the United States, really cares about Japan’s dominance over
Korea.”
He waited, still watching her suspiciously. Leaning toward him, Joy
looked back wide-eyed, lips slightly parted, as though fascinated. John
raised an eyebrow, shook his head in disbelief, and continued.
“Ah, it is critical to discourage the Japanese military in their aggressive interests in Korea, Manchuria, and eventually China. This is a
very high-stakes game, involving as it does the possible militarization
of Japan, invasion of China, and even Pearl Harbor several decades uptime.
We’d agreed, you know, that we’d offer Han ten million in gold
and another twenty million in American dollars, with the usual threat
that if he used the money for other than its intended purpose, we would
have him painfully assassinated.”
“Are you done?” Joy asked sweetly.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

317

“Yes,” and he hopefully added, “for the moment.”
“Ha-ha!” Joy reached under the large map of China on her lap
and pulled out two sheets of paper. She shook them at him. “I have
that little lecture here, word for word. I wrote it down an hour before
you gave it. I can now repeat your lectures verbatim, I’ve heard
them so often.”
John ripped the papers out of her hand and started reading what
she’d written. “I’ll be damned,” he said, looking up. “You missed
the most important part of my absolutely stimulating historical
presentation.”
Joy’s eyebrows shot up. “I can’t believe it. What did I miss?”
“Why, baby, I’m shocked that you already forget my incredible
course lectures. You know, the part where I say, ‘The defeat of Han
likely would be followed by the Japanese military demanding, and the
quivering politicians accepting, the complete colonization of Korea.’
That’s the key to understanding all this. And you missed it. I should
never have given you an ‘A’ for my course.”
“You didn’t say that.”
“Ha-ha, yourself. You don’t even remember it. You need more lectures, girl.” He handed the papers back with a flourish, and went back
to his reading, the dimples deepening at the corners of his mouth.
Joy held the papers in one hand as she crossed her arms and tapped
her foot. He’s lying. I think. Okay, next time I’ll have our digital recorder with me.
She reached over and hit him on the knee with the papers. “Beast.”
“Hey, why’d you do that?”
“On principle,” she explained with a smile.
When they got to Peking, Joy received a surprising report from the
Zhao Detective Agency on Han’s character. She’d had Han investigated to make sure they could trust giving him so much money. She
told John what they found. “You won’t like this,” she said. “The
agency discovered that except for fighting the occasional battle, Chinese and especially foreign women were the center of his life.
Regardless of his age and girth, he was a walking erection.”
John was startled. “They wrote that?”
“No. That’s my mature female interpolation. They did write that he
had forced a number of high-ranking Koreans to make their wives
available to him, and he brags about a woman a day while here. The
agency warns us of rumors that, with the help of his guards, he has resorted to rape if a woman resists him.”

318

R.J. Rummel

John gaped at her for only a moment before exploding. “No way are
you going with me to meet with Han. Apparently wearing a wedding
ring—and he won’t know it’s false—and my being with you as your
supposed husband will mean nothing. I know of his attitude. In Asian
society of this age, women are only for procreation and men’s pleasure.
Husbands donating their wives for an evening at the request of the
powerful is not unusual.” Getting even more worked up, he actually
shouted at her, “This man will have nothing to do with it. You are not
for barter.”
Just on general principles, and with a little irritation, she replied,
“Excuse me, isn’t that my decision? Since when do you decide by your
male lonesome what we do together? What are you afraid of? I can take
care of myself, I think you know.”
He replied a little defensively, “No, your taking care of yourself is
not the problem. It’s my fear that he would refuse our aid or have anything to do with us once you deny him your body.” Looking at her with
raised eyebrows and a pouting mouth, he revealed what he feared most.
“What would you do if he made accepting the aid conditional on you
sleeping with him?”
“The aid is too important, Korea too important, for him to do that.”
“Come on, baby, you’re not that naive. What would you do?”
She didn’t answer.
“Okay, you don’t have to say anything. I know how important the
mission is to you. And because of your training in sex, I know you
could treat it with Han as would a prostitute with a particularly unsavory customer.” He mimicked her feminine voice, while giving a loosewristed wave. “‘Oh, it’s just part of our job. I’ll just do it and get it over
with.’ Right?”
She didn’t answer.
Shaking his head, he told her a might too loudly, “I’m going alone,
damn it.”

aaa
Through their Peking office, John made sure that Han would have a
Chinese interpreter during the appointment. Joy actually was not
needed anyway.
Two days after they’d checked into the old Peking Hotel, John
donned his armor, holstered and pocketed his guns, and went to the afternoon meeting with Han to make his offer. This would be the first

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

319

meeting of their mission where Joy and John would not be together.
And Joy was scared that he was doing it alone.
She expected him back by dinner, but no John. Nor did he come
back that evening by midnight. Nor did he use his communicator to tell
her why he was delayed.
She was frantic. Growing worry and fear prevented her from sleeping at all that night. There was nothing Joy could do, either. If she took
a rickshaw to the Palace Hotel on Goldfish Lane where Han was staying, John might be on his way back at that moment and they would
miss each other. They had agreed when they first arrived never to initiate contact if one of them were delayed, unless in a dire emergency.
They could easily endanger the other person if they distracted them at a
critical moment. Moreover, if in a meeting or otherwise involved with
other people, one could not respond to the call. This would only raise
the anxiety or worry of both the caller and the recipient. So she decided
to wait until midmorning before calling him, and if she received no answer, she intended to storm Han’s hotel room.
A little after 8 a.m., when Joy felt and must have looked like one
of those passengers standing on the deck of the Titanic just before it
sank, she heard the knob of their hotel room door turn. She was lying down on the bed, fighting panic, and immediately sat up straight.
The door started opening; she was halfway there before it opened
completely.
In stumbled John, his face flushed, unsteady on his feet. She was all
over him before he could shut the door. She threw her arms around him
and cried, “You’re safe. You’re okay. Thank God. I was so worried.”
Getting some control of herself, Joy could finally ask, “What happened? Why didn’t you communicate with me?”
Then she smelled the alcohol. She had never seen him drunk. Only
a little high at celebrations, but during any part of their mission, he
never took a drink.
There was something else. A female-in-heat smell.
Joy dropped her arms and stepped back, amazed and with growing
disgust. “What happened to you?” she asked again, now giving different meaning to the “happened.”
John looked sheepish and then defensive, and muttered, “Let me
sleep. I’ll tell both of you afterward.”
“That’s not funny,” she threw at him as he flopped on the bed. Angry, she only took his shoes off and left him to sleep in his clothes. She
put a Do not disturb sign on their hotel door, and left for their company

320

R.J. Rummel

office on Damochang Road to help prepare a large consignment of sixteenth century jade statues they were importing in return for Singer
sewing machines. She was glad for the distraction.
That afternoon, exhausted from lack of sleep, Joy returned to their
hotel room. John was snoring, so she climbed into bed. With his snores
assuring her he was with her and safe, regardless of anything else, she
fell into sleep.
It was evening when John woke her up as he got out of bed to relieve himself. When he came back, she reached out her arms to hug
him, and the words tumbled out, “You scared me, darling. I thought
something happened to you. You were somewhat drunk when you
came home. Why didn’t you communicate with me? What happened?”
Then Joy remembered. “You also smelled of woman.”
He looked at her for several moments, and said, “I have to take a
shower first. Want to take one with me?”
So they showered, and toweled each other’s back dry, and after they
put their hotel guest robes on, he took her by the hand and seated her on
the bed. “Now,” he said, “I want to tell you what happened. There must
always be truth between us, not only because it is right for us, baby, but
because it is important to our mission.”
Joy tensed. Where’s this bullshit going?
He stopped, looked down for a moment, and added, “Please listen
and don’t say anything until I finish. Okay?”
As Joy was about to say something, he put two fingers on her
mouth, and went on, “I met with Han—a real bastard, but we have dealt
with bastards before, and it’s part of our mission. I made our offer, but
he would not believe I was a secret agent and kept demanding, ‘Who is
the money from?’
“I simply said, ‘The money is yours. The only stipulation is that
you spend it to fight the Japanese.’
“He wanted to know when he’d get it. I told him, ‘Four days for the
money transfer, and ten days to get the gold to you.’ He seemed satisfied with that, and had his guards bring in food and drink. He
demanded, ‘You must drink with me to seal the bargain. It is an old
Korean custom. It’s like what you Westerners do—a handshake.’
“Okay, I thought, I can sip along. After about thirty minutes, his
guards brought in four Chinese dancing girls. They not only danced,
but while doing so they slowly . . . ahh, discarded their clothes. Ahh, all
of them.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

321

“At that point Han toasted me, and said something the interpreter
had trouble with: ‘Those who do business with me must drink with me;
those who drink with me must fuck with me.’
“I told him we didn’t do these things in the West, and that besides,
I’m a happily married man. He laughed uproariously and said, ‘So,
don’t tell her.’
“Anyway he insisted, saying, ‘I will not trust someone who is not a
man, like this,’ and he started stroking one of the dancers between the
legs.”
“And what did you do?” Joy asked, her voice causing ice crystals to
form in the air between them.
“Umm . . . . ah . . . I made love to . . . two of the dancers.”
Her brain went numb and retreated from consciousness. Something
deep inside her that Joy didn’t know existed grabbed hold of her voice
and squeezed it into a spitting shriek. “Two of them? You screwed two
women? One was not enough? Why did you stop at two? Why not all
four? Why didn’t you ask for four more? I’m sure Han would have
trusted you even more.”
Joy had never been so angry with John. She felt so betrayed.
Knowledge of his unfaithfulness took over and turned her shriek into a
screech. “I was worried sick and you were screwing—”
He tried to pull her down, but she beat on his chest with her fists,
tears coming out of her eyes. She couldn’t get her breath even to
screech. Finally she filled her lungs and screamed at him loud enough
for the rickshaw men outside the hotel to hear, “How could you, John?”
He pushed her back on the bed and lay on top of her, pressing her
into the soft mattress with his weight, and holding her arms down with
his hands. He looked into her blazing eyes with understanding, and
pointed out in a calm voice, “Our mission, sweetheart, think of our mission. It has to be above all. Han was stupid. The freedom of his country
was at stake. I was offering him the means of defeating the Japanese.
But he would only trust me, and thus accept my offer, if he saw himself
in me.”
Joy lay there with him on top of her, her stomach twisted into a
knot, her heart thudding, her breath rasping in her aching throat. Her
brain still cowered before an anger she’d never felt before. All she
could do was rasp, “You screwed two women all night?”
“It was nothing to me.”
Joy’s cowardly mind supplied, “Of course. You had to tie it to a
chopstick to get it up. You bastard.”

322

R.J. Rummel

“No, I fantasized I was making love to you.”
Joy roared, risking losing her voice altogether, “You WHAT?”
“It was only physical, baby. It was like exercise. I did nothing but
go in, come, and pull out. The girls must have been disappointed and
probably thought that Westerners didn’t know how to make love. But
Han watched and actually tried to show me with one of the girls how I
should be doing it. He asked me if I wanted to take one of the girls back
to my hotel room and practice, but I declined, saying I had to leave Peking shortly. As I left him, he smiled and told me practice makes
perfect.
“Anyway, baby,” John added, seemingly oblivious to her fury, “we
are secret agents. And we are at war against war and democide. As a
secret agent, I must do what I must do as a man.”
“What a pile of shit,” Joy croaked. She threw him off her with a
body perch and leg twist, and broke down in body-shaking sobs. When
John tried to put his arms around her, she threw them off, staggered
into the European bathroom, and slammed the door so hard the wall
shook. She sat on the toilet seat, utterly miserable.
He not only betrayed me by screwing two whores, he tried to excuse
infidelity with that self-righteous crap.
Joy did not know how long she sat there, but she began to calm
down. Her real mind began to assert itself over the cowardly one.
Yes, I know intellectually I was unreasonable. Yes, we have our
mission. True, this third universe depends on us, and untold millions of lives are at stake. But she loved John so deeply that she
found it impossible to emotionally accept what he had done. It was
not in her character. I would never betray him like that. I would
have to be raped.
The door to the bathroom opened a crack and John stuck his head
inside, looking very apologetic. “Can I come in?”
Joy was torn between her love for him and her jealousy. She could
not trust herself to speak. Her real mind motioned him in. He came in
and sat on the edge of the bathtub, took her cold, listless hand, and said
nothing.
She whispered, “You bastard.”
He said nothing. After a long silence, she looked at him and cried,
her voice breaking, “I hate this. I hate the mission. I hate these appointments. I just want to be with you. I want to adopt children. I want
to raise a family. I want to get old together. But that can’t be. We may
not even grow old together.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

323

Joy put her head in her hands and broke down again in shuddering
sobs. He caressed her back, and waited. Between sobs, she managed to
get out, “What makes it so much worse is that I know . . . I know my
love for you must not interfere.”
John gently lifted her off the toilet and carried her to the bed, and
they cried together. Half-heartedly at first, then with all her strength,
she hugged him and let her misery flow out of her with her tears.
He is mine. He is with me. We have our whole lives to be together.
They slept in each other’s arms and in the morning they bathed together, returned to bed, and made slow, gentle, tender love, a
lovemaking that she was certain only they shared.
Long afterward, Joy finally asked, “Why, at no time during that
whole night, did you contact me? I was so scared something had happened to you.”
John replied, “I felt what I was doing was not right for us. It violated what was special between us. If I communicated to you, I would
either have had to lie or tell you what I was doing. I didn’t want to lie
and I didn’t want to tell you the truth over the communicator. Can you
understand that?”
“Yes, my darling, I can.” And that ended it. Joy would never feel
such anger toward him again. But it taught her one thing. In spite of all
her training, even in the arts of love; in spite of all her allusions to her
Asian background and how it differed from the West in being more accepting of sex; in spite of her self image as a very rational person, she
was still a woman. She was just as prone as any to jealousy and rage
over her man.

Chapter 26
Joy
Shanghai

“W

hat a lovely evening,” Joy commented as they left their
room at the Peace Hotel to go to a Shanghai music festival. “Let’s take a walk afterward through the
International Settlement. I can’t get over how it’s a virtual independent
city-state within China, run by foreign governments. I don’t blame the
Chinese for being upset about it.”
They were just about to step into a rickshaw when two men suddenly came up behind them and threw a net over their heads. Joy and
John reacted almost instantly, but the net was being pulled tight around
them and hampered their movement. They both got their guns out, but
couldn’t see their attackers to take aim; they couldn’t turn because of
the net.
A stupid net, Joy fumed as she struggled against the cords. I never
thought we would be attacked with a stupid net. Cowardly.
A voice behind them said in Chinese, “Drop your guns and be still
or we will shoot you.”
Joy stopped struggling and immediately told John to do the same.
The attackers wound the net around them and tied its ends tight so that
they were completely immobilized. Passersby averted their eyes and
walked on. They all knew that interference in such attacks or kidnappings could mean instant death.
A small, three-wheeled, Chinese truck puttered to the wooden curb
in front of them and four men picked them up, dumped them on the
truck bed, and covered them with a bamboo mat that stretched from
side to side. They felt the truck rattle forward in a loud clashing of
gears and a backfire and soon they were bouncing from one side of the
bed to the other.
John remained calm. Trying to speak while being thrown about
wasn’t easy, but he managed to say, “It must be a kidnapping for
money. We should get out of this if we don’t anger them.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

325

They were jiggled, bounced, jerked, and bruised by the bed of the
truck and its rough sides for about an hour. Finally, the truck rattled to
a stop.
More clashing of gears and a clatter, and the truck backed up to
stop again. The driver killed the engine. Someone took the mat off
them, and Joy saw that they were at the delivery door to a warehouse in
what must be an outlying industrial sector. Since it was Sunday there
was no one around.
Three men drove up in a smoking, noisy, old Buick. They got out,
came over and lifted Joy and John out of the truck. They carried them
inside the warehouse and stood them up, then stepped back, their guns
still pointed at their captives. Two men had been waiting. They slowly
took the net from around Joy and John, picked up their guns, and
frisked them. They were experts. They hiked up her dress and found
her knives. They took her magnum from her purse, emptied John’s
shoulder holster, and found the S&W he carried in his coat pocket.
They threw all the weapons on a scarred and chipped work table
nearby. They said nothing. They showed no emotion. Joy began to
worry. These were not normal kidnappers.
Still, what to do if kidnapped was one of the scenarios Joy had been
trained for, and she had passed this training on to John. So they played
it very scared and helpless. They kept their heads down, and wouldn’t
look at their kidnappers. As the kidnappers tied them by their hands and
feet to separate pillars, she tensed the muscles in her hands and wrists
so that she would have wiggle room in the ropes when she relaxed her
muscles. But they tied her wrists tightly and the wriggle room just
wasn’t there.
One of the men, who had been standing in the back during all this,
came forward and stopped in front of John. He was thin and tall, with a
clump of black hair hanging from his chin and eyes so narrow they
looked like slits in his round face. He asked John in Chinese, “Your
name?”
Joy answered in Chinese, “He does not speak Chinese. I will translate.” And she did so.
John answered, “John Banks.”
“What are you doing here?”
“I am a businessman. I own the Tor Import and Export Company
and am negotiating a deal for Chinese paintings.”
Slit Eyes then asked for the gardener’s pruning shears on the table.
When one of the men handed them to him, he looked at John and

326

R.J. Rummel

threatened, “I will take off a finger for each lie you tell me. If you continue to lie, I will work my way around your body until you are nothing
more than a quivering torso only held up by the ropes.”
Joy almost choked in translating this. She was so scared for John
her heart was shaking her whole body and she could feel the sweat beginning to wet the inside of her armor.
Slit Eyes looked at one of his men and said, “Show him.”
The man went to a cabinet and brought back a long-handled branch
pruner and a machete, which he placed on the table.
Slit Eyes asked, “Why are you here?”
“On business,” John said without hesitation.
The man moved behind him, and in seconds John let out a sharp
scream and almost immediately gurgled, trying to suppress it.
Joy shrieked at the man, “Stop it. He is telling you the truth. What
do you want from him?”
The man came back in front of John and held out his bloody finger.
He asked again, “Why are you here?”
She could hardly translate; her voice was for long moments beyond
her control. She now knew it would be their death if John told him the
truth. She finally got the translation out.
Sweat now dripped from John’s chin, but he looked at the man and
firmed his voice to say, “You can cut off all my fingers and toes. You
can cut off my ears and nose and lips. But my answer will always be
‘business.’”
She barely managed to translate this as well.
“We will see,” the man said, and walked behind John again. This
time John managed to squelch his scream, but he couldn’t prevent his
face from distorting and reddening in pain.
Slit Eyes brought out another bloody finger and now held two in
front of John. He asked, “Well?”
Joy refused to translate.
Slit Eyes looked at her and said in a soft voice, “Will you translate.”
“No.”
“Okay,” he said with a smile, “I speak English.” He turned to John
and asked in English, “Why you here?”
John’s face was blotched red and white, and he was sweating even
more. But, his face was also rigid with determination. “Business,” he
spit out.
“Okay, we do pretty woman.” And in Chinese he said to two men,
“Untie and strip her.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

327

Joy closed her mind to John and tried to relax her muscles, calm her
mind, and gather her strength. Her mind filled with the image of her
karate sensei standing over her when she was six years old and on the
verge of crying from a very painful throw to the wooden floor. “Calm
your mind,” he said in a soothing voice, as he hit her on the arm with a
stick. “Calm, calm, like the reflection in a still mountain lake, a reflection of summer clouds floating across a peaceful blue sky. Empty your
mind of all but the clouds,” and he hit her with the stick again. She had
to learn to ignore pain and distracting emotion. It was only when her
face and body looked calm and relaxed that he stopped hitting her. In
spite of the pain of the blows, she had not uttered a sound. From then
on she knew she was his special student.
That image of her sensei helped her extinguish the burning hot fury
and terror tearing at her guts, trying to destroy her thoughts. In their
place she found her calm core and let it expand and gather strength
from her training and move up her arms and down her legs and into her
toes and fingers until she was fully encased in it. Inside that calm bubble, multiple pieces of her aligned themselves.
The last thing she thought before she closed down her mind to all
extraneous thought was, “I love you, John. Help me, Mom.”
Outwardly, she was a helpless and scared woman, her head hanging
and shoulders sloping, as she pleaded in Chinese, “No, no, please
don’t.”
In spite of John’s pain, he played his role in trying to provide a distraction. He struggled against his ropes and shouted and yelled in
English for them to leave her alone, and although the words may not
have been understood, his frantic fear for her certainly was.
Two men untied her. Joy faked a scared, weak woman’s resistance
as they started to take off her long skirt. She could hardly fight well in
that and they were doing her a favor. She waited until they got down to
her cotton panties.
At that moment there was no expanse of time, no thought, no analysis; no fear, worry, anxiety; no feeling at all. She was a pure weapon, a
deadly spirit. She struck.
She drove her knee into the face of the one bending over to pull
down her panties, smashing his nose and flipping him unconscious to
the floor at the same moment she mortally injured the other one, who
had just got hold of her blouse to rip it off, with a fore knuckle fist
punch to his upper throat.

328

R.J. Rummel

Still standing in front of John, Slit Eyes reached for his gun, but she
sent him sprawling with a reverse kick to his face and the remaining
two came at her with knives and she did a leaping roll and came up
alongside the table with their weapons on it, but the only thing within
reach was her throwing knife. She grabbed it barely in time to dodge a
killing knife thrust, parried a side thrust, and stabbed the man through
the solar plexus and into the heart with an upward cut; and the other
man reached for a gun in his pocket and she flipped her knife at him.
He went down in a gush of blood with the knife in his lower throat.
Panting, Joy went to each of the men on the floor to make sure they
were dead or unconscious. The two she had knifed were dead and the
others unconscious. She pulled her knife out of the throat of a dead man
and hit each of the unconscious ones in the temple with its hard handle
to make sure they would stay out for a while. She didn’t worry about
killing them.
That done, Joy rushed over to John. Through his pain he mumbled,
“Nice work, baby.”
She kissed him on the cheek, and went around him to cut his hands
free. His index and little fingers had been cut from his left hand and the
stumps were dribbling blood. She cut his feet free, and checked
whether he had gone into traumatic shock. Just as she was looking into
John’s eyes for shock, the truck driver appeared from a side door and
saw the others sprawled on the floor. He immediately took out his gun
and crouched, opening fire. She heard John grunt, and he started to fall.
She couldn’t help him at the moment and survive.
She ran zigzagging to the table and grabbed her magnum as the
man fired two more times. Without looking, she threw herself head first
to the floor and twisted to land on her back with her magnum pointed to
where the bullets had come from; she shot the man as he was running
toward her and raising his gun to shoot at her on the floor.
She got up and dashed over to John. He had been shot in the back
and the bullet had come out his lower left chest. She couldn’t believe it.
He had not worn his armor. She got her skirt and rapidly folded it and
put it under his shirt on his back wound to act as a compress, and
folded up his shirt and pushed it against the hole in his chest and put his
hand on it.
He was pale and gasping for breath. She had to move him. She got
her holster purse off the table, put all their weapons in it, and hung it
around her neck. She levered John to a half standing position, got her
back under his chest, and with all her strength she slowly carried him,

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

329

his feet dragging, through the door they had been brought through, and
to the Buick. She opened the car’s high back door and levered John up
and into the car and onto the rear floor. She rushed over to the driver’s
side. She switched the magneto on, checked to make sure the car was
out of gear so that it would not jerk forward and hit her when she tried
to start it, retarded the spark, and advanced the throttle lever to halfway
to enrich the fuel-air ratio and make it easier to start the car.
She took the crank from its hook, leaped out and ran to the front of
the Buick, and inserted the crank in the engine. She had to use both
hands and exert all her strength to turn the crank and hoped that she had
retarded the spark sufficiently to prevent a backfire. A little off and the
resulting backfire might violently jerk the crank and break her thumbs
or arms.
No, she didn’t pray. She scared the engine. As she cranked two revolutions, she screamed at it, “Start, or I’ll turn you into goddam junk!”
The two-cylinder engine fired, shaking the car violently as she
rushed to the steering wheel to advance the spark and retard the throttle
before the engine died. She made it; the engine settled into a loud rattle
as she jumped up behind the wheel. She frantically released the hand
brake, hit the low speed pedal with her foot, and in moments crushed
the high speed clutch to the floor and shifted into top second gear. The
Buick jack-rabbitted fiercely as she pointed the car toward the bright
skyline of downtown Shanghai.
Given the condition that John was in, their office on Ningbo Lu was
too far away. As soon as she saw pedestrians, she stopped and yelled
out that she had an emergency and asked if there was a doctor close by.
After stopping several people, she was directed to the Baptist Missionary Academy about five minutes away. Joy drove there at high speed,
passing cars, horses, wagons, and carts, driving rickshaws off the road,
and continually beeping her pipsqueak horn. She bounced John all over
the back floor and she was afraid he would fall out. She had no choice.
She would apologize later, if he lived. She left behind her a chaotic
crowd of Chinese pedestrians who would forever curse woman drivers.
She finally found the Academy, skidded to a halt on the gravel in
front of it, and rushed inside, oblivious to her torn blouse, revealed gray
armor, and white panties. She yelled at a shocked woman in the reception area that her husband had been shot protecting her from rape and
was in the car outside. The receptionist called down the hallway and a
man and woman, both dressed in well-worn medical whites, came out
of a room.

330

R.J. Rummel

Joy said, “Husband shot,” in English, and the three followed her as
she rushed back to the car. They got John out of the car and she helped
them carry him into a medical office with a paper-covered examination
table. They laid him on the table and the doctor began examining his
wounds.
John was still alive, but unconscious, pale, and breathing shallowly.
Joy watched as the doctor looked at his bullet holes, cleaned the entry
and exit wounds, and gave him injections of what, she did not know.
He treated the wound for infection. Good thing that the man who shot
him had used ordinary bullets, she thought abstractedly, which from the
entry wound look like a .32 caliber.
Finally the doctor, with his nurse’s help, put compresses on the two
wounds and heavily bandaged John’s chest from back to front. He had
no idea that he should also treat John for traumatic shock. General practitioners had yet to know much about it; World War I had not yet
occurred.
John was lucky. The bullet passed through his left side horizontally
and almost at a right angle to his back; it went through below his rib
cage and left lung, missing his stomach and, as far as Joy could tell,
also missing his large intestine.
Still, he was not looking good at all, and sometimes the shock of a
serious bullet wound could kill. She had to get John to her medical
supplies and under her care. She used the Academy’s phone, viciously
cranked it to get the operator, and asked to be connected to Deng Buwei, their manager at their Shanghai office. She hastily warned him that
John was seriously wounded and she was bringing him there.
Still running on adrenaline, Joy asked the doctor and nurse to help
her carry John to their car so that she could take him to a hospital. The
doctor protested, saying it was dangerous to move him. But she insisted. As they carried him to the car, they asked what happened. She
said it was an attempted rape and John had tried to protect her. They
seemed to accept that, given the way she looked.
Once she had John in the car, they helped her start it with the crank,
and Joy drove off in a cloud of oily smoke for Shanghai. When she
could see distinct buildings on its skyline, she was able to navigate toward their office near the International Settlement and the docks.
Deng Bu-wei and two assistants were waiting outside. She told
them to carry John gently to his private office, one of which they always made sure was available in any company offices they set up, and
rushed into it ahead of them to jerk out of a cabinet their locked medi-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

331

cal case. When Deng and his assistants carried John in, she told them to
lay him out on the lacquered desk and asked Deng to stay, while his
assistants brought her a bottle of water.
She unlocked the case, revealing their medical equipment and
medicine. She hooked John up to a heart, blood pressure, and body
temperature monitor, and went to work on him. She had been trained
by the Society to manage a variety of emergencies, including gunshot
wounds to the torso, and this office contained the essential medicine
and supplies for handling this, among other emergencies. Anticipating a
need, the Society had stocked well the medical time capsule it sent.
Joy gave John several injections for infection and trauma, hoping
there would be no incompatibility with what he had already received.
This was a gunshot wound and she thus feared a Group A betahemolytic strep, and gave him a penicillin-spectrum antibiotic. She had
no way of giving him a blood transfusion, but he had not bled that
much. She cut off his bandages with medical scissors, sniffed the discharge from his wounds for feces to be sure his intestines were not hit,
washed his wounds with medical soap, and treated them with antibiotics. She left the wounds open so that they could drain. She put special
antibacterial compresses on them from her supplies and with Deng’s
help she loosely rewound his back and chest wounds with antibacterial
bandages. She also rebandaged his finger stumps, after disinfecting and
putting antibiotics on them.
Joy asked Deng to bring in cushions and an ornate Chinese room
separator from their reception room, and when he and an assistant did
so, she laid the separator on the floor, with a large cushion under one
end and cushions on top. With their help, she laid John on the cushions
with his head at the low end. She pulled down the cotton curtains covering the office window, folded them into a blanket, and covered him
with it, making sure he would be warm but not overheated.
Done, Joy asked that they be left alone. She sat cross-legged on the
floor next to him.
He remained unconscious.
She was so scared he would die. She took his cold hand in both of
hers. She began to shake uncontrollably, and had to release his hand to
stop shaking him as well. The post-combat fatigue had set in hours ago.
She was exhausted. But all she could feel was fear. She kept her eyes
glued to the monitor and his rising heartbeat and falling blood pressure.
His skin was cool to the touch and slightly moist.
No good. No good at all.

332

R.J. Rummel

Hours, it seemed, went by. She began to plead with him, “Don’t
you dare die, my love in heart and soul. Don’t you dare die. I want to
have a few words with you about you not wearing your armored
vest.”
She waited. His heartbeat went up to 123 beats per minute while his
systolic had fallen to 78. HE’S DYING.
Joy begged, “No, no, darling, don’t die.” Tears almost blinded her.
She grabbed her right wrist to stop her hand from trembling, and took
his hand in it again. She held it gently and sobbed.
With her free hand Joy took out her locket and flipped it open with
her finger. She put it down alongside John and beseeched her mother to
help save him. She felt so helpless, so alone. She was trained for action,
not sitting and watching her lover die.
She cried until she could not cry anymore. She prayed for him to
live. She tried to persuade him that it would be grossly unfair to him, to
them, to her for him to die. She again begged her mother for help.
Above all, and before and after whatever else she said, she told him
how much she loved him and what he meant to her. She could not let
him die without hearing that. She whispered it. She leaned over and
gently caressed his hair from his forehead. She kissed him on his cold
white cheeks and said it. She kissed her fingers and touched his lips
with them and said it again.
The monitor was her whole world now. It swam before her tearfilled eyes as his pulse slowly increased and blood pressure declined,
taking his life away. Death seemed inevitable.
Watching the red digital numbers with horror, Joy reached behind
her for her purse. She pulled it around in front of her and reached in for
her tactical knife. She put the knife on her lap. There was no thought to
this. No plan. No consideration of their mission.
It was so very simple. If John died, she had failed to protect him.
She had failed. She would join him in seconds. It would be their final
togetherness in this world. Our souls will ascend as one to the other
world.
His blood pressure continued to edge downward. Never taking her
eyes off the monitor, she released John’s hand from her right and took
it gently into her left. She picked up the knife in her right hand and
waited. Now ready to do what she must, waiting for the deaths that
might come in the next minute or so, she reached a state of utter calm
that she had never felt before. Death and release will come soon, I
know.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

333

His pulse and blood pressure stabilized. But he wasn’t out of
danger yet. Joy held the knife ready. Her absolute calm didn’t break.
She did not know how much time went by. The sky lightened. Deng
knocked on the door several times, but each time she said simply,
“Go away.”
It got hot. It must have been midday. His blood pressure turned upward; his pulse started to fall. Joy released his hand and felt his head. It
was dry and slightly warm. Normal color had returned to his face.
She dropped the knife and released a howling cry of happiness.
“JOHN WILL LIVE.”
She put her head in her hands and her whole body shook with her
sobs. She had found within her more tears. Happy ones.
It was turning dark outside when John opened his eyes, saw her distraught face, swollen, bloodshot eyes, wild hair, and torn blouse, and
croaked, “You look like hell. Don’t you care what people will say?” He
gave her a pathetic grin.
Joy’s tears flowed down her cheeks. She instantly forgot all the
smart-alecky things she was going to say when he gained consciousness. She took his hand and brushed her cheeks with it. She leaned over
and kissed his dry lips, and made the greatest understatement of her
life: “I was worried about you, dearest. I love you.”
“I love you too, baby. Is it possible for a man to get a drink around
here?”
Joy got up, painfully, since she wasn’t used to sitting on the floor
cross-legged for so long. At first she couldn’t straighten her back. She
was not too steady on her feet as she opened the office door and called
for Deng. He came almost immediately; his wife Lizhen was with him.
Joy apologized for her rudeness, and asked Deng to bring water for
John. He did so in moments, and Lizhen brought clothes she had
bought for Joy.
Joy thanked Lizhen, promised to pay for them, and took the water
to John. She gently raised his head and helped him sip. His blood pressure was up to 89 over 68.
Lizhen left for a moment and came back with blankets for Joy, and
asked if she wanted anything to eat. Joy told her that she wasn’t hungry. Before they left, she told Deng to make sure the hotel extended
their stay for a month.
John’s eyes were closed again and he looked like he was sleeping.
So tired she was barely able to talk, Joy asked Deng to send a telegram
to Jy-ying:

R.J. Rummel

334

Jy-ying,
John tortured and shot. Think he will live. Will stay
for month more while he heals. Please tell Hands. Ask
him to handle company for us. Give him all the help you
can. More in few days. Thank you.
Joy
Joy suddenly realized that she hadn’t taken off her stinking armor,
and did so. She picked up her open locket and kissed her mother’s picture, and told her, “I know you were with me through all this. I know
you helped. Thanks, Mom. I would not have lived many seconds beyond his death.” She closed the locket and put it back over her head to
hang above her heart.
After putting one of the blankets on the floor next to John, she laid
down on it. She rested her head next to his, put her hand on his, and
whispered, “I’ve never been so scared in my life. Please don’t do that
again, my love.” She plunged into sleep almost instantly.

aaa
Jy-ying
Having left whining Little Wei in her apartment for his protection,
Jy-ying stomped alone into the rear of Lin Huifeng’s restaurant. Gruffly
she asked the Chinese cook, who was holding at arm’s length his flaming wok, “Is Lin upstairs?”
When he said yes, she rushed to the stairs, jumped up them two at a
time, and pounded on Lin’s door. He opened it, wearing a surprised
look. She pushed him aside and went in. As he closed the door, she
turned on him, took her Browning pistol out of her purse, and pointed it
between his eyes.
“I could tear you apart with my hands, but you would not believe I
can do that until your arms and legs were quivering on the floor. But
you will believe this gun. I paid you to have a certain person eliminated. Instead, those you contracted tortured and shot her partner. I did
not want him killed.” She spat at him, “Did you understand that?”
He clasped his shaking hands in front of him and bowed, unable to
speak. She rocked with anger. Grabbing his receding hair, she pulled up
his head to look at her and shoved the gun barrel into his stomach. She
hissed, “They almost killed him!”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

335

Trembling, voice wavering in fear, Lin tried to respond. “I don’t
know . . . what happened.”
“I will give you five days to find out. If he dies, you die.”
She put her gun away, took a step toward him, grabbed his long
shirt, and threw him over her hip onto the floor. As he lay on the
wooden floor, she kicked him in the quadriceps so he would have several days of pain to remind him of her anger. “Five days,” she repeated
as he held his leg, moaning.
“Don’t think you can pay some tong find and get rid of me,” she
warned. “I have friends here who will avenge me, and you will take a
long time to die. I’ll let myself out, thank you.”
She left.

aaa
Joy
It was morning and light outside when she woke up. She raised her
head and looked at John. His eyes were open and he was looking at her.
“I’m horny. Let’s make love.”
Joy jerked with surprise and looked at him incredulously until she
saw his attempt at a smile.
“But first things first—I’ve got to piss.”
She got up, feeling much better after the rest, and brought over the
metal wastebasket. She helped him turn on his side to use it. She called
Deng and handed him the bucket with apologies, and asked him to
come back after he disposed of the urine.
When he returned, Joy asked him to remain with John while she
used the toilet—a little room with a porcelain-lined hole in the floor
and a removable bucket underneath—and got into the clothes that Lizhen had brought her. When she returned to the office, Lizhen had
brought green tea, thin soup for John, and hot rice, vegetables, and
chicken for Joy that she had cooked at home.
Before eating, Joy had to change the bandages, treat John’s wounds
again to prevent infection, make sure the entrance and exit holes were
draining well, and give him another injection. She fed him the soup and
gave him some tea before eating herself. While doing this, she explained to Deng what had happened, and to John as well, filling him in
on events after he lost consciousness.

R.J. Rummel

336

Deng later brought in two assistants, who moved the desk and other
furniture out of the way, set up a double bed, and gently lifted John
onto it.
Over the next two weeks, John gradually gained strength and was
able to get up and move slowly about with little pain. She had kept his
wounds open with a sterile saline solution so that they could freely
drain, had carefully studied and smelled what came out, and checked
his temperature and blood pressure every four hours, even if she had to
wake from a dead sleep. There was no evidence of a general infection.
She grew increasingly confident that in another two weeks they could
leave for home, confident enough to finally tell him, “You were so
lucky. That bullet that went through you missed your spine and every
important organ. And the bullet missed me as it came out of your lower
chest. But, stupid man, I had my armored vest on.”
After giving him that opening to confess his sin, she waited, but he
said nothing. Okay, she thought, I’ll draw it out of him. “Why didn’t
you wear your damn armor?” she asked, proud under the circumstances
of her well-formed question and patient tone.
“I forgot.”
“You forgot?”
“Yes”
“You forgot to wear your armored vest?”
“Yes.”
Joy rolled her eyes to the ceiling, then looked outside. “Nice
weather today, isn’t it? Although it’s turning cool.”
It got colder in the room for a while, but no need to say what was
self-evident.

aaa
Jy-ying
Five days later, Jy-ying approached Lin’s restaurant cautiously, her
Browning hidden under a light coat thrown over her hand, Little Wei
following along. He was now too useful to leave behind. He might
smell the danger before she did.
She picked her time so that the restaurant would most likely be
crowded, and it was. The busy cooks paid no attention to her as she
strode through the kitchen with Little Wei trying to keep up, and
bounded up the stairs. She didn’t knock, but threw it open and stepped
to one side.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

337

Lin was waiting for her. He sat at his half moon table in his wingbacked wicker chair, smoking his long pipe. Without expression, he
motioned her to sit down across from him. She made sure Little Wei
had come in, looked around the room, checking for hiding places and,
since sitting where he had motioned would put her back to the door and
most of the room, she commanded, “You sit there. I will sit where you
are.”
He got up and took the elmwood Chinese chair. She sat down and
placed her gun on the table, pointed at him and within easy reach. She
knew he had people assassinated in Chinatown and took no chances.
Little Wei was having a great time sniffing around this new world
of smells. Several times, he sneezed.
Jy-ying raised an eyebrow and waited.
“Tea?”
“No.”
“I have spent a modest fortune on secret telegrams. My contacts at
the Western Union office here and in Shanghai are getting rich. Can I
expect you will cover my costs?”
“You are lucky to be alive.”
“I hope you will have mercy on my humble person when you hear
what happened.”
“Get on with it.”
Her tone of voice made Little Wei stop sniffing at a bedroll and
look up at her, his tail down. When he saw she wasn’t looking at him,
he went back to his fun.
Lin took a nervous puff on his pipe and explained, “I contracted
with the Green Lotus Society through the Sue Yop tong to have your
friend removed. Imperial Intelligence had a spy in the organization, and
he reported my request to his contact.”
Lin was relaxing as he talked and he did not try to hide his curiosity. “Intelligence was carrying on a secret investigation of your friend
and her partner, believing that their business might be a cover for antiimperial spying. Because of what they heard from the spy, they became
even more interested and picked up my contact in the society and tortured him to find out more.”
His face fell into an ugly, gap-toothed grimace. “All they could find
out was that someone had made this contract. Such contracts are done
all the time. Fortunately, I have a secret way of doing this through my
relatives, so Intelligence will not trace the source to your servant, not
even that it came from the United States.

R.J. Rummel

338

“I am sorry at what happened. If you so desire, I can have those
who almost killed your friend’s partner . . . disciplined for their eagerness.”
“How much?”
“Considering the terrible amount I have already spent on your behalf, $5,000 would be humble repayment.”
“Was the Green Lotus member who was picked up released?”
“Yes, he is in the hospital.”
“Then do what you suggest, and include him.” She watched Lin as
she reached into her purse with one hand and felt for her roll of bills.
She took it out and counted out ten hundred-dollar bills while still
watching his eyes. “This is what you will get. Also, I will know what
happens through my own sources.”
She got up and sidled to the door while keeping an eye on him. Little Wei immediately followed her and they both left.

aaa
Joy
Just before Joy and John left for the Shanghai docks to voyage
home, they had two visitors to the office: Hong Dong-po, the head of
the local Triad Society, and another man. They carried in a large, ornate
Chinese chest and put it down near the door. Opening it, Hong took out
a bamboo mat and unrolled it on the floor next to the chest. His face
inscrutable, he next pulled out a man’s head by its hair and held it up
for them to see, as though it were some treasure that he was selling. After giving the head’s name as Wang Wulong, he placed it on the mat.
Soon, he had lined up seven heads facing John. Pointing to the first
three, Hong said to Joy in Chinese, “These men you killed. He pointed
to the next three and said, “These were our pleasure.” They were the
ones Joy had knocked unconscious.
She thought she recognized Slit Eyes, the one who had cut off
John’s fingers, but she couldn’t be sure. None of the heads had any
ears, noses, eyes, or lips.
Hong pointed do the seventh head and said with disgust, “This was
a minor Green Lotus member. He had told the others about both of you.
His wife was tortured to get him to divulge what he knew, and we are
sorry about that. Still, one does not tell secrets.” The head had no hair,
eyebrows, or beard—it had been completely skinned.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

339

Hong added, “We will send the seven heads to Imperial Intelligence
headquarters with our compliments. We don’t believe you will be bothered again.”
Joy translated all this for John. He looked at the head of what he
also thought was Slit Eyes, shook his finger at it, and said, “I told you
to leave her alone, and you wouldn’t listen. I hope that you’ve learned
your lesson.”
She didn’t think this would translate well, so she simply said, “He
wants to thank you, and give you $1,000 a head.”
“No,” Dong said. “This was a matter of honor. You are Chinese. Do
you understand?”
“Of course,” Joy responded, feeling her face heat up. She stood and,
facing Dong, bowed deeply. “Yes. You are an honorable person. I hope
that you will accept our humble thanks.”
Dong and his helper put the heads back into the chest. When John
saw they were going to leave, he motioned Dong over to his bed. He
put out his hand. Dong did not understand at first, so Joy explained that
John wanted to shake hands. Dong took his hand, and John shook it
vigorously.
When they were alone again, John asked Joy, “Why did they do
that? What’s in it for them? And what is it about us that interested Imperial Intelligence?”
Joy was puzzled herself. “It is an iron rule among these secret
societies that no one snitches. They will not only torture and kill their
own members for doing so, but also members of other societies. As to
us, I don’t know what they know or why they are interested in us.
When we get back, we should ask Jy-ying if she can guess or find out.”

Chapter 27
Joy

A

fter four weeks, John had healed enough for them to board the
Santa Maria for their trip home. Joy hand-carried their medical
equipment aboard, intent on making damn sure John continued
to heal well.
Near the middle of the voyage he got obstreperous about Joy not
letting him exercise. So she started walking him around the first class
deck, and told him to leave his shirt open so that the bandage around
his chest could be seen. This answered the unspoken question other
passengers might have as to why he was so pale and walking so slowly
for a relatively young man.
The blond beauty came out of nowhere. She must have been watching them, and thought Joy was his nurse.
“Hello,” she said to John in a saccharine voice, ignoring Joy.
“Whatever happened to you? Here, can I help?” And she moved to his
other side and put her arm through his to give him support. She motioned with her head for Joy to get lost.
John stopped and looked at the girl. She had lovely, sparkling blue
eyes, full lips, and hair that curled around her head and shoulders in a
blond shower. She wore a red shirt, open at the throat to reveal a gold
chain from which hung a little gold plate with Chinese calligraphy on it
that Joy automatically translated to herself as “lifang—beautiful virtue.” She had on a currently risqué hip- and bottom-hugging woolen
dress. What Joy noticed most was her large breasts, pushed up and out
by some kind of undergarment.
Enough there for three of me, Joy chuckled to herself. “Dressed to
kill,” was invented for her. Definitely a wife’s worst nightmare.
When the blond looked back at John with a beguiling smile, he
smiled in return, looked at Joy, and said, “Thank you for your help. I’ll
be in touch, and don’t forget scenario B.” He winked.
They went off together down the deck. The last thing Joy heard
was, “And your name is, my pretty?”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

341

“Honey.”
What else would it be?
“What a nice . . . . ”
They disappeared down the deck.
Joy had heard of the sea floozies who traveled back and forth firstclass on the liners, seducing rich male passengers. Their “husband”
would catch them in a compromising position, and demand satisfaction,
for which a small fortune would suffice. Just out of fun, Joy and John
had imagined several scenarios they might use if such a floozy tried to
seduce John, and had even lettered them.
She found an isolated deck chair, sat down on it, and waited. They
were three days out of Shanghai, and the ship was slowly rocked by a
medium swell as it made steady progress. A brisk breeze blew across
her face the strands of hair sticking out from under her narrow brimmed
deck hat. On the horizon there was a rainsquall, and the sun was partly
hidden by a towering cumulus cloud. It was a great view and a pleasant
time to be alive.
She soon fell asleep while watching a school of flying fish.
“KK. Hi baby. You there?”
Joy woke up with a start. The sun had gone down and she was getting chilled. “KK. I’m here. What’s up?”
“Ha-ha. Funny girl. I’m with the blonde in her cabin. It’s A33. I
know she has tipped off her partner. I guess he should be along after he
thinks she has had enough time to look indecent. I’m in her toilet to call
you, and will now leave the communicator on so that you will know
when to come in. I’m looking forward to the fun.”
“Yes, I bet you are,” Joy couldn’t help saying.
“Now I’ve got to somehow get my hands on her for her partner’s
show.”
“Don’t strain yourself.” That hung in the air with little icicles forming on the edges.
“We’re into this now, baby. Let’s carry it though.” Before Joy
could respond, John hastened to add, “When it’s all set up, I’ll cough
and that will be your cue. Signing off.”
Joy stomped around the A-deck looking for A33. She must have
looked like she had bitten into a rotting fish, for several passengers
gave her a second look as she pushed past them, her hands balled up
into fists at her side. After finding A33, it was only the world’s greatest
willpower that prevented her from barging in on John, and scaring that
whore to near-death with her magnum.

342

R.J. Rummel

She waited in the corridor at a distance from A33, looking in her
purse, as though she couldn’t find her key. She heard giggling and sighing in John’s communicator, and words exchanged that indicated things
were getting hot between the pair. When Joy had fantasized about this
scenario with John, she thought it would be fun. Hearing them now, she
thought, This reverse scam is a stupid idea. Of course, it would be
John’s idea. Make that: idiotic idea.
Joy heard a moan and her mind hissed, If I hear one more moan out
of that slut, I’m going in.
Just then, a heavyset man walked down the corridor, stopped in
front of A33, and with his back to her, put his ear to the door. They
both heard the moans. He rushed in, beating Joy to it.
Over the communicator, she heard the man’s voice. “What’s going
on here? What’re you doing with my wife? You son of a bitch. I’m going to knock the shit out of you!”
John acted surprised. “I didn’t know she was married. She led me
on. Honey, why didn’t you tell me, for Christ’s sake? I’m sorry. I’ll just
leave.”
It was the whore’s turn. Faking her tears, she pleaded, “Please
Bruno, don’t hurt me, don’t beat me again. He made me do it,” and so
on. It was fine theater and made Joy forget her jealousy.
Finally John coughed, and Joy rushed down the corridor and burst
in to A33.
John had his hand with the bandaged finger stumps on Bruno’s arm.
Honey was topless, with only her bloomers on.
Joy yelled at John, “Thank God I found you. The purser said he saw
you come in here.”
Then she looked at Honey, who was staring at her in utter surprise.
Apparently horrified, Joy exclaimed, “Oh my God, did he touch you
with his hand?” And she pointed to John’s bandaged hand.
Honey nodded, picking up her flimsy shirt and holding it across her
large breasts.
Joy made believe she’d just noticed that John had his hand on
Bruno, and she screamed at the man, “You let him touch you with that
hand?”
Bruno backed away, beginning to look nervous.
“Jesus Christ, I can’t believe this.” Joy worked up some crocodile
tears. “It’s my fault, I should have known. I trusted him not to touch
anybody. My God, I’ve got to tell the captain.” And she turned and
started for the door.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

343

John yelled, “I’m sorry, nurse Chang! I couldn’t help it. She’s so
lovely. You don’t know what it’s like for a man, and I haven’t had a
woman since I caught this disease—”
Yes, Joy thought at that moment, the way she looked when I barged
in, it may be a long time before you do have a woman.
“Holy Christ, what have I done?” John screwed up his face in, Joy
thought, a crummy imitation of crying.
Bruno was now obviously scared. “What ya got, pal?”
“You don’t want to know.” John got up to leave with Joy.
Bruno grabbed John’s shirt and demanded, “What is it?”
“Leprosy. See, I’ve already lost two fingers.” John showed him his
two bandaged stumps. “It’s now around my chest.” John pulled his
shirt apart and displayed the bandages.
Emulating a doctor telling his patient that he has terminal cancer,
with every line of her face pointing down and her voice somber, Joy
pointed out, “Now you two have it.”
She hesitated, then with the greatest apparent reluctance, added,
“I’ve got to tell the captain. He knows about him.” She nodded at John.
“I was supposed to keep him in his cabin. The captain will shoot me.”
Honey and Bruno were very frightened. Honey had lost her coloring and Bruno could barely squeak out, “What will the captain do?”
“He’ll quarantine you in your cabin and when we get to San Francisco, he’ll turn you over to the health authorities. What you now have
is highly contagious and they will send you to a leper colony. You will
have to spend the rest of your life there. That is where I was taking this
fellow. The disease is horrible. Your skin rots away and your appendages rot off, like his fingers.”
Joy looked at Honey, and put her hand over her mouth. “Oh my
God, did he touch your . . . breasts?”
Yes, you bastard, she thought at John.
Honey turned even whiter and started shaking. All she could do was nod.
Joy said in a rush, “They are going to rot away.”
Good. Couldn’t be happier.
She said nothing for a moment, as though she was horrified at what
she had said, then added in a sorrowful voice, “I’m sorry, I shouldn’t
have told you that.”
Bruno was as white as a fish belly. He too was shaking, and had
broken out in a sweat. “You mean my arm will rot off?”
“Yes, slowly, and after it goes, the rot will extend to the rest of your
body. There is no cure for it. Come,” Joy said to John, “we’ve got to
rush to the captain.”

344

R.J. Rummel

She headed for the door and he got up to join her, trying to hide the
huge grin struggling to erupt on his face.
Bruno pulled a gun out of his pocket and said, “No.”
Joy looked at Bruno sadly. “This is a Portuguese ship, and the
purser knows we are here. If you murder us, he’ll suspect you did it,
and you’ll be tried for murder in Portugal. Execution is by the garrote.”
“What’s that?”
“The executioner puts a metal band around your neck and slowly
tightens it with a screw until you’re unable to take even a tiny breath.
You die by slow suffocation.”
Shaking even more, his face slack with horror, Bruno lowered his
gun. Tremulously, he said, “Don’t tell the captain. I’ll give you
money.”
“What do you think I am? I’m a nurse. I’m concerned about the
health of everyone on board this ship. I can’t have you two running
around and infecting people with leprosy.”
He pleaded, “We’ll stay in our cabin the rest of the trip and never
touch anyone again. I’ll give you $3,000.”
Joy hesitated, as though considering it. “No, you two are too much
of a health risk.”
“Five thousand.”
More hesitation. “No, not worth it. Come on, let’s go, Mr. Silver,”
she said to John.
“Wait.” Frantically, Bruno almost screamed, “Honey, get your
stash.”
She hurriedly put on her shirt, got off the bed, and tottered to the
cabin’s small closet. She pulled a roll of bills out of a shoe and gave it
to Bruno. He tried to count it, but was shaking so badly, he had to start
over twice. Finally, he added it to a roll he had in his own pocket, and
cried, “Here, take it all. About $7,260. This is all we have. Please don’t
tell the captain.”
“I’ll tell you what,” Joy said reluctantly, holding out her hand for
the money. “I feel sorry for you two. It’s not your fault. I won’t tell the
captain unless I see you anywhere on this ship, and I will ask the purser
to keep an eye out for me. I will also get your address from the purser
and tell the state health department to keep a watch on you two. Now,
do I have your promise? You will never touch another human being,
including each other? That would only speed up the rot.”
Bruno replied, with relief, “Yes, yes.”
“Do you promise that as soon as the rot sets in, you will turn yourselves over to your state health department?”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

345

“We will, I promise.”
“Good luck.” Joy put the money in her holster purse, opened the
door for John, and they left.
They had a long walk around the ship to get to their cabin, and she
was sure that many passengers who saw their contorted faces wondered
what was the matter. They tried to hold it all in until they got back to
their cabin, where they just exploded in laughter and rolled on their
bunks and the floor until their sides hurt. Finally, John held up his bandaged hand and, pointing with the other at his bandaged stumps, said,
“It was worth it. I haven’t had so much fun since I put a large snake in
an outhouse while a school bully was inside, and jammed the door shut
with a branch.”
Once they had calmed down, Joy squeezed the laughter out of her
voice and asked, “Did you really touch her breasts?”
“Yes, but only with my bandaged hand. You know, it was part of
the scenario. I had to.” John looked like a little boy telling his mother,
“The cookies just happened to fall out of the jar.”
“Poor boy. Nipples?”
Mock horror on his face, he replied, “Really, baby, what do you
think I am? But you’ll never believe what she did to me. It was so embarrassing.”
John laughed as Joy picked up a pillow and beat him gently on the
head with it. “Beast!” she yelled.
Truth be told, she may have hidden it pretty well, but she couldn’t
help the glimmer of jealousy that she felt at the time. Since then, she’d
stopped berating herself for being jealous. For a person of her training
and background, it was so unbecoming. She just recognized it for what
it was—the aura of love. Like John’s jealousy over her just talking to
men, when he would tell her later, “You’re flirting again.”
They never saw that couple again. In the months that followed, they
sometimes wondered what had happened to them. They would imagine
their hypochondria about the slightest sore or rash on their bodies, and
thought that, had they known the truth, they would probably have preferred a jail term to the constant fear in which they lived.

aaa
By the time they docked, they had communicated to Jy-ying the details of what had happened in China, and asked her to tell the others.
Although they hadn’t expected it, she, the guys, and Mariko met them
at San Francisco Pier 8.

346

R.J. Rummel

When they spied Joy and John coming down the ship’s ramp, they
broke through the crowd of people waiting and scampered onto the
ramp and past the port authorities who tried to stop them. The guys
came to a gleeful halt just in front of John and shook his hand, gently
hugged him, and patted him on the shoulder.
Joy’s turn. Hands lifted her up in a bear hug. Her feet never touched
the ramp as he passed her to Dolphy to hug before passing her to Sal,
who complained about being last. Jy-ying and Mariko gave John a
careful hug and kissed Joy on the cheek.
That night, Joy and John threw a party and invited all their company executives and their wives over as well, and John told everyone
an edited version of what had happened, claiming that extortion was the
aim of those who kidnapped them, and that they’d been rescued by the
police. During the toasts, Joy looked around and reflected, Our company is doing well. It looks like we forestalled the colonization of
Korea and have set back the Japanese military in favor of civilian rule.
I’ve grown to really like the guys, Mariko, and Jy-ying. I can’t blame
her for her crush on John, and it’s now under control. We’re alive, and
John is healing well. And I know the spirit of Mom is close.
For the first time in her life, Joy got drunk—eye-glazing, mindnumbing, universe-spinning drunk. Jy-ying, who as a Muslim could not
touch alcohol, told Joy afterward that she led the singing of some ribald
ballads and before she fell into a stupor on the floor with her locket in
her hands, she tried to do the dance of the seven veils. Smiling, Jy-ying
kindly refused to tell her whether she got to the seventh. Joy remembered none of it. Jy-ying and Mariko said they put her to bed, and that
the guys gently laid John, stupidly drunk as well, next to her.
Nobody would tell her what John did before he passed out. Probably tried to touch some woman’s breasts with his stumps, she thought
Their trip to Japan and China and the lobbying on behalf of Korea
was successful, they found out in the following years. John read her
one revealing headline from The New York Times: “Congress Passes
Angry Resolution Over Jap-Imposed Korean Protectorate.” In return,
she read him headlines from the Chinese and Japanese newspapers to
which she subscribed, including “General Han’s Korean Righteous
Army Defeats Japanese Army at Taejon.”
Where did Han find the time and energy? she wondered.

Chapter 28
Joy
1909–1910

T

hey’d barely had time to unpack their bags in San Francisco before they received Janet’s terrible message:
Dear Joy and John,
My loving Ed was assassinated two days ago. Will
have him cremated, as he desired. I will carry on his project with all my strength. I loved him dearly. What more
can I say?
Yours,
Janet

They were all stunned and saddened, and after two seconds of silent
communication between Joy and John, she knew what to do. They
would travel to Liverpool to give Janet support through this tough time,
and help her tidy up her affairs and move to San Francisco.
John called Western Union to telegraph their reply.
Dear Janet:
Out deepest condolences and sympathy. Mankind has
lost a great man. We are coming to help. We invite you to
move to San Francisco with us when we return.
Joy and John
They knew that Jy-ying was close to Janet also, but Joy thought it
best she stay and handle company matters. Jy-ying was very saddened
by the news, as were the guys and Mariko.
John told Joy, “I was afraid of something like this. Ed had become
too prominent, too successful against colonialism. He made too many
enemies among the rich and powerful. We could easily be killed in the
same way. What may save us is that we are only known widely for our
business success. Everything else we do secretly.”

348

R.J. Rummel

Joy responded, “We’ve got to do all we can for Janet. She is now critical to the success of decolonization. Besides, she is like a sister to me.”
“Like Jy-ying?” John asked without expression.
“No, not the same. Oh, I like her, and she is really good at her work
for me, and I enjoy our sparring, but there is a distance there I can’t put
my finger on.”
“Maybe you’re still troubled by her having spied on us, or her attempted seduc—”
“Maybe.” It came out too loud and too fast. She took a deep breath,
and calmed her voice. “But she has behaved herself since.” She looked
sidelong at John. “Hasn’t she?”
“You betcha.”
They spent two days with Jy-ying and the others, laying out what
needed to be done with the company while they were gone, and left on
a four-day express to New York, where they were able to get a third
class berth on the famous R.M.S. Mauritania. It took them over six
days to reach Liverpool, during which they kept in wireless contact
with Janet.
She was staying with the Wilsons, her foster parents, who were
providing her with the emotional support she now needed. They also
helped Joy and John arrange for Janet to move to San Francisco. Only
Joy and John, however, could help tie up all the loose strings of Ed’s
anticolonial work. They made sure the Wilsons understood that Janet’s
move and their involvement must be kept secret, for she or all of them
might be assassinated as well.
Janet bought a beautiful native Congo urn for Ed’s ashes. They
were able to get first class accommodations on the R.M.S. Lusitania,
with a stateroom for Janet next to theirs. Janet carried Ed’s ashes onto
the ship and tenderly placed the urn on a little dresser in her room. She
carefully secured it against the ship’s motion, and placed a photograph
of the two of them next to it. Sometimes when they stopped by her
cabin to take her to dinner, Joy and John found her with her eyes red
and swollen.
They communicated with Jy-ying by telegram while in England,
and by wireless from their ship, about what they wanted done for Janet.
By the time they returned to San Francisco with her, the apartment
across the hall from Jy-ying had been furnished with early Victorian
furniture—Janet’s favorite.
Once Janet was settled in her new apartment, they helped her take
over the editing of the weekly West African Mail and set up post office

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

349

boxes to which people could send her sensitive insider information. She
still had Ed’s secret contacts through which she could funnel funds for
lobbying and distribution to sympathetic people. It had been a difficult
operation with Ed, and much harder now that Janet had to do it alone.
John, Joy, and Jy-ying helped as best they could, and in a number of
instances, John acted as a go-between when a male presence was required, as was often the case in this age.
Joy and John set up an office in their company where Janet could
work, and she hired assistants who made the repetitive part of the work
easier. But when not at work on what they called the Colonial Project,
for the first several months she was either across the hall with Jy-ying
and Little Wei, or downstairs with Joy and John.
Once Janet was settled, Joy and John tried to move on. Joy found it
especially hard. Her deep sympathy for Janet went beyond normal
compassion. She kept imagining that Ed’s ashes were John’s, and was
overwhelmed by the rapid emotional destruction she would suffer, were
it true. She couldn’t shake it. It hung over her and soured her days.
Months later, when they were alone in the evening, she put down
the 1909 Sears Roebuck Catalogue she was leafing through, and told
the living room, “I know Ed was among the best of humanity. That his
life was snuffed out as fast as I could snap my fingers, in a way no armor or weapons could protect against, was a warning we can’t ignore.”
John looked up, brows furrowed, from Volume 2 of The Decline
and Fall of the Roman Empire, which he was still trying to finish.
“What?”
She realized she had been thinking aloud. She looked at him. “I
love you, dearest.”
“Oh, I see you noticed my manly hair, my perfect nose, my piercing
eyes, and my lush lips; and especially, my incredibly masculine handlebar mustache. I love you too, baby.” He cocked his head, twirled the
ends of his carrot-colored mustache, and looked at her with a lascivious
grin.
She stuck her tongue out at him, and looked back down at the catalogue without seeing it. I would even miss his horrible humor.

aaa
Jy-ying
How fortuitous, Jy-ying thought when Janet moved in across the
hall. She never did like Janet being so far away—it made their conspir-

350

R.J. Rummel

acy and companionship difficult. Now they could do so much together.
The problem at first was keeping their true identities from Joy and
John, and the three pesky guys. They had to continue to act like they
belonged in this age; they had to watch that they didn’t say things about
the future they couldn’t have known. It was hard enough with Jy-ying
alone, but when they were talking to each other with the others around,
they had to carefully guard what they said.
After well over a year, it became routine. A new problem slowly
emerged, to eat at Jy-ying’s relationship with Janet like a cancer. And
then, as when an x-ray and biopsy show the lethal tumor for what it is,
in two short discussions, Jy-ying’s view of Janet went from coconspirator and friend to potential enemy.
They had never really discussed religion. It seemed enough that
they were both Sabah Muslims, and both did their Contact Prayers five
times a day. But somehow, while visiting Janet, Jy-ying brought up the
subject of the Hanafi sect: “We cannot have these Hanafi Sabahs
spreading their false interpretations of his teaching and prophesies. We
have to adhere strictly to what Sabah said. No liberal interpretations,
but strict adherence. He was the Prophet of God and it is not for us to
read between his lines. I think the National Council of Clerics should
have been tougher with the Hanafis from the beginning.”
Janet blanched. “My father was a Hanafi, and our leading imam in
Britain was sympathetic to the Hanafi school—that’s why he favored
my dad’s work. I really don’t know. I’m not into these religious distinctions, myself. What was the Council doing about the Hanafi school?”
Jy-ying leaned over and snapped her fingers for Little Wei to come
to her. He came and rolled over for her to scratch his stomach. As she
gave him the full benefit of her nails, she tried to think of what to say.
This was a shock to her.
Everyone in Sabah’s Security Guard had believed that the Hanafis
had to be rooted out, first in China and then elsewhere. Their beliefs
could seriously undermine Sabahism; the sect was in some ways no
less an enemy than Christianity or Judaism. Lists were being developed
and the first arrests of leaders under one guise or another had taken
place a month before her time travel.
She had to be sure. Time for a Q & A.
She smiled up at Janet. “Well, it’s a matter of your own faith.” She
went through the major tenets of Islam, its basic pillars, on which there
was virtually no disagreement. But when it got to the principles of Sabah, there was a gulf.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

351

Janet put it this way. “I do not believe that the Ahmedi’s green
book, Principles of Obedience, is necessarily correct, and that the Supreme Imam of Sabahism is the only source of holy understanding and
rules.” She bowed her head. “Peace be unto Sabah. I think each Sabahist is responsible for his or her own interpretation, and that different
interpretations should be able to coexist in harmony. Also, I don’t see
why Sabah cannot compete with other religions peacefully.”
Jy-ying was aghast. This is almost heresy. It’s what Security was
trying to stamp out. There is only one truth of Sabah, and that is the
truth laid down by the first Supreme Imam Abduvahit Ahmedi. A shiver
ran down her spine at her final thought. Janet is a Hanafi.
Although she had just done so an hour before, she claimed that Little Wei needed to got out. She left with him as Janet returned to her
apartment.
The next discussion with Janet days later scared her even more.
“I am impressed with the freedom people in the United States
have,” Janet said reflectively. “Oh, I know that women can’t vote, and
blacks are segregated, and there are other problems. But compared to
the Sabahs’ Great Britain, I love it here and in my country during this
age. I think the exclusiveness of Sabah and the absolute rule by the
clerics is wrong. People should be free to choose their religion and their
government.”
If Janet had hit her in the face with her fist, Jy-ying could not have
felt a greater blow. But that was only the first punch. The second sent
Jy-ying reeling.
Janet said, “I believe that Sabah was a prophet of God. But there
have been other prophets, such as Mohammed himself. There will be
other prophets, as God wills it. We obey His prophets, as each of us
understands His words. But I don’t believe God has said through any of
His prophets that we should kill Joy. I think if Sabah were here, he
would tell us to persuade Joy, as you intend to do with John, not to kill
Sabah. Anyway, I think she is doing great work, and we should help
her, not kill her.”
Jy-ying’s face showed none of her shock. She smiled, as emotionally painful as it was, and changed the subject to Janet’s work on
decolonization. Soon she claimed she was tired from her sparring with
Joy that morning, and she was going to bed early.
Alone after Janet left, Jy-ying tried to think through what was going
on with Janet. She was more than worried. Janet frightened her.

R.J. Rummel

352

aaa
Joy
After all their foreign trips in 1908 and 1909, they had a breather
until they would intervene in the Chinese Revolution in 1912. They
continued to keep a close eye on events in Europe, making sure they
exactly followed the Old Universe chronology prepared by the Society.
Although it was still too early for them to personally intervene, they
prepared to do so eventually by establishing offices in Moscow, St. Petersburg, Berlin, Belgrade, and other potentially important cities in
Europe. They also spent tens of millions of dollars on antiwar propaganda and an informational campaign throughout Europe.
John was convinced that, if they could stop World War I, they
would have gone a long way toward preventing World War II as well.
If he’s right, Joy thought, it will make all the work worth it.
They also concentrated on further building up their business. Their
separate brokerage accounts—Joy had opened one also—now had to be
split among five brokerage houses; it was getting difficult to manage
them. By early 1911, they were worth close to $735 million. They’d
more than made up for the funds transferred to Ed and Janet, and spent
on the interventions in Mexico, Japan, and Korea.
Joy continued to do her weekly correlation between the current
New York Stock Exchange stock prices and those recorded in the Old
Universe, and the gap was growing. From a perfect 100 percent in
1908, it slipped to 96 percent in 1909. By February 1911, it was down
to 83 percent.
“That makes sense, “ John said when Joy told him. “It must be due
to the success of democracy in Mexico, and the changes we instigated
in Korea and Japan. And above all, the success of Ed and Janet’s Colonial Project.”
“What?” Joy asked. “You mean that our company being the largest
import and export firm in the Western part of the United States has
nothing to do with it? You’re so humble.”
The three guys happily accepted Janet, as they had Jy-ying. But
there seemed something special about Janet. “Janet is very much like
you in her openness and natural assumption of equality, and crazy, often risqué, sense of humor,” John told Joy. “The guys like that.”
Sal seemed to feel that maybe Janet would be like Joy in other
ways. One day when Jy-ying was not around, he asked her jokingly,

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

353

“Can you beat up five men with one hand, while holding your dress out
of the way with the other?”
Janet gave him a mock steely look, and said, “Don’t piss me off,
mister, or you’ll see. Anyway, from the stories I’ve heard, she takes all
her clothes off first. I wouldn’t do that. I’m too modest.” They both
laughed.
After Jy-ying, Sal went through girlfriends like a child through
popcorn. Joy gave up trying to keep track.
Hands had broken up with his girlfriend, Jane, and had no serious
relationship for several months afterward. Then he took an interest in
Janet. Although she was more than ten years older than Hands, she was
youthful in her behavior and very pretty.
For Janet, Hands’ attentions came too soon after Ed’s death. She
tried to discourage him in a kind way. Joy tried to help her. She gently
hinted to Hands that Janet’s lack of interest had nothing to do with him
personally, but was due to her love for Ed.
Mariko finally overcame her mother’s resistance to her daughter
marrying a non-Japanese, and she and Dolphy got married in Hawaii in
a Western, white gown ceremony. Joy was her bridesmaid, and John
was best man. Sal, Hands, Janet and Jy-ying also attended at company
expense, and they spent a week touring Kauai, Maui, and the Big Island. Joy and John learned to surfboard on moderate sized waves,
although Joy hated the old-style swimsuits that covered her from neck
to knee.
Hawaii was their last good time before their China intervention.
They returned to San Francisco to put their business in order for their
trip to China. John was very concerned, almost frightened by the proposed intervention.
“We will be trying to assassinate the leading and most unscrupulous
general in the country, a man who has the Chinese army behind him,”
he admitted frankly. “We’ll also be dealing with one or another secret
society, made up of hardened criminals who could make a game out of
who can keep a person alive the longest while slicing him apart piece
by piece.”
“But now, if we’re killed, Janet and Jy-ying can carry on our mission,” Joy commented. “And there are Hands, Sal, and Dolphy, who
know our company well enough to run it themselves.”
John looked like he found only cold comfort in that.

Chapter 29
Joy
1912

S

hortly before their departure, John called everyone together to
discuss the China trip, and “everyone” now included Mariko.
After Joy passed Chinese Harbin beer around and heated up
Japanese Oolong tea for Jy-ying and Janet, John opened the meeting
with, “As you already know, Joy and I will be taking a dangerous trip
to China to build up the company’s offices there, and in a small way, to
further the democratic revolution now underway.”
They had revised their wills. Now if something happened to them,
Janet, Jy-ying, Hands, Sal, and Dolphy and Mariko together would
each receive 20 percent of their liquid assets and stocks, and 20 percent
ownership in the company. Hands was willed executive control of the
company, with a Board of Directors made up of the six of them. They’d
also added a secret codicil for Jy-ying, giving her the code to their capsules and discretion in the distribution and management of the funds
and supplies in them for the mission and the assassination of Sabah.
“It’s especially important while we’re gone, and especially if we
don’t return,” John said, “that you all continue to help Janet with her
Colonial Project. Joy and I consider it of prime importance, but it is too
much for her to do alone.” He looked at Janet. “Janet, can you update
us on your progress?”
She seemed surprised by the request and gazed into space for a few
seconds, apparently thinking about what to say. “Well, I don’t know
how much of it you’ve been following. John may remember the International Commission on the Future of Colonial Peoples—ICFCP for
short—that was set up in 1911 at the Washington Conference. Ed was
partly responsible for that. It finally achieved its aim.
“Colonial powers have been increasingly embarrassed by my actual
and encouraged disclosures of their treatment of colonial people. World
public opinion has turned strongly against colonization—”
Jy-ying interrupted to say, “Thanks much to those horrible photographs of murdered indigenous peoples you widely published.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

355

“Yes,” John added, “and this outraged public opinion has muscle,
thanks to the spreading and deepening democratization of the world.”
Janet nodded and went on. “As I’ve already told some of you, two
months ago a multilateral Self Government Treaty was signed by all
colonial powers. This obligated them to turn all their colonies over to
the ICFCP over a period of five years. The ICFCP would be responsible for the administration of the colonies and their development toward
self-government. In this, education, training in self-government, and
free trade would be emphasized. At the end of ten years, the people of
each colony would vote on their future self-government.”
“It couldn’t be that easy,” Joy interjected wryly. “I know how governments work.”
“It wasn’t,” Janet replied. “The greatest resistance to this divestiture
of colonies came from Great Britain, where many politicians argued
that they were already doing what the ICFCP was supposed to do, and
could do it better. However, President Taft applied great political pressure. And I had published in Britain evidence of the obscene profits
twelve House of Commons members made from their relationship to
British monopolies in the colonies. I also included photographs of
eight-year-old children working in British-owned textile sweatshops in
Madras. All this was too much to ignore, and the House voted to sign
the ICFCP Treaty by a narrow margin.”
They all clapped. John toasted her and said, “That is the greatest
tribute Ed could ever have had.”
She smiled at that, eyes glistening.

aaa
In February of 1912, they took the passenger ship Manchuria to
Hong Kong, and from there a coastal vessel to Shanghai. From their
office there, they would try to work their intervention.
They’d timed their arrival carefully. The Emperor has just abdicated, the centuries old Manchu Dynasty had fallen. General Yüan
Shih-k’ai, head of the Northern Army, was trying to set up a new dynasty of his own. In the interim, democratic leaders had declared a new
republic and “elected” Sun Yat-sen its new president. These events
were as important as the complete collapse of the USSR in 1991.
Their timing had much to do with John’s reading of Chinese history, he reminded Joy one evening when she made the mistake of
bringing up the subject. Joy recognized his tone, and cringed.

356

R.J. Rummel

“The pivot of these events is General Yüan,” John droned. “He has
the military power and will use it to his political advantage—”
He’s lecturing. There is no God.
“In the Old Universe, he was directly responsible for the disastrous
and bloody War Lord Period, during which hundreds of local wars
were fought.”
He paused to draw breath. Joy seized the opening. “Do you really
mean to say ‘hundreds’? That’s a lot of wars in one country.”
“Actually, baby, believe it or not, there were hundreds of wars. And
there was the even bloodier civil war between the Nationalists led by
Chiang Kai-shek and the communist Mao Tse-tung. Millions were
killed.”
In the Old Universe, Yüan had assassinated Sung Chiao-jen who, as
the leader of the most powerful parliamentary party and the democratic
movement next to Sun Yat-sen, was the only real hope of democracy in
China. We’ll have to arrange the assassinations of Yüan, Chiang, Mao,
and Chou En-lai, who would be his influential second in command.
“I’ll set up an appointment for Sun to teach at Harvard that he cannot refuse,” John concluded, “and provide the funds that Sung needs to
solidify democracy in China.”
Joy shifted, not meeting his eyes.
John studied her. “You don’t think we are going to do the
assassinations personally, do you?”
“Why not? I thought that was our job description.”
He got that irritating lecturing tone in his voice again. “Baby, China
is a large and complex country with all kinds of interwoven alliances,
friendships, secret societies, regional conflicts, and on and on. We
don’t know our way around in that historical-cultural-social-political
complex. It’s a sure way of getting ourselves killed.” His tone turned
commanding. “We contract the assassinations with a secret society.”
Joy thought he was wrong, but took it calmly at first. “I speak the
most common Chinese languages; I look Chinese; I can act Chinese. I
should do it. That way we know it’s done.”
“No!”
Joy yelled, “Then why the hell have I been keeping up my skills?
Why have I been training you in them? I don’t even need to be able to
push a child off its potty, to contract this out. Even you can do that.”
“Ahh, sweetheart. Aren’t you forgetting one little thing?”
“What?”
“You need all your skills to protect me.”
“Oh. Yes, of course.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

357

aaa
Jy-ying
Jy-ying watched Joy and John’s ship sail off, then hurried to Lin’s
Chinese restaurant to put out another contract on Joy. She had not even
hinted to Janet that she was going to do this, but she knew that Janet
was concerned about what Jy-ying intended to do.
Holding Little Wei in one arm, Jy-ying entered the restaurant at
suppertime, and found only a few tourists there. She went through the
kitchen, where a cook was reading a Chinese newspaper, and climbed
the stairs to Lin’s rooms.
A young man answered when she knocked. He looked at her curiously and asked in Chinese, “What do you want?”
“I want to see Lin Huifeng.”
“He is dead.”
Jy-ying tried to push open the door and enter the room, but the man
held the door partly closed and would not make way for her.
She explained, “I have done . . . business with him. I want to know
what happened.”
He tried to close the door on her. She quickly stepped back, put Little Wei down, and did a thrust kick at the door, slamming it open and
almost knocking the man off his feet. She pulled her Taiyang .38 out of
her holster purse before rushing inside the room. There she whirled and
kicked the man behind the knee. He fell hard on the floor. She pushed
the door closed, pointed the gun at him, and informed him in a sweet
voice, “I could kill you with my hands. This gun is for your protection.
This way, you won’t try your muscles on me and I won’t have to protect myself, and possibly kill you.”
Little Wei stayed out of the way and watched with interest. He attended all her sparring matches with Joy and had early learned, after
almost being stepped on, to find a comfortable niche.
The man sat on the floor, holding one leg and rubbing it. He glared
at her. “What do you want?”
“What happened to Lin?”
“Why?”
“That is my business.” She waved the gun at him. “Are you going
to tell me, or do you need some persuasion?”
He tried to get up and she kicked him in the leg again. He fell back.
“Stay down.”

358

R.J. Rummel

Holding the gun in one hand, she reached into her false bustle and
pulled out her thin combat knife. She put her gun away and pointed the
knife at the frightened face of the man now trembling on the floor.
“This knife is quieter and of more use for what I have in mind,” she
told him in a cold voice. “Tell me, now. Who are you?”
“I am Lin Desheng, his son.”
“Where is your father?”
“He is dead.”
She waited. So did Little Wei, who sat back on his behind to watch.
Jy-ying suddenly leaned forward and nicked the man’s arm with her
knife. He yelled at the pain and tried to scuttle away from her, but a
Chinese cabinet stopped him.
She followed him, leaned over him with her knife, and asked, “How
did he die?”
He spoke in a tremulous rush. “He was tortured to death.”
She waved her knife.
“They wanted to know who he did some business with. They would
not believe he didn’t know.”
She now knew what happened. She asked anyway, “Who?”
Lin Desheng’s face showed his anguish and fear. His mouth moved,
but nothing came out. She could almost taste his sweat. She waited, and
wrinkled her nose. He had soiled his pants.
She took mercy on him. “It was the Sue Yop tong, and this had to
do with what happened to the Green Lotus Society in China, correct? It
has to do with a contract he made.”
He barely nodded, the fear not leaving his eyes.
Still holding the knife, Jy-ying opened the door, scooped up Little
Wei, and left.
She passed the cook on her way out but paid him little mind. Until
she was putting Little Wei in the passenger seat of her new self-starting
Cadillac she didn’t realize the cook must have followed her out of the
kitchen and signaled to someone. A man with a black slouch hat pulled
down nearly over his eyes came up behind her and knocked her brimless lawn hat off as he grabbed her hair and jerked her head back with
his left hand to put a chokehold on her with his right arm.
Her trained reflexes took charge. She reached up with both hands
and pulled down on his arm, tucking her chin in and dropping her
weight down heavily while with her right arm she thrust an elbow
strike into his ribs and shifted her center of gravity over her left leg to
put her right hip below his. Lifting up with her legs and twisting, she
threw him into the fender of the car.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

359

The man grunted and fell off the fender to the ground, but rolled to
his feet while Jy-ying leaned back, weight toward her heels, fists turned
down, right one held out from her cheek, her left farther from her chest,
in her own wing chun chong sau—ready stance.
Jy-ying saw immediately from the man’s roll and his own ready stance
that he would not be easy. He had lost his black hat and she could see the
queue wrapped around his head. She knew immediately that he was a boo
how doy—a fighting man—employed by the tongs. He was thin, and
shorter than her, but that made no difference. He was clearly trained, a
specialist, but in what martial art, it was too early to tell.
Her waist to ankle dress and flat-heeled, pointed shoes limited her
ability to maneuver as well as her choice of moves. Dressed in this
straitjacket, she thought, I have no time for play.
He came at her in a twirling motion, both hands raised in fists close
to his head, the move timed so that he would be in position to hurl
straight-knuckle punches at her face. He did not anticipate her swift
sideways step and the knife she whipped out of her bustle and thrust
under his arm and deep between his ribs.
He twisted away from her, fell to one knee with the knife still in
him, and leaned on one arm as he reached into his coat pocket.
A gun. Shit. Okay, anything that works.
In a blur, she spun her body at him, the flounces on her dress spinning out; she reached him just as he was raising his gun to shoot her,
and with the full force of her spin she did a front leg kick up and under
his chin, snapping his head back. She heard the crack as his neck broke
and he fell backward, dead.
Maybe six seconds had passed, but she was gasping for breath.
Gradually she became aware of the world, and Little Wei’s loud barking. He was at the Cadillac’s passenger window, jumping up and down
and growling and barking to be let out to help her. He knew the real
thing.
She picked up the dead man’s gun and looked around. Several people had stopped at a distance to watch, and the driver of a loaded cart
had halted his horse in the middle of Gibb Street. When they saw her
looking at them, they all averted their eyes and made off. This was
Chinatown, after all, and a dangerous place to be nosy.
She searched the dead man’s pockets. He had no identity, no wallet.
In an inner coat pocket he carried an olive green card the size of a business card. It had a bright green border and nothing else. That was all
she needed. It proved he was a tong fighting man and that the Sue Yop
tong were looking for her.

360

R.J. Rummel

“They have a long memory for slights,” she said to herself, shaking
her head over the years that had passed.
She retrieved her knife and cleaned it on the dead man’s coat. When
she tried to get into the car, Little Wei was all over her, aiming his
tongue at her face. She got him calmed down, put him firmly down on
the passenger side, and told him to stay in Chinese.
She drove away from the restaurant, watching in front and behind
her for another car. She saw a Ransom Olds pull away from the
wooden curb behind her, two stores down. She did a left at the next intersection, and another left, and saw the car also make the turns while
keeping its distance. It had its canvas top down and she saw two men
inside.
She grabbed Little Wei by his scruff with one hand and pushed him
onto the floor between her left leg and the door, again telling him to
stay. As she made sure her door was solidly shut, she explained to him,
“It is going to get a little rough.”
She saw the bullet break part of the windshield to her right, but she
couldn’t hear the shot above the engine noise. She hunkered down as
far as she could without blinding herself to the road, and pushed the
accelerator down to the floor. These streets were not meant for racing at
thirty or forty miles per hour, and the car bounced and skidded as it hit
one wagon rut or pothole after another. She swerved around wagons
and carts, almost hitting two horses, a donkey, and a bicycle, and when
she saw the chaos she created, she knew what to do.
She headed for congested Stockton and Broadway Streets, and
when she reached the traffic of horse riders, bicycles, and diverse
horse-drawn wagons and carriages, she hoped her steel fenders were
made strong enough. She aimed and timed her destruction well. She hit
the wooden hub of a front wheel on a farm wagon loaded with caged
chickens. The wheel was knocked off, and the two mules pulled the
wagon over when the axle dug into the brick street.
She drove alongside another farm wagon loaded with pigs, pulled
close to the horse’s head, and blew her horn. Its peripheral vision
blocked by the bridle’s blinders, the startled horse screamed, reared,
kicked, then tried to run off at a right angle, spilling the pigs to the
street.
Jy-ying caused two more wagons and a cart to overturn. Looking
behind her, she could see nothing but angry drivers, scared horses,
mules, and pigs, and wagons and carts stopped at all angles as their
drivers had tried to avoid the wreckage. No car was going to get
through that easily.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

361

She pulled around a traffic jam and swerved in front of a two-horse
water wagon and across the lane, barely missing another horse, then
swerved down a side street. Another right and left, and she felt certain
no one was following her.
When she got to John’s apartment building and parked behind it,
she picked up excited Little Wei and inspected the damage to her fenders. The paint had been scratched off of one and the other had a slight
dent in it. She patted the fender affectionately.
That evening, she checked the telephone book, the newspaper advertising pages, and put the CD that Security had prepared for her in
her laptop. She searched for potential contacts in San Francisco. She
found another tong contact, and a possible intermediary to the Triad
Society. But after sitting back and thinking about it, she decided it was
too dangerous now to deal through Chinatown. These local tong and
China’s secret societies were all interwoven. The Sue Yop tong would
now put out a special contract on her. She could not trust anyone.
She petted Little Wei, who was twitching in his sleep after all the
excitement, and told him, “She’s escaped again. There’s no way I can
get to her in China. Now I must do it myself.”

aaa
Joy
In Shanghai, John started negotiations with the secret Triad Society
for the assassinations of Yüan, Chiang, Mao, and Chou En-lai. Chiang,
Mao, and Chou were not yet widely known, so they cost John only
$5,000 each. But after the fall of the Manchu Dynasty, General Yüan
became, as he schemed, the most important political and military figure
in China. For the assassination of such a national figure, John had to
put up $100,000.
John told Joy happily, “Just by these assassinations alone, we may
have saved perhaps fifty or sixty million lives, when all the internal
wars and mass murders for which they were responsible are added up.”
“Are you sure of that?”
“No. In the fascist culture now prevalent in China, others may take
their place. I hope the vast sums we have given to support democracy
may avoid this, especially the fifteen million dollars you promised
Sung to help him consolidate his democratically oriented party and replace Sun as president of the Republic. I understand that Sung will

362

R.J. Rummel

soon conduct true national democratic elections for the first representative national legislature.”
They waited for their contract on Yüan to be carried out. After two
anxious weeks, a trusted guard killed the General and escaped before
the assassination became known. News about Yüan’s murder exploded
in China and was second in importance only to the abdication of the
Emperor.
Assassinations were not enough. They waited to see what would
happen as a result. In a week, Sun Yat-sen resigned his presidency for
the good of the country and left for the new teaching position at Harvard that John had arranged. Sung’s position was strengthened and it
looked like democracy was on a roll.
They left for home tired, not looking forward to another interminable voyage, but happy that they seemed successful, at least for the
moment. Joy did notice during the voyage that John seemed to have a
special interest in studying each young blonde woman he saw around
the ship.
“Don’t get your hopes up, dearest,” she told him in a voice that
would chill the Sahara Desert. “You no longer have the bandaged
stumps for it.”
“But if I spy a sea floozy, maybe I’ll tie a bandage around them.
Aren’t you in favor of cleaning up these ships for honest travelers?”
Her answer was to punch him in the shoulder. He doubled up holding his shoulder, wincing, and yelling, “I’m injured. Help me. Where’s
a blonde?”

Chapter 30
Janet

I

t was a happy time for Janet. Joy and John had returned from their
China intervention and it had worked out well; she was overjoyed,
especially for Ed’s soul, that progress on his Colonial Project had
gone so well; and now, most important to her, she felt at home with
Joy, John, and the guys, and even Jy-ying had gotten over her inexplicable coolness.
She and Jy-ying had recently been discussing in detail what would
happen in the future: the rise of Sabah, his seizure of China, and his
takeover of the democracies. She saw that Jy-ying also hated the horrible mass murder leading up to it, and could barely justify it by the
Great Victory of Sabah and Islam. But she did.
Janet had come to a decision. She invited Jy-ying over for her special
English potato, tomato, onion, and cheese casserole to tell her about it. After they finished the meal, Janet served her special chocolate mousse.
“What an awful, un-Chinese dessert,” Jy-ying murmured, smiling
and trying to scrape the last bead of chocolate from inside her dessert
cup. Little Wei was jumping up and down for his share, but she had
saved a little of her casserole, and gave him that instead.
“Don’t you feel guilty?” Janet asked.
“Yes, but the vet told me chocolate was bad for him.”
After they did the dishes and cleaned up, Janet filled their porcelain
teacups with the remaining jasmine tea. They both sat on the sofa, half
facing each other, sipping their tea and talking about the opposition of
Portugal’s colonial bureaucracy to turning Angola over to the ICFCP.
Already, because of the pressure added by Janet’s Colonial Project,
they had been forced to make reforms in the colony, such as opening it
to economic competition.
There was a moment of silence as Jy-ying sipped her tea, and Janet
seized the moment to announce, “I’m going to tell Joy and John about
us. I can’t stand lying anymore. I’m now against killing Joy. We will
have to find another way to protect Sabah, God be with him. This
would be Ed’s way.”

364

R.J. Rummel

Jy-ying blanched, and her teacup trembled on its saucer as she put it
down gently. She stared at Janet.
Janet stared back at her. This was the moment she feared. She knew
that she did not have the mental strength and training, if it came to a
test of wills between them.
Finally Jy-ying whispered in a tone that made Little Wei jerk up his
head and look at her, “You dare make that decision for me, as well?”
Janet started shivering. She clasped her hands on her lap and looked
down at them. “Won’t it be obvious that you are included if I tell them
about me? I will leave you out; I won’t mention your name. I will tell
them only about me, but if they ask about you, I will not lie anymore. I
will just tell them to ask you.” A tear started down her cheek. “I cannot
live these lies anymore, Jy-ying. Joy has been like a sister to me, and
John has been sweet. The thought of killing her, and what it would do
to John, sickens me. I get nauseous thinking about it.”
She began to cry. “I’m sorry, Jy-ying. I’m so very sorry.”
Little Wei had jumped on the sofa. He was trying to lick Janet’s
cheeks while she held him.
Jy-ying sighed and asked, “When will you tell them?”
Janet let her determination show in her tone. “I’ve asked Joy if I
can see them tomorrow evening after supper. I’ll tell them then.” She
dabbed at her eyes with hands. “I don’t know what they’ll do. Maybe
kick me out. Fire me. There’s not much more I can do on colonialism—
maybe it’s time to close down the project, anyway. I’ll return to them
what funds are left.”
“What about your determination to do what your father lost his life
for?”
“My father was a good man. I don’t believe any longer that he
would want me to kill Joy. I’m now sure he would try to find another
way to protect Sabah.”
Jy-ying’s tone turned conversational. “What will you do, once you
tell them?”
“Return to England. Live with my foster parents, if they’ll have me.
I love them, you know. And try to forget all this.”
Having said what she’d dreaded throughout the day, she was suddenly exhausted. She simply wanted to be alone. She stood up,
conveying the social hint. “Thank you, Jy-ying, for being so good to
me, and for all the help you have given me.” She reached over and
touched Jy-ying on the arm as she got up. “I hope that it works out
well, if they also find out about you.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

365

Jy-ying walked to the door, followed by Little Wei. As she opened
it, she turned around and gave Janet a hug. “What God wills, He wills.
We are only His to command.” She looked reflective, as though talking
to herself. “You have to do what you must.”
Following Little Wei out, Jy-ying gently closed the door behind
her. Janet put her back to the door, slid down it, and pulled her knees
up to her chin. She wept. “Oh Ed, I miss you,” she whispered. “I’m so
scared of telling them. Please help me.”

aaa
Janet took her morning bath, did her Dawn Contact Prayers, and
had a breakfast of tea, toast, and jam. She dressed, picked up what in
this age passed for a “lady’s” briefcase, and shut and locked the apartment door behind her.
She had worked out her fears the night before, and finally felt relief
at having told Jy-ying her intentions. By the time she fell asleep, she
had grown confident that telling Joy and John would work out. The
mood had carried over to this morning, and she was almost happy that
this huge burden would soon be off her shoulders.
She reached the back of the apartments and went down the stairs to
the outside door. She opened it and walked across the gravel alley to
the former horse stable that John had remodeled into a four-car garage.
She unlocked and lifted the garage door where her Ford was parked,
and walked into the dark interior.
A slight swish of sound. She began to turn her head toward it.
She felt a sudden smack in the head, a diminishing sense of falling.
Nothingness.

aaa
Joy
As Joy and John approached their garage, Joy thought, Strange.
Janet left the garage door up. But her Ford is still there.
John, apparently suspicious as well, rushed ahead of her. When Joy
entered, she found him kneeling beside Janet, who lay on her back on
the floor, her head turned toward them, her eyes closed. She looked like
she was sleeping, and that the pool under her head was spilled red
paint.

366

R.J. Rummel

John yelled, “Shit!”
Joy’s heart stopped. She didn’t have to look closely to know that
Janet was dead. The blood from her head said it all. Assassinated, Joy’s
mind supplied. Her eyes opened wide as her hand rushed to cover her
cheek. She screamed.
John leaned over and lifted Janet’s wrist to feel for a pulse. He
shook his head, and sat down between Janet’s body and her car. “Shit.
Shit. SHIT.”
Joy dropped onto the concrete floor on the other side of Janet, took her
cold, chalk-white hand in hers, and broke down in body wrenching, keening sobs. Janet had become her best friend—an intimate part of her life.
John moved to sit beside Joy. He put his arm around her and sobbed
with her.
Gulping air, Joy finally looked at John. His face was red and tearstreaked, his lips trembling, eyes blazing with anger. Joy was trembling
all over. She still held Janet’s cold, stiff hand in hers. She rubbed her
fingers over Janet’s, and with her other hand caressed Janet’s palm as
though she could communicate her affection to the dead woman’s soul.
Joy could hardly get a word out between her sobs. She succeeded at
last in saying to John, “No police. We’ll . . . handle this ourselves. We
can’t have them . . . prying into her Colonial Project. Or our company.
Could you get Jy-ying . . . the guys? I can’t.”
John released her, stood up shakily and left to tell the others. Joy
felt no passage of time. She was lost in the agony of her grief. She was
still holding Janet’s cold hand when the others arrived and gathered
around. John backed the cars out of the garage and parked them in the
alley so that they had room. Everyone wept. Sal beat the garage wall
with his fist in helpless anger. Mariko held struggling Little Wei; Jyying was sobbing something in Chinese that Joy could not understand.
While also shedding tears, Hands was the most restrained of them all,
although Joy knew he held a special place in his heart for Janet. He
leaned over her head and kissed her cheek.
Jy-ying was the first to finally ask through her tears, “Okay, what
do we do?”
Joy hissed, “I’ll find the son of a bitch who did this.”
Hesitantly at first, the others began to discuss what to do next. Joy
was too wracked with grief to think straight, and could only sit still
holding Janet’s hand.
“We will handle this ourselves,” John said. “We have the money to
hire the best detective agencies and pursue whatever clues they find.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

367

The others agreed.
Jy-ying pointed out, “It had to be a professional job. I noticed that
the glass had been removed from the garage window with a glass cutter.” She bent over and looked closely at the hole in Janet’s head.
“From the size of the hole, a .22 caliber gun was used—quiet and efficient. The killer must have tracked her movements for some time, and
knew that she was usually the first in the garage to leave in the morning. He must have waited inside, next to the garage door, until Janet
opened it and walked toward her car, then shot her in the back of the
head.”
The guys and Mariko were too shocked by the murder to wonder
how Jy-ying knew all this.
Jy-ying picked up Janet’s purse and looked inside. She added, “Her
wallet is still in her purse, along with her Colt.”
“Whoever murdered Ed has now finished the job,” Hands said.

aaa
Within an hour Hands and Dolphy had rented a truck, bought a
large insulated meat box from a butcher’s storehouse, a hundred pound
block of ice, and trucked them to the garage. Joy finally released
Janet’s hand when they arrived, and John and the guys gently lifted her
body and placed it in the meat box.
Joy yelled, “Wait.”
She rose and leaned over the box. She smoothed out Janet’s clothes
and tried to comb her dark brown hair with her fingers so that it neatly
framed her face. She took off her silk blouse and wet it from the melting ice block, then rubbed the blood off Janet’s ear, hair, and neck with
it. The bullet that killed her had lodged in her brain, and left her face
undisturbed. She looked at peace. Joy caressed her cold cheek, kissed
her forehead, and told her, “Now, my friend, my sister, you are with Ed
again. You succeeded beyond your hopes and dreams. You’ve saved
millions of lives and made the world a better place. Rest in peace.”
She turned away. John put his arms around her.
Everyone said farewell in their own way. Finally the men chipped
ice from the block and packed it around Janet’s body, and closed and
locked the chest.
As an importer, John had all kinds of labels, stamps, manifests, and
billings, and he and the others immediately prepared appropriate documents and attachments. They certified that inside the box was 165

368

R.J. Rummel

pounds of specially prepared frozen steaks freighted from Texas, and
that they had been bought for export. They rented space in the Cut Rite
Meat Market’s cold storage, claiming that their export of the steaks was
delayed over billing problems.
Within three days they made it worthwhile for the Morrison Funeral
Home to cremate Janet without a formal death certificate. They brought
her ashes to their apartment in a simple container, and when they all
could get together, they had a private funeral for her. They toasted the
woman they knew and loved so well, and thanked God for allowing her
to see the good results of her and Ed’s crusade against the horrors of
colonialism. Then they mixed Janet’s ashes with Ed’s in the beautiful
urn she had bought for him.
Many days later, when Joy was able to absorb the pain of Janet’s
death into her life, she persuaded John that even in death, which
would come eventually to all of them, they could remain together.
She suggested that they have a crypt built that would eventually
house all of them at Cypress Lawn Memorial Park, outside of San
Francisco.
Their wealth made it easy. They built a modest crypt and bought the
plots around it so that it could be expanded, if necessary. When it was
ready, Joy, carrying the urn, led the others toward the crypt along a narrow lane lined with a variety of roses. The crypt was not very big, but
solid, squarish, and constructed of beautiful blue Purbeck marble.
There were no windows. Nor were there decorations or carvings on the
exterior. But there was a bed of well-tended, variegated pink, red, and
white roses surrounding the crypt, and red and orange bougainvillea
climbed a trellis framing the entrance. A little granite plate over the
door was incised with Banks and Team.
John unlocked the door, went inside, and flicked a switch; the interior was bathed in diffused light. Joy felt as though the inside of the
crypt was bathed in a golden sunrise, with the sun’s first rays reflecting
off of green leaves and plants. Indeed, the inside lighting was suffused
with sunlight that penetrated the inch or so thick marble walls and cast
a light blue wash over everything.
On the far wall were three Italian rose-veined marble shelves made
to eventually hold all their urns. Another wall held a photograph of
Janet, another of Ed, and a third of them together. Joy placed the urn
containing Janet and Ed’s ashes on the top shelf, above an engraved
plaque:

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

369

Edward Dene Morel, 1873–1909. Janet Morel, –1912
Unrivaled Humanists, they truly loved each other.
They live on in the hearts of their friends and the many
whose lives they saved and freed. Together again, now
for eternity. RIP
As they all left, Jy-ying turned at the entrance. Facing the urn, she
stiffened her back and gave a crisp salute.

aaa
Joy
1913
John hired the Anderson Detective Agency in San Francisco and
gave them a blank check to do what was necessary to find Janet’s murderer. The agency not only hired many additional detectives to work for
them on this case, but also sought help from similar agencies in Europe
and Africa. What they earned from John in their international search
enabled the agency to build up to become one of the best known agencies in the country.
Joy and John refused to micromanage the agency’s efforts and
would not rush them, recognizing the difficulties involved. They only
wanted a weekly progress briefing. When asked why this murder had
not been reported to the police, they were forthright—they didn’t want
the police prying into their or the company’s affairs. Money overcame
any other questions the agency might have had.
In early 1913, all the small pieces of the puzzle that had been collected from Europe and Southwest Africa over the year finally fit
together and pointed to the owner of the Portuguese company Castelbranco, which had a government-enforced shipping monopoly on all
Portuguese trade with the Angolan colony. With Portugal’s reforms and
the adoption of free trade for the colony, Castelbranco’s monopoly
ended and it went into bankruptcy when Angola was opened to competitive shipping. Carlos Folha, the president of the company, knew
how dependent his family’s wealth was on this monopoly and had tried
to stop Ed’s crusade by having him assassinated.
The agency reported they were 99 percent sure that Folha contracted with the Spanish professional killer known as The Tooth, an
alias of Felipe Parda. They also believed, although the evidence was

370

R.J. Rummel

scanty, that Folha had him assassinate Janet Morel years later, out of
revenge for his company’s bankruptcy.
Joy and John shared this conclusion with the others, but invited
only Hands and Jy-ying to Portugal to handle it, leaving Sal, Dolphy,
and Mariko behind to manage the company.
During the trip, Joy commented to John that Hands and Jy-ying
seemed to be spending much time together, and since their staterooms
were across from theirs, John added with a wink, “Yes, two-gether.”
The next chance she got, Joy asked Jy-ying about it.
“Yes,” she said frankly, “I like him. He is an honest and sincere
man.”
When they arrived in Portugal, they talked to Folha’s former mistress and his first wife, both discarded by Folha, and both ready to spit
on his grave. John made it well worth their while to provide information about how Folha communicated with Parda.
They determined when Parda would be in his Madrid apartment,
and had a package sent to him on a Monday, containing 10,000 Portuguese escudo and a forged message in Folha’s handwriting that simply
read Segres, Friday, 12:30.
Segres was a little Portuguese town on Cape St. Vincent, with a
small harbor. Nearby was Baleeir, its picturesque fishing port. Folha
and Parda often met at the Hotel Da Baleeita restaurant to discuss what
Folha wanted Parda to do for him, and they’d sometimes spent a day
sailing off southern Portugal in a small sailboat Folha kept there, until
his bankruptcy forced him to sell it.
Once they’d determined Folha had contracted Parda for the assassinations, and that Segres was where they made personal contact, they
telephoned Mateus Cardenas about their plans. He made some helpful
suggestions, and invited them to stay in his home.
Cardenas had been a regional manager of a Portuguese rubber plantation in Angola until its financial collapse. He had returned to Portugal
and, with money he had saved in Angola, he bought a small fishing
boat and made a living fishing off of Segres. He had been a major
source of inside information for Ed, and after his murder, for Janet. She
had commented on him often and thought that his revelations, along
with those of dozens of other whistle-blowers throughout Europe and in
the former colonies, were one of the major reasons for the collapse of
African colonialism. He had warned Janet over the years that there
might be an attempt to assassinate her; he and Isabel, his Angolan wife,
had been devastated by Janet’s death. As soon as they heard about

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

371

Janet’s assassination, they offered to help in any way they could to find
the murderers.
Joy and the others arrived in Segres two days ahead of time and
were met by Mateus and Isabel. Hands, Jy-ying, Joy, and John all slept
on blankets and rugs in a small spare room in the Cardenas’ home that
night, after convincing the Cardenas that they would go to a hotel rather
than depriving them of their bed. Nobody enjoyed their time there more
than Little Wei, who was an immediate hit with Isabel. He seemed to
think that all of them sleeping on the floor together was the greatest adventure, and enjoyed jumping from one sleeping body to another.
They all had discussed what to do when Parda arrived, and they
made very careful plans. This was a dangerous man who lived off his
contracts for assassinations. Murder was his business. They had to assume that he was as well-armed as they were, and knew his weapons
and how to use his hands, as well.
They knew Parda’s pattern was to get a hotel room at Hotel Da Baleeita in the morning and meet Folha in the restaurant at the appointed
time. Their easiest course, then, would have been to shoot Parda while
walking past him in the hotel hallway when he arrived or left his room for
the restaurant. Joy would have none of this, and Jy-ying agreed with her.
“I will not kill him unless I am absolutely certain he murdered Ed,
and especially Janet,” Joy said.
John and Hands tried to argue that the detective agency had provided all the evidence they needed. John even retrieved from his
luggage the documents that the agency had sent them. She waved them
away. “I know, I know it’s all there. But I must hear it from him.”
“Now, how are you going to do that?” John asked, his tone really
saying, “Oh no you don’t, baby.”
Looking at John from under her eyelashes, she answered, “As a
woman.”
Jy-ying smiled knowingly, and Hands looked shocked. John’s face
immediately darkened. Leaning over Joy and waving a finger under her
nose, he yelled, “No way. No sex. If you think you’re going to do that,
I’m going over there as soon as he arrives to shoot the son of a bitch.”
For once, Joy saw the finger as justified, and ignored it. Laughing,
she took his hand in hers. “Please. I would rather boil in oil than have
sex with him. But there are different ways of using sex.”
So they discussed it, and Joy got him to agree—reluctantly—to
what she had in mind. At one point he told her that, at thirty-two, she
wasn’t young anymore, and she should act her age. Joy was about to

372

R.J. Rummel

show him how young she was, when Jy-ying saved him from bodily
harm by telling him, “Do not be stupid.”
They left for the hotel, leaving Little Wei in the good hands of Isabel, who had taken over his entertainment and care from the moment
they arrived.
They didn’t know when Parda would arrive at the hotel, but they
knew what he looked like and Joy and John watched for him to arrive
outside, while Jy-ying and Hands waited in the lobby, looking like
happy tourists enjoying the view of Baleeita Bay from the lobby windows.
Parda arrived in a small, smoking bus along with two other guests.
He was known by the receptionists, who gave him a key to a secondfloor room. Hands had strolled over to the receptionist’s desk and
waited as if wanting to ask a question; he was able to see what room
number Parda got.
Hands and Jy-ying went outside to tell Joy, then took up their stations. Jy-ying went to watch the rear of the hotel in case Parda tried to
escape, and Hands watched the front. Both of them were well armed.
Joy and John strolled into the lobby and up the stairs to the second
floor. She tested her communicator to be sure that John could hear it
okay. She left it on so that he could follow her exchange with Parda and
rush into the room if her plan didn’t work out.
She had covered herself with a coat and hat before they entered the
hotel. Now, near Parda’s door, she took off her hat, unpinned her hair,
and let it fall naturally to her waist. She automatically looked for gray
hair, and damned John for making her self-conscious about her age.
She took off her coat and gave that and the hat to John to drop
somewhere. She had lightly rouged her cheeks and painted her lips with
rose-red lipstick. She could not wear a low-cut bodice because of her
armor, and since the armor tended to flatten her breasts, she had
inserted in her blouse, over the armor, rounded cups that Isabel cut
from cork for her. John had looked at the result with amusement. Hands
whistled and looked at Jy-ying, saying, “Hey, why don’t you do that?”
Jy-ying threw him on the floor and Little Wei happily jumped on his
stomach.
Joy wore a tight, long-sleeved, pink silk blouse with lace at the
neck, which she tucked into a tight, woolen worsted maroon skirt that
fell straight down to cover the tops of her high-heeled black boots. She
was trying to give the impression of a very feminine-looking hooker—
feminine for weakness; hooker for availability. The only thing that was

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

373

out of place was the red headband on her forehead. John told her it was
sexy.
With John out of sight down the hallway, she paused and calmed
herself, as she usually did before battle. She slowed her heartbeat,
cleared her mind, focused her energy, took two deep breaths, and said
to herself, “Here we go.”
She knocked on the door to Parda’s room.
Parda opened the door just enough to look around it with one wary
eye. After a brief hesitation, he opened the door farther. With only his
head and one shoulder showing, he slowly looked her up and down. Joy
felt as though he’d already created an image of her naked on his bed.
He smiled and said, “Sim?”—“Yes?” in Portuguese, she guessed.
She had discussed with John and Mateus how to handle the language
problem. Parda spoke English as part of his profession. But she had to
use Portuguese initially to get into his room. So Mateus taught her how
to say, “Hello. I am a Chinese gift to you from Folha.”
She gave Parda a very sexy smile and said, “Hello. Eu sou-lhe um
presente chinês de Folha.”
He opened the door wider, looked her up and down again. She
pointed to him and to herself and made a circle of her thumb and index
finger, then slid her other index finger through the circle to simulate
sex. Muttering something in Spanish that may have been, “I can’t believe this,” he waved her into the room. As she passed him, he caressed
her behind.
She hoped he didn’t feel her cringe away at his touch. She couldn’t
help it.
As she walked over to the window, she carefully surveyed the
room, noting where all the furniture was and the empty spaces between.
She turned to face him so that the light streamed into the room behind
her and into his eyes.
She studied him as she would any opponent before battle. He was
an exceptionally athletic and muscular man, with a cocky pose. His hair
was a mess of dark brown curls, which he let collect around his head as
though never disciplined by a comb. He was clean-shaven, with a beak
nose and strong, heavy lips. His eyes were coal black and unusually
large. They dominated his swarthy, hard-looking face. He wore course,
dark work clothes.
He looked like a killer.
He stepped toward her with one hand raised to pull her onto the
double bed.

374

R.J. Rummel

Coldly and carefully enunciating each word, Joy demanded in English, “Stop and listen, you bastard.”
He halted suddenly, cupped his right fist with his left hand, and
thrust his head forward, looking at her curiously.
She had assumed her unique readiness stance, with hands hanging
loosely at her side, head slightly tilted, knees slightly bent, and her
weight on the balls of her feet. She coolly looked him in the eye. In a
tone not even Hell could have melted, she hurled at him, “In San Francisco you assassinated my best friend, Janet Morel.”
His eyes narrowed. He looked for the slightest hint of fear or stupid
innocence in her eyes. His brow furrowed as he thought through who
she might be and how dangerous to him she was. He again looked her
up and down, this time looking for weapons and judging her strength,
Joy was sure. But she knew he was a typical male of this era and saw
only a naive, weak woman. Finally, he spit at her in English, “Who sent
you?”
“Nobody.”
Looking her over again, he said gruffly, “I killed no one.”
Unblinking, Joy continued to look him in the eye. “I know that you
are a professional assassin,” she said, no less coldly, “and you murdered Janet Morel in 1912, and her husband Ed in 1909.”
“Who told you these fucking lies?”
“Folha, who paid you to do the assassinations. In bed, he revealed
everything. A lot of alcohol and a little bit of teasing his cock, and he
was a fountain of information.”
“Folha.” He spit it out like rotten fish. “That fucking . . . ” and
he added some Portuguese words she thought were hardly complementary.
Joy stood ready, waiting, unmoving, and watched his eyes very
carefully. She could see that he was feeling in control as he asked,
“Who’d you tell?”
“No one.” Adopting a matter-of-fact tone, she added, “I wanted to
see your face when I told you. Now I’m going to the police.”
He looked puzzled again. She could see him flexing his right fist as
he asked, “You’re not scared of me?”
Still looking him in the eye, she smiled and replied lightly, “No.”
His mouth turned down at the corners and his face hardened even
more. His eyes glittered. He growled, “You know I killed your friends.
Killing is what I do. And you stand there, and you are not afraid of
me?” He nearly shouted the last word.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

375

“You killed Janet and Ed Morel?”
“Yes!” he shot at her, and sneered.
Joy had what she wanted. He is so certain that I will not leave this
room alive, she thought, watching him. She gave him a lethal smile.
Eyes locked on his, she reached up to her red headband and twisted it
inside out. She had not displayed the lightning bolt symbol now shown
on the headband since she fought the Mexican bandits. In hand to hand
combat, it was the symbol of death.
She brought her hand down and said in the sweetest voice she could
manage, “No, you don’t scare me at all.”
“You fucking whore. You’re crazy. I’m going to kill you, but I’m
going to fuck you first. I’m going to fuck your cunt. I’m going to fuck
your asshole. I’m going to fuck your mouth. By the time I’m done,
you’ll be begging for death. And when I’m done killing you, I’m going
to slowly kill that fucking Folha.”
“Try me,” she said.
He rushed to grab her and throw her on the bed. She did a scooping
inward to outward block and a side thrust kick, knocking him into a
chest of drawers. Twisting behind him, she front kicked him into the
window. He turned his body so that his shoulder took the blow and
bounced off the window frame; crouching, he faced her.
For a second he looked at her with surprise, then reached down with
his right hand to snatch a knife from his boot. Before it even cleared the
boot, she palmed the knife she had hidden up her sleeve and threw it
into his right shoulder. As she intended, it cut his rotator cuff and paralyzed his arm.
Just then the door to the room burst open to smack against its stop
and John rushed into the room with his gun pointed at Parda. “Hands
up, Parda,” he shouted.
His one arm useless, Parda tried to pull the knife out of his shoulder
with his other hand, but Joy chopped down on his wrist before he could
reach it. His breath came in gasps. He looked from her to John and back.
Joy whipped her hand up and jerked the knife from his shoulder
with a sideways slice. He grunted with pain and covered his shoulder
with his hand as blood flowed out between his fingers. He went into a
semi-crouch and scowled at her venomously.
Joy held the bloody end of the knife up before his nose, and informed him as though passing a verdict, “You murdered two wonderful
people I respected and who did you no harm. You did it for money.
You didn’t care what decent people they were. You did it in spite of

376

R.J. Rummel

their great work for humanity. Parda, you are shitty scum. I’m going to
send you to Hell where you belong.”
“Fuck you,” he yelled as he moved fast to the side, where Joy’s
body blocked John’s line of fire.
He leaped directly at her to girdle and crush her throat with his
good arm, but she reflexed a sideways twist while ducking under his
arm and smashing his throat with an upward backhanded death chop.
He went down heavily on the bed, thrashing about and choking for
breath through his crushed trachea and esophagus. His chest heaving,
holding his throat with his hand, he looked at her with watering eyes
full of pain and bewilderment.
She took Janet’s picture from under her blouse with one hand and,
still holding her knife in the other, she stepped to the side of the bed
and held Janet’s picture before his bulging eyes. She told him, “This is
the woman you murdered.” She waited for him to focus on it through
his agony. Then she thrust the knife below his sternum and up into his
heart.
Joy sat hard on the bed next to his twitching body. Holding Janet’s
picture to her heart, she started to cry.
John came over, put his arm around her, and said softly, “It’s over,
baby.” He kissed her wet cheek and added, “I’ll get Hands and Jyying.”
By the time they arrived, she had pulled herself together, taken off
her headband, and was cleaning up the blood. Hands and John carried
in a trunk that they had bought the day before. Hands held his nose, as
Parda had soiled himself in death.
Jy-ying studied the body for a moment, then said, “Good work, Joy.
I couldn’t have done better.” She turned to Hands, who was looking
sick. Smiling, she tried out a new word she had just learned, “See, do
not mess with us women.”
They had lined the trunk with cut canvas sail, and the four of them
fitted Parda’s body inside. They also included the blood-soaked blanket
from the bed, and made double sure there were no other signs of blood.
John brought in Joy’s hat and coat so that she could look like a decent
woman again. They left, with John and Hands carrying the trunk, and
Jy-ying carrying Parda’s overnight bag stuffed with all his belongings,
including two guns and a knife. They exited the hotel by a side entrance. Mateus was waiting for them with a rented truck. They loaded
up, drove to his boat, and chugged out into the Atlantic Ocean.
About two miles out, they wrapped Parda’s body—minus his

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

377

head—in the bloodied and soiled canvas and secured it with an old anchor chain. They dropped him into the sea without a word. Joy spit into
the swirl his body created as it disappeared on its way to the bottom. By
suppertime they were back on shore.
Four days later, a courier delivered to Folha’s rundown office in
Lisbon a box labeled with his name and, in large red letters in Portuguese, Personal. Inside was Parda’s head wrapped in wax paper,
unseeing eyes still open. Tied to his ear was a note in Portuguese that
Joy had dictated to Mateus:
Dear Mr. Folha
Here is the head of the assassin you paid to murder
two very good people. You are next, unless you save me
the trouble.
The Knife.
Three days later, Mateus translated for them an item from Diario de
Noticias, a Lisbon newspaper.
BUSINESSMAN COMMITS SUICIDE
Well-known businessman Carlos Folha was found
dead in his office yesterday morning by his wife, after
failing to return home from work. He had shot himself in
the head. A suicide note gave the failure of his businesses
as the reason for his suicide.
His wife said that he had been despondent ever since
the collapse of his shipping company, and blamed the
government for his suicide.
Folha was well known and highly respected in business and political circles, and at one time managed all
trade with Angola.

Chapter 31
Jy-ying

J

y-ying had spent all morning shopping and had filled three large
bags. After her noon prayers, she went to her supply capsule and
filled another bag before driving to Barbara’s orphanage. She gave
a small personal gift to each of the girls—a doll for Mary, a stuffed
bear for Shirley, a music box for Wanying, and so on. It was the happiest Jy-ying had felt in months, and Little Wei seemed to feel the same
way.
After an hour with the girls, she asked to see Barbara privately, and
when they were alone, she told her, “I may be going on a long trip to
China and I may not come back. If I don’t, I want you to have this for
your orphanage.” She bowed and gave her a package containing
$100,000, saying, “Please only open this fifteen minutes after I leave.”
She also gave her a bulkier package that contained most of her jewelry. “Please don’t open this right away, either.”
Barbara was surprised and wanted to hear all about her trip. Jy-ying
said, “I do not have the time; I must rush off.”
At the door, Barbara hugged her and tearfully wished Jy-ying a
good trip, and the girls crowded around her, thanking her cheerfully.
They waved and said goodbye, not knowing it might be for forever.
Jy-ying fought tears all the way back to her apartment. When she
got there, she wrote a will. She put it and a large envelope on the
counter next to the sink. It couldn’t be missed there.
Jy-ying sat on her sofa for hours, staring at nothing, her mind a
maelstrom of thought and memories. Little Wei was asleep next to her
on the sofa, his head tight against her thigh. Only when he awoke and
rushed to the door to whine with his back against it, signaling a need to
go out, did she take him on his evening walk. All she remembered
about it was getting twisted in his leash when he saw a cat and darted
around her.
She still could not believe it. She had thought it impossible, but she
could not deny what she had heard, and her own memory. She had been

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

379

confronting this over and over, twisting it around in her mind, dancing
around it with her emotions, but always the conclusion was the same.
She still must save Sabah. And there was only one way to save him.
Eliminate Joy. Jy-ying knew that Joy was beyond persuasion on this.
John? She still thought he was manageable, especially with what she
now knew. But if not, he could also be eliminated later.
She was beginning to hate herself, to hate her lies, to hate what she
had to do. “To Joy,” she whispered, and a shiver went up her spine
when she spoke that name aloud. She gave a shuddering sigh. I wish I
were dead.
All Jy-ying’s dedication, all her passion about saving Sabah, all her
singular focus was seeping away. She felt like an empty shell, with little left worth holding onto. A light had dimmed. It had started with the
death of Janet. She had felt close to Janet, in spite of her apostasy. And
when Janet said she would tell Joy, Jy-ying had not slept that night, believing that the following day she would have to kill her. But when
dawn came, she knew she could not. She had sighed with relief and
prepared the new lies she would tell Joy and John when they found out
about her from Janet.
Although terribly convenient, the death of Janet was too awful.
When she’d first seen Janet’s body, Jy-ying had felt released from a
huge weight, but that was fleeting, a matter of seconds. Janet’s death
more than grieved her, it shook her. Jy-ying’s tears were real; her anger
at the killer was real. Her feelings for Janet had weakened the iron bubble she had erected around her perceived necessity for killing Joy.
Janet’s death had begun softening the wall, and now with her latest discovery, it was melting.
Then Hands. She put her head in her hand and let the tears flow. Sal
was a nice man who had helped her with her needs and assuaged her
loneliness for a while. But she’d fallen for Hands. He was not John. He
was a different man. But he had both a hardness and a tenderness about
him that she liked. She thought there was something developing between them, until that second night on the ship when, as they sat on his
bed, he told her that he had a girlfriend in Germany—an actress. And
he was in love with her. Hands also admitted that he was afraid if Sal
knew that he and Jy-ying were “getting together,” it would hurt their
friendship, regardless of how much time had gone by since she broke
up with Sal.
“I understand,” she told Hands. “There will be no . . . . What is the
English word for this? Ahh, complications. Yes, there will be no com-

380

R.J. Rummel

plications.” But after the last night on the return voyage, he had been so
tender and considerate that she found it hard to just treat it as a shipboard romance. She cried. Hands held her tight. And when she was
down to sniffles, she told him, “Do not worry. No complications. Yes.”
Yes, she, Security Captain Khoo Jy-ying, time traveler, trained in
the arts of defense and killing, and soon-to-be murderer of Joy, had
cried. Jy-ying had fallen in love with Hands. Yes, there were no complications. Not overt ones. They were all in her head.
Anyway, there was John, she told herself. He really was her deeper
love. And she would have him. Especially when he found out what she
now knew. She would have him, but she felt dirty about it. No, maybe
not dirty. Guilty? No, that wasn’t the right word either. She felt . . .
wrong.
I have got to kill Joy tomorrow morning during sparring. Tomorrow. I can’t let this go on. I must do it. I know her weakness and she
does not know mine. I know which combination of punches, kicks, and
blocks will open her up to the death knife chop.
Oh God, let her die quickly; let it be painless. I could not stand to
see her suffer.
But she is so strong. I yet may lose, she reminded herself.
Calming herself, she sat at her desk and composed a letter to John:
Dear John:
If you are reading this, I am dead. Joy may also be dead. If
she is, I am so sorry. It was God’s will. If she is not, that is also
God’s will, and this letter is also addressed to her—to me from
a different universe.
I leave everything I own to you, and this includes the supply
capsule you will find in my warehouse. The code to unlock it
and the ownership documents for the warehouse are in the top
envelope.
Yes, I am a time traveler. Yes, I was sent here to save Sabah, to prevent his murder by whomever received that message
from the future about him, which turned out to be you and Joy.
I pray to God that I have not failed. But if I do, I pray that
you will see the light and leave Sabah alive. He will be the true
prophet of God, and maybe if you guide him after his birth,
many of the terrible things done in his name will be no more.
Say my fond goodbyes to Hands, Sal, Dolphy, and Mariko.
Love,
Jy-ying

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

381

She picked up her Book of Sabah, which she had brought with her
from the future. She turned to a well-marked page and read it again, as
she had repeatedly for the last four hours. She had drawn a red box
around the words.
Do not kill the infidel unless you must for your protection or the defense of Sabah. Rather, educate him in
the way of God and of his Prophet Sabah. Teach him
what is Right and True, teach him God’s Way, and you
will lead him to happiness and Paradise, and save his
soul.
It helped a little, but the light of dedication within her was still dim,
almost flickering. She picked up Little Wei, startling him, and held him
close to her chest and rested her head on him. “I love you, little guy.
You are all I have in this world.” She cried again. She didn’t care about
the tears. Only he would know.

aaa
Joy
Something was wrong with Jy-ying. She didn’t have to intuit it. She
could see it as they changed clothes for their now bimonthly sparring.
Even Little Wei seemed to have a nervousness about him. Joy tried to
speak to Jy-ying, but she only responded in grim monosyllables, her
expression sour.
She had noticed a gradual deterioration in Jy-ying’s mood ever
since they returned from her execution of Parda. She and John had tried
to bring Jy-ying out of it. But nothing, including John’s awful humor,
had worked. Joy had asked Jy-ying several times if there was a problem
they could help with, and each time her eyes grew moist and she shook
her head as though she did not trust her voice.
They left the little locker-bath room and entered the large gym.
They had the mats laid out in the center, near a little weight lifting area,
and circled by a narrow jogging track that ran along the walls. Jy-ying
seemed to be in an unusual hurry as they walked to the mats. Oblivious
to his mistress’s mood, Little Wei started his routine search for strange
smells.

382

R.J. Rummel

Joy had on her usual red, and now frayed, headband, with her hair
back in a ponytail. She had worn just a sweatshirt and shorts for a
change.
Jy-ying had braided her hair into one long black braid, and had
doubled it back and somehow tucked it into a tight knot close to
her neck, apparently to prevent the braid from whipping her face.
She wore her standard sloppy black sparring outfit, with the yellow
trim.
When they reached the center of the mats, Jy-ying stopped at an
unusual distance from Joy and stared at her for a long moment. Finally,
taking a deep breath, she took a long green cloth from beneath her shirt
and tied it around her forehead. It bore a red crescent and star on a deep
green background.
When she saw the crescent, a warning went off in Joy’s mind like a
gunshot. She gaped, and reflexively backed up a step. She couldn’t
have been more shocked if Jy-ying had pointed a submachine gun at
her. That was the battle crescent of Sabah’s Islam. Only a Sabah would
wear it, Lora’s message had said.
She blurted, “KK. What the hell?”
Bowing stiffly from the waist, her arms and hands held against her
sides, her face a picture of gloom, Jy-ying said, “I am Captain Khoo Jyying of the Sabah Security Guards. I am from the Second Universe year
2002, and the School of Shaolin Wing Chun Kung Fu. I am here to
prevent you from killing Sabah, or his parents before he is born. To do
so I must kill you—me—since you are beyond persuasion. Prepare
yourself for combat and death.”
Joy needed no instruction. The cloth crescent told her immediately
that this was to the death. She only sought explanation while her body
drew on all its training for just such a moment. She had to know. “What
do you mean, that I am you?”
Jy-ying now stood seemingly relaxed. But Joy knew that stance. It
was similar to her own.
Jy-ying spoke, her voice stripped of any emotion. “You told me
all I needed to know during our supper together two nights ago. You
were found alone and almost dead on a boat when, the doctors estimated, you were four years old. Your parents apparently had tried to
escape persecution in Vietnam and were killed by pirates. Your foster mother Tor named you and adopted you, and you named your
company after her.
“I tried to find out what you remembered. You told me the name

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

383

‘Tien Yen’ often came to mind. I was surprised. I asked if any other
words or names came to mind, and you said ‘Hua,’ accompanied by a
vague image of your mother. I was even more surprised. ‘Do you remember your name?’ I asked. You said several names worked in and
out of your memory, all vague. You think you had a baby sister, maybe
named Tang. Your name might have been something like Jy-cheng, but
it was too hazy.”
No longer flat, Jy-ying’s voice seemed to waver out of her control.
It fell into a soft whisper. “Joy. You are Jy-ying. Our mother was from
the Hua family in China, a family with a long history. Her parents immigrated to Vietnam, where she met and married our father, a Chinese
man named Shihao. I think you also vaguely recall his name. Our sister
was named Ting. Your father died with your mother in the 1984 rebellion against Sabah; Ting was killed months later. Our parents were in
the secret police and fought for Sabah.”
Joy’s question seemed to fall out of a mind that her training had
sidelined for the battle. “I thought time travelers could not go back in
time and meet themselves.”
“You are from the Old Universe. I am from the Second Universe.
We are now in the Third Universe. This makes it possible. And it must
be possible, since you and I are standing here.”
Her words spilled out again; they seemed to come from outside of
Joy—outside of a body now prepared for a fight to the death. “But
while you look like me . . . my scar aside, you also look different. If
you’re me, how can you look as different as you do? And be two inches
shorter?”
Jy-ying’s own voice was unsteady. “My parents suffered from the
Vietnamese government’s attempt to force all first and second generation Chinese to return to China. They were unable to get much food or
medical help, and lived in a refugee camp after they fled across the
border into China. I didn’t have your healthy diet. And when I was five,
I caught a mild case of noma. It is a gangrene that affects the mouth
and face. The worst cases suffer extreme facial disfigurement and can
die from septicemia or pneumonia. Although my noma was not too serious, it was bad enough to scar my lower face. When I was sixteen my
foster father, a high official in the Sabah Guards, had a sympathetic Security doctor perform a series of plastic surgeries on me. If you looked
carefully under my chin, you would see the scars.”
Her voice had been growing strained and it trailed off at the end.

R.J. Rummel

384

Little Wei stopped his sniffing and looked at her from across the gym,
his tail half-down.

aaa
Jy-ying
The questions were over. The explanations done. There was nothing
more but death. She waited for Joy’s bow, and thus her acceptance of
what was to come.
She took two deep breaths and turned inward, and calmed herself
by envisioning herself sitting beside a murmuring forest brook on a
cloudless day and watching a leaf float gently by. She had not been at
peace with herself like this since she came to this new world. There
was nothing now to disturb her mind. It was dead to all thought; only
her superbly trained body existed.
Jy-ying waited, her stance perfect, her planned offense inscrutable.
Joy backed up another two steps. She gave Jy-ying a long stare, assessing her. Jy-ying could see her eyes narrow as calculation was
replaced by deadly seriousness. Hers were now the eyes of one tiger
challenged by another. She reached up to her headband and folded it
over, turning it inside out. It was still red, but now had a white lightning bolt emblazoned across the red background.
Jy-ying knew that symbol. It was famous throughout Asian martial
arts. Joy had not told her that she had trained in that hidden and outlawed dojo. That Joy should show that symbol now meant that no
mercy would be shown. It was their code. To display that symbol
meant this battle must end in one or the other’s death.
Joy glided forward three paces, and bowed. “I am Joy Phim of the
secret Sensei Jigoro Ueshiba bushinota dojo. I am Sino-Vietnamese and
of the family of Tor Phim. I come from the First Universe. I am duty
bound by the bushinota dojo to warn you that this combat must be to
the death. If you do not so desire, you may bow and retire.”
Jy-ying assumed her ready stance.
Joy gave up her usual and seemingly relaxed ready stance, and
adopted what Jy-ying could only guess must be the battle stance of the
bushinota dojo. She slightly turned her right foot to a precise angle
from the vertical alignment of her body, and her left foot to the opposite side at its own precise angle. She bent her knees and lifted the heel
of her front foot a little off the mat. Her center of gravity was slightly

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

385

forward. She loosely clenched her hands into turned-down fists and
straight-armed them forward from her hips.
Jy-ying waited no longer than the precise second their wu shi dao—
code of the warrior—allowed before her attack, which was when Joy
finished her ready stance.
Now!
Jy-ying launched a whirlwind of twirling, swinging, side and thrust
kicks, punches, and knife chops, calculated to expose Joy’s face and
neck while staying out of reach of her superior grappling judo skills as
Joy blocked, whirled, kicked, knuckle punched, blocked, twirled and
edged in to grapple; she caught Jy-ying’s foot in an underhand swoop
and twisted it back on her with both hands as Jy-ying backhanded her
in the cheek with a knuckle punch. Joy dropped to the mat and rolled to
recover and Jy-ying did a swinging drop kick to Joy’s knee, pushing it
backwards, tearing the meniscus and almost dislocating the joint. The
leg was now almost useless for heavy work.
Joy tried to recover with a one-legged straight armed punch to Jyying’s solar plexus; blocking it, Jy-ying did a swooping heel kick to
Joy’s other leg and knocked Joy into a rolling and unsteady-looking
recovery—a ploy—which she converted into a forward jump roll,
catching Jy-ying’s head in a scissor grip with her legs and throwing Jyying forward to the mat with her legs still around her neck. The grip
must have been terribly painful for Joy to hold, but she held it and now
she could use her grapples. Jy-ying tried to reach Joy’s head, but Joy
slithered under Jy-ying’s arms and elbow piston-punched her stomach
and face; when Jy-ying tried to exploit the resulting opening, Joy
grabbed her wrist and twisted.
Jy-ying used her shoulders as a pivot and rolled up and over Joy’s
legs and out of both grips, then solidly thrust-kicked Joy’s left arm just
below the shoulder. Joy rolled away and up, virtually supporting herself
on one leg, her left arm hanging, her body angled to protect that vulnerable side.
Jy-ying had the advantage and she pressed it.
Chop, kick, fist, fist, and Joy hand blocked, twisted, shoulder
blocked, slide blocked. Jy-ying saw her leg slowly giving way.
Only about eight seconds had passed since their death struggle began, and Jy-ying now could see Joy’s lethal weakness, could almost
smell it. She looked into Joy’s eyes. They were clear and unafraid, but
resigned—no, not resigned, accepting—to what was to come, like the

R.J. Rummel

386

eyes of a wolf whose foot is caught in a trap as it calmly watches the
hunter approach with his rifle.
Jy-ying knew precisely how to end it now. A simple angled kick,
and Joy would have to do a one-legged jump sideways; a punch to her
left side, and as she would have to block that with her right arm; Jyying would then give her the death knife chop to her neck.
Joy waited, eyes bright. There was no offensive left in her body.
Jy-ying did not savor this moment; she dreaded that it had come.
With certain victory only a few moves away, her warrior self relaxed
control over her mind. And her thoughts and feelings tumbled out. She
had grown proud of Joy and what she had become, as though of herself.
She thought of Joy’s life, her life, in another universe. She thought of
her being saved from the boat when she was a child. She thought of
their parents, who had died so heroically, and their dead sister. She
thought of what Joy had missed by never really knowing them—her
family that she would have loved. She thought of how Joy had been
deprived of her identity. Now she, Jy-ying, would deprive her—
herself—of life.
She had to do it now. Even an hour from now, she would no longer
have the will.
She shifted her center of gravity to make her opening angled kick.
God be with you, Jo—
Jy-ying felt a sharp sting in the side of her chest and heard the shot
at the same time. Her solid stance held her up as she looked down at the
blood beginning to flow out of the hole underneath her armpit. She
jerked her head up to see John racing toward her with his gun still
pointed at her. She turned her heavy head toward Joy and tried to say,
“I’m sorry,” but the room was beginning to spin and she barely could
make out John holding his gun as he disappeared into the haze.
She felt the mat as she dropped to her knees, and supported herself
by leaning on one arm until that gave way and she fell on her back. She
felt so light-headed, but so wonderfully at peace. She barely made out
Little Wei frantically licking her face, and she managed to lift both
hands to hug him to her. “I love you, my little ma . . . ”

aaa
Joy
Joy heard the shot and saw Jy-ying’s surprise, her expression as she
tried to say something to her. She watched Jy-ying’s slow motion col-

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

387

lapse. Joy fell to the mat herself, gulping in air, just beginning to feel
the flood of pain from her bruises, strained muscles, and injured arm
and leg.
As soon as Jy-ying was down, John ran to kneel beside Joy. “Are
you alright?” he yelled.
She could barely move her head to nod. She tried to point at Jyying, but her arm would not work. She screamed, “Save her!”
John turned and looked at Jy-ying. A pool of blood was forming
under her, and she held Little Wei as he frantically licked her face, his
tail between his legs and his ears back. John tried to approach her, but
he wiggled out of her limp hands and growled and nipped at John, obviously ready to do battle to save his mistress. John tore off his coat
and held it wide open in both hands as he approached Little Wei. He
threw it on him, wrapping it around the little dog as he madly struggled
and whined.
John put one arm around the coat to hold Little Wei within it, and
felt for Jy-ying’s pulse. He backed up and released her guardian, and
shook his head at Joy. Jy-ying was dead.
She collapsed on the mat, her body succumbing to exhaustion and
agony. It took a moment for her mind to emerge from the wreckage,
and then all that Jy-ying said flooded in.
Joy released a long shriek of sorrow and loss. Gulping for air, crying hysterically, she tried to crawl toward Jy-ying. When John saw
what she was doing, he walked in front of her with his coat open toward Little Wei so that he wouldn’t attack her, and slowly pushed the
growling dog away. Little Wei hovered nearby, lifted his muzzle toward the ceiling, and howled his loss. John had never before heard the
howl of a wolf that had lost its mate. It was the saddest sound he had
ever heard.
Joy pulled her body over Jy-ying in a hug and kissed her cooling
face. And cried and cried. John tried to pull Joy up several times, but
she shrugged him off. “You don’t understand,” she whimpered. “She is
me.”
John sat down next to her and put his arm around her shoulder. “I
do. You turned our communicator on with that ‘KK.’ I heard everything, and broke every speed record getting here.”
Joy twisted painfully to look up at him and he tenderly pulled her
into a sitting position. She buried her head in his chest and cried, “She
could have killed me. She didn’t. She hesitated. I think she knew you
were coming and waited for her own death.”

388

R.J. Rummel

John whispered, “She didn’t know about the communicators, and
even if she did, she didn’t know the toggle code.”
Joy was coming out of it, and wiped her tears on his shirt. She was
so exhausted she could barely push the words out. “She had been a spy.
She knew more about us than we think.”
She fainted.

aaa
They had the funeral for Jy-ying in John’s apartment. She had been
cremated, the mortician’s concern about the police being eased with a
large contribution to the O’Conner Mortuary, and the story that she had
been shot in a rape attempt that was being kept quiet to avoid embarrassment to her family.
The urn with Jy-ying’s ashes was placed on a pedestal against one
plain wall, with a colored photograph next to it that John had taken a
year ago with his Old Universe digital camera. Little Wei stood guard
underneath, his tail half down, motionless, his ears partly back. He had
barely eaten in three days.
Hands, Sal, Dolphy, and Mariko were there, and some people Jyying had worked with at the company. Outside of the mortician, nobody but Joy and John knew that she had been shot. John told them all
that Joy and Jy-ying were on their way to shop when the front wheel of
Jy-ying’s car came off and she hit a tree. She was thrown into the tree
and killed. Joy had ducked beneath the dashboard and survived with
bruises and minor injuries.
John gave the oration.
Sal had his say about this wonderful woman he had met, and John
was impressed by an eloquence he didn’t know Sal had. Hands also
said a few words, only a little less warm and affectionate than Sal’s.
Joy had to say something at the end. She limped painfully to the
urn, almost every inch of her body black, blue, and purple, and turned
her swollen face to gaze at Sal and Hands. She looked at John, and silent words passed between them.
She stared down at the floor for many seconds in the absolute silence.
She raised her head and stood as tall as she could. She found the
words. “What can I say about Jy-ying? People say they saw much of
me in her. If that’s true, it makes me very happy, for it tells me what
kind of person I really am.” She kissed her fingers and waved them toward the urn. “Goodbye, Jy-ying.”

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

389

She started to collapse. John rushed to pick her up in his arms,
and carried her back to the sofa and let her cry on his shoulder. One
by one the others left. Hands left with his arm around Sal’s shaking
shoulders. Only Little Wei remained. He was now their—her—
responsibility.
That night, Joy rolled off the bed onto her knees and slowly pushed
herself upright. She still could not sit on the edge of the bed to stand.
She limped into the living room, quietly closing the bedroom door behind her, and gingerly sat on the sofa. Just enough moonlight came
through the windows for her to see Jy-ying’s urn and Little Wei below
it, watching her.
She had a long conversation with Jy-ying. She told her again about
what little snatches she remembered of her—their—family. She tried to
dredge up every elusive sound she remembered and form it into a word
for Jy-ying. She tried to put it all together into some picture of what she
had lost.
Then she repeated what she already had told Jy-ying about her life
with Tor, who adopted her; of her growing love for her new mother,
and her happiness. She told Jy-ying how John entered her life and what
he meant to her. She didn’t stop when Little Wei jumped on the sofa
and lay down next to her, his head tight against her thigh. She bared her
soul to Jy-ying, and told her everything she would never tell another
person, not even John. It was alright, she knew. For Jy-ying was her; it
was as though she were only telling herself.
John found her asleep on the sofa early in the morning with Little
Wei curled up next to her. For the first time since the battle, she looked
at peace.

aaa
They all went together to permanently place Jy-ying’s urn in the
crypt. John placed the urn on a white marble shelf next to Janet and
Ed’s urn, and hung a framed colored photograph of Jy-ying on a nearby
wall. On the shelf’s edge below the urn, an epitaph had been engraved
on a little plaque:
Khoo Jy-ying –1913
God’s loyal Subject to the end. She is now in His
hands. He should treat her well.
RIP

390

R.J. Rummel

Joy bowed her head in respect, thinking, There, but for the throw of
the die, go I.
As they left the crypt, Little Wei sat down under Jy-ying’s urn and
refused to leave. John picked him up and carried him, struggling, to
their car. He passed Little Wei to Joy, who kissed him and held him
close as he drove them back to their apartment.
The next morning when John opened the door to bring in the milk
delivery, Little Wei ran out into the hallway and out the open door of
the building. John ran after him, but the terrier disappeared down the
street.
That evening, John received a phone call. “Hello,” a man’s voice
said, “this is the manager of the Cypress Lawn Memorial Park. Do you
own a little white dog?”
“Yes, I do.”
“The crypt with ‘Bank’s Team’ above the door is yours?”
“Yes.”
“Your dog is at the door trying to get in. When my gardener tries to
pick him up, he growls at him. Can you come and get him?”
Joy and John drove there immediately, and found Little Wei lying
against the crypt door. Joy unlocked it and let him in. He ran to Jyying’s urn, sat in front of it with his tail wagging, and barked. They left
him there for about twenty minutes while they walked around the
cemetery. When they returned to the crypt, Little Wei was in the same
position. When he heard them he looked over his shoulder at them, then
back at the urn.
John picked him up and held him tight as he struggled. They took
him back to the apartment.

Chapter 32
Joy
1913–1914

J

oy and John made three trips to Europe during 1913 and 1914 to
prevent World War I and the Russian Revolution. They were successful beyond all hopes. The propaganda and lobbying campaigns
they funded helped prevent public opinion and legislators from accepting war as a solution to political conflict. And of special importance,
the legislatures of England, Germany, and France passed legislation
curtailing the military. This might not have been enough, had Joy and
John not also taken direct action.
During each trip they extended their web of business relationships
with many of the most important European power brokers and secret
societies, with their company at the center. This potentially subversive
web cost them $125 million alone, but it was worth it, because they
were able to use it to remove from office those high officials whose actions led to World War I in the Old Universe, and replace them with
officials who had a much more moderate or accommodating view of
their potential enemies.
Joy wanted to assassinate them for causing the deaths of millions in
the Old Universe. John did not, and argued that they were not directly
responsible for those deaths, as were Hitler and Stalin for those murdered under their rule and by their commands. They compromised on
removing them from office by bribery, or frame-up, or some other nonviolent means.
John therefore was happy with the way it worked out, except for
Foreign Secretary Gottfried von Jagow. German police and a passing
photographer found him drunk. No problem in itself, except he was in
an alley, in the arms of a young boy who claimed that Jagow forced
him to commit sodomy. A photograph of the two magically appeared in
newspaper and magazine offices, and within days Von Jagow resigned.
Three days later, he committed suicide.
John was stunned by this, but felt better when Joy set up their laptop and inserted the DVD containing photographs and news videos of

392

R.J. Rummel

World War I—a massacre costing in battle alone some nine million
lives, and a possible cause of the 1918 worldwide influenza epidemic
that ended only after eighteen million or more people had died from it.
The most dangerous of their interventions involved the fanatical
Black Hand Society of Serbia, whose leader, Apis, had been responsible for the assassination of the heir to the Austrian throne on June 28th,
1914 when he and his wife were driven down the streets of Sarajevo.
This was the trigger for World War I.
To prevent this assassination, John framed Apis with forged secret
government documents and wireless communications with the German
General Staff. Apis was arrested as a traitor and the Serbian police systematically uprooted the Black Hand Society.
In Austria, Hands and his German fiancée had themselves invited to
a diplomatic party attended by the Archduke. While Hands told the
Archduke a fictional story about an English duchess he had seduced,
his fiancée stealthily dropped a powder into his drink. The next day the
Archduke could not get out of bed. He had a fever, was vomiting, and
felt dizzy when he tried to stand. His doctor advised that he stay in bed
and cancel his scheduled trip to Sarajevo. The Archduke did gradually
recover, but there was no longer a reason to visit Sarajevo until nine
years later, which then turned out to be an uneventful trip.
June 28th, 1914, passed without notice, except by Joy and John.
And when midnight passed by peacefully, they didn’t notice it either.
They were stuporiously, gloriously, happily drunk in celebration.
World War I or something like it could still break out, as John
warned Joy. “Avoiding the Archduke’s assassination, which triggered
Word War I in the Old Universe, does not mean the war will not eventually occur. There could be other triggers. We also must continue our
work at the underlying conditions, which is fundamentally the lack of
democracy.”
They did, but it was not as though they were fighting a political
tide. Democracy was growing in popularity. They simply added as
much of their funds as they could to the democratically oriented parties
and politicians in Germany, Russia, and Serbia. They also put funds
into getting the democratic peace message across, one aspect of which
was the building of a huge statue of Immanuel Kant, the father of the
idea of a democratic peace, in front of the German parliament. With a
little pushing, the Kaiser gave the keynote address and President Wilson of the United States gave a widely acclaimed speech on democracy.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

393

One assassination Joy and John agreed on, and because they would
soon be dealing with Abul Sabah, with the outcome of that unknown,
they would do it earlier than necessary.
They had him tracked down to the art colony in Munich, where he
had moved in 1913. He was only a struggling artist, selling his touristy
paintings to survive. They discussed at length how to do the assassination. On September 1, the day and month in the Old Universe that the
man had initiated the European theater of World War II with his invasion of Poland, John knocked on his door.
When Hitler answered the door, John shot him dead.
John was dazed by what he had done. He had taught college students about Hitler’s aggressions, his Holocaust, and his war crimes, and
now he had killed the very man who had been such a horrible subject of
his professional study and research. It was days before John could function normally, and two days before he could sleep. Over and over
again, he murmured, “I can’t believe it. I killed Hitler. Me.”
An unknown, Hitler’s death went unreported in the German newspapers.

aaa
John had told—lectured, as usual—Joy that making Russia democratic was even more important than preventing World War I. Just from
democide alone, Lenin, Stalin, and their successors had killed or been
responsbile for the death of about 62 million people.
So, to promote democracy in Russia they provided tens of millions
of dollars to the democratic forces, and funneled much of the funds to
Prince G.E. Lvov and moderate lawyer A.F. Kerensky. They also contracted for the assassinations of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, who was writing
his revolutionary documents from Krakow, and Leon Trotsky, then living in Vienna after escaping forced exile in Siberia for his
revolutionary activities.
John did Hitler. Stalin was Joy’s. Through aid, training, and subversion, he’d fostered the spread of communism to China and ultimately to
Vietnam and Cambodia. And thus he bore some responsibility for the
horrors that Joy’s mom, her godmother Gu, and so many others in their
Society had suffered.
Joy wanted him, but she couldn’t get to him easily. In 1913, he had
been exiled to Siberia for revolutionary activities. They weren’t going
to make the long trip there, just for him. So John let her handle the con-

394

R.J. Rummel

tract, at least. To the same royalist group that had arranged for the assassinations of Lenin and Trotsky, Joy paid $15,000 for Stalin’s death.
They didn’t dicker over the price.

Chapter 33
Joy
1915

T

en years, Joy reflected. We have now been in this age for ten
years. What incredible things we have done; so much has happened to us in that time. What great tales we could tell, except
everyone in the Old Universe would think them science fiction.
Now they would try to save as many as two billion lives. It was
time to kill Sabah.
But first, they had something sad to do.
They had a short walk along a rose lined path to their crypt. John
unlocked the door and handed the small, light green urn containing Little Wei’s ashes to Joy, who kissed it and placed it alongside Jy-ying’s.
They’d found a digital photograph of Little Wei among Jy-ying’s effects; it showed the white terrier with his perky ears up, little red
tongue showing, and head tilted questioningly at the photographer. His
tail, of course, was a blur. John hung it on the adjacent wall. On the
shelf below the urn, John placed a framed clipping from the San Francisco Courier:
THE DOG THAT WOULDN’T FORGET
At a private ceremony, John Banks, owner of the
Banks & Team crypt at Cypress Lawn Memorial Park,
plans to place the ashes of Little Wei beside those of his
mistress, Khoo Jy-ying.
Mr. Banks had tried to take care of Little Wei after
Miss Khoo died, but whenever the dog was left unattended, he would walk ten miles to the crypt and take up
station outside.
Finally, Banks let him stay there and made sure he
was fed, and constructed a little doghouse nearby to protect him from the weather. But come rain or shine, Little
Wei could be found huddled against the crypt door.

396

R.J. Rummel

Whenever anyone opened the door, he dashed inside to
sit before Khoo’s urn with his tail wagging.
Yesterday morning, he was found dead by the crypt
door. Banks suggests he died of a broken heart.
Finally, John attached a little white plaque on the edge of the
shelf underneath the urn:
Little Wei, –1915
Now take my paw, my mistress,
So that the sounds of my joy
Be music to your heart.

Chapter 34
Joy

T

hey knew that the world had avoided World War I and that the
European movement toward greater democracy appeared selfreinforcing. Sabah had been born the previous year, and they
could not let him get much older. They made their plans; they were
ready.
John could hardly look at them when he lied to the three guys and
Mariko, as he had so often, about what Joy and he would be doing.
“Middle Asia produces many products that we can buy cheaply and
import to the United States. We should make a handsome profit, if we
can set this up. But we have no offices in Middle Asia. Our closest is
Peking, a long distance away. So we will set up an office in Kashgar,
Uighuristan, which is central to the area, and do some exploring. You
know, play tourists. Besides, I’ve developed a personal interest in this
region, which Janet encouraged. It’s my new hobby. I’m fascinated by
the Silk Road that Marco Polo traveled and through which much prized
silk was imported into Europe from China. It still exists, and we will be
using that ourselves.”
Dolphy asked, “How much time will you be gone?”
“Probably about five months. The four of you do good work, and
Joy and I have no fear about leaving the company in your hands for that
long. We both will leave detailed instructions . . . ”
And new wills, Joy thought.
“Anyway, we think the trip will be worth it.”
John didn’t say what the detailed instructions were. In them
they admitted they were from the future, described the information
they had received from Lora and Mark, and provided instructions
on how to use Joy’s laptop to insert and watch the CD and DVD
they’d put in their safe. They were asking a lot, but they knew the
four would go through it all as testament to Joy and John. They had
included detailed instructions on the route to Kashgar, and expressed their hope that the guys would assassinate Sabah if Joy and
John failed.
Joy insisted that they also describe with compassion Jy-ying’s
failed mission from the future, and that all Jy-ying had left them, including her supply capsule, be willed to the guys.

R.J. Rummel

398

Joy and John had worked months on all these details, testing them
for possible misunderstanding, and trying to keep them as simple as
possible without losing the importance of the message.
“We don’t expect to die, of course,” John hastened to add. “But
there are warlords and bandits, not to mention opportunists who try to
fleece supposedly rich Westerners, and who may get angry if they fail.”
Sal smirked. “Good idea, taking Joy for your protection.”

aaa
Uighuristan
Since they would be traveling through the high Karakorem Mountains that divided northwestern India from Uighuristan, John and Joy
waited until early summer of 1915 to make the trip.
This trip was the most fascinating, fatiguing, and dangerous one
yet. It took them three ships and two ports to reach Karachi. They had
to transfer ships in Hong Kong and Singapore. It would have been romantic if it was their first-ever trip, maybe even their fifth. But they
were traveled out and now getting a little old for this. Even John no
longer felt up to carrying her from the rail of the ship to their cabin in a
burst of crazy lust. Nor did Joy really regret it.
The flimsy, careening train they took from Karachi to Islamabad
was so overcrowded, people sat on the roof with their baggage. They
took two days to recover from the experience, then traveled on an old
Fraser bus to Gilgit. The bus was no better than the train, with old and
young Indians of all descriptions toting chickens, goats, straw bundles,
and large bags. The smell was overwhelming. There was no such thing
as first class.
Gilgit was the gateway to the foothills of the impressive and snowpeaked Karakorem Mountains. There they waited four days for a guide
to form a horse and camel caravan of Indians and returning Uighur
businessmen, bound for Kashgar. They bought horses, and were able to
buy themselves into the caravan by virtue of their business. They had
their armor, handguns, and knives, but they also bought the best rifles
they could find. Everyone around here had rifles, including all those in
their caravan.
Language was difficult, but Joy spoke the Mandarin, Hakka, and
Cantonese Chinese languages, and there were usually a few Chinese
speakers around who also spoke the local dialect or language. In Gilgit

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

399

they found one fellow, named Fadi, who spoke Mandarin and Uighur.
Joy hired him as a translator for the whole trip to Kashgar and their return to Gilgit. She suspected he would be able to retire for life on what
they paid him.
From Gilgit they traveled by caravan about seventy miles up into
the mountains to Hunza on the winding Silk Road, and from there the
175 miles through the Khunjerab Pass, the highest border crossing in
the world, into Uighuristan. There they slowly trekked some 230 more
miles to Tashkorgan. After a day’s rest, they traveled with the caravan
the final 200 or so miles to Kashgar, located in the utterly desolate
western end of the Takliman Desert.
There were weeks of awful cold, and weeks of dry, lip-chapping
heat. There were beautiful mountain views and monotonous gray landscapes of rock after rock, with nothing green anywhere; dry, flat
expanses of sandy, gravely land, and wondrous foliage. They stank so
bad, Joy was sure she saw a greenish, oily mist surrounding them all
after just a few days. They considered themselves fortunate that their
noses soon became inured to the stench. But she still could taste it. And
feel it. After two weeks, she thought she could peel the stench off.
Joy told John she’d have preferred to view all the scenery on a
DVD for an hour, take a shower, and go to bed afterward.
By the time they reached Kashgar, they could hardly walk. Joy
swore that her legs were so bowed, she could keep her ankles together
and push her upper torso through the gap at her knees. She noticed that
John had developed a cowboy swagger.
They decided to rest for several days and become familiar with
Kashgar. They found the Kashgar Guesthouse for businessmen near the
famous Idgah Kah Mosque, and a place to stable their horses. Within
two seconds of completing these arrangements, Joy was immersed in
what passed for a bath—cold water filling a plastered hole in the
ground. Heaven!
John hated cold water baths and insisted he didn’t need one, but
when she told him nicely that he either join her or sleep on the other
side of Kashgar, he gave up the joking.
They and their translator walked all over the small city—more what
Joy would call a town, with a population of about ten or fifteen thousand people. It was strictly Muslim; most of the women completely
covered their bodies and wore the customary rust-colored veil. Unlike
many Muslim countries, however, they wore colorful clothes. Joy and
John stood out as foreigners, though they dressed very conservatively
and Joy covered her hair with brightly colored scarves.

400

R.J. Rummel

Kashgar was the most fundamentalist Muslim city of all Uighuristan. There were mosques scattered throughout, and the call for prayers
was dutifully observed. Those living here were mainly Uighur and
Kyrgyz ethnic groups, with a smattering of other Turkish ethnic groups
as well. Clearly, this region had much more in common with the other
ethnic groupings to the west than with the Han Chinese on the eastern
border. Culturally, it belonged to the transcaspian khanates, like Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.
Joy and John’s declared purpose for coming to Kashgar was to buy
locally woven carpets for their company, and possibly to set up a company office here to sell Western goods. This gave them an excuse to
ask questions and check the mosque and civic registers for the Sabah
family. There were sixteen such families, but only one had a baby boy.
His name was Abul and his father was Aisha. Aisha Sabah owned a
small farm about five miles outside of Kashgar. He husbanded sheep
and goats, and grew barley and a variety of fruits, including the delicious hami melon.
They knew what they wanted to do. Following the directions they
got from the Guesthouse, they rode their horses out to the farm and
pulled up before a small, three room, clay brick home surrounded by
barley and vegetable fields. When they arrived, Aisha was herding several dozen sheep into a small corral, and ignored them until he drove all
the sheep inside and closed the gate.
He turned and looked obliquely at Joy and John, studying them
carefully with deeply sunken eyes in a long, thin, heavily bearded face.
He wore an embroidered square cap, several long, grayish shirts that
hung at different lengths over his waist, and baggy brown pants, tight at
the ankle above woven slippers. What struck Joy at first was his jetblack beard of straight hair and his equally black mustache, which covered his mouth. Joy did not know how he ate through it. He had a
tanned and deeply furrowed face. Joy’s first thought, before he and
their translator Fadi exchanged any words, was that his photograph
would be a natural for the National Geographic.
Fadi seemed to be introducing them; they heard, “John Banks . . .
Joy Phim . . . America.”
Aisha’s eyes opened wide when he heard that, and he emitted a
deep grunt of surprise that sounded something like, “Haaaa.”
Joy had told Fadi to say: “They are in your country to buy Uighur
products for their company. Perhaps you have something you would
like to sell them. May we talk to you about it?” After each exchange in

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

401

Uighur, Fadi would translate it into Chinese for Joy, and she would repeat it in English for John.
Aisha responded, “I don’t think I have anything to sell, but I want
to hear about America. Come inside and tell me about it.” He led them
into his home, where he introduced them to his wife Niyasam, telling
her, “We have guests who come from the United States.”
She immediately put her hands together and bowed deeply to them.
“God be praised,” she said. “Thank you for coming to our little home.”
Niyasam was a short, heavyset woman. She wore a kimono-like
light blue dress that fell straight from her shoulders to her bare feet. She
had a multicolored scarf around her head that she had pulled off her
shoulders as soon as they entered the house.
Aisha invited them to sit at his only table, while Niyasam hurried to
a cupboard at one end of the main room and pulled out a plate of buns
that she put in the middle of the table. She dropped some tea leaves into
a teapot hanging from a rod beside the fireplace, stoked up the fire, and
swung the pot to hang over it. Aisha said nothing as they watched her
move about the room. She served them the boiling tea then looked at
Aisha; when he nodded, she left the room.
Turning to Fadi, he said, “Ask them if it is true that everyone in the
United States is rich.”
John answered, “We have our rich and poor, as you do, but our
poor are in many ways richer than are your rich. Not in comparable
money perhaps, but in what is available to many of them, such as running hot and cold water, indoor toilets, good medical care, free
education, and so on.” This initiated a long conversation about the
United States, throughout which Aisha expressed his awe.
Joy was getting impatient. This was taking too long. She was going
to have Fadi mention the child, when they heard him crying in another
room. She smiled and told Fadi, “Ask if we can see him.”
Fadi translated, and Aisha yelled out something to Niyasam. She
appeared almost immediately with the boy wrapped in a light blanket
and balanced in her right arm. The child had stopped crying and was
looking back and forth between Niyasam and those at the table. Abul
was a cute child, with rosy cheeks and bright round eyes in an absolutely round face. Already he had a head of stubby black hair.
At the sight of him, Joy and John began their little play in English,
repeated by Joy in Chinese for Fadi to pass on to Aisha in Uighur.
“Oh, what a beautiful child,” Joy said.
John added, “He is handsome. And he already looks strong. I’m
impressed.”

402

R.J. Rummel

Joy feigned tears. “I’m so sad that I can’t have a child like this.”
John put a comforting arm about her. “I have never seen a child like
this, one that I wanted so much.” And so on.
Finally, Joy asked, “Can I hold him?” and held out her arms. Niyasam proudly put the child in her arms. Joy hugged him and kissed
him on the face, and looked imploringly at John.
Joy didn’t think their acting would have received rave reviews, but
in that context it was sufficient to introduce their question. Looking at
Aisha, John assumed a pleading expression. “We want so much to have
a child, but cannot. We have fallen in love with your child, and want to
buy him from you. Would you sell him to us?”
After Joy translated that into Chinese, Fadi hesitated, then asked her
if that was what she really meant. Joy couldn’t believe she would ask to
buy a child, it was so foreign to her own culture. But as John had explained to her after his study of the culture of this area in preparation
for this trip, it was not that uncommon in this part of the world to sell
one’s child. The poor and lower middle class sometimes sold their children to those who could support them, or to religious institutions. They
even were sold into prostitution. For those without sons, buying a male
child was the only way to pass on their name and inheritance, especially their farm or business. John’s question would not be considered
immoral or crazy, although when it finally got to Aisha, Fadi told Joy
that he was surprised that they, as foreigners, had asked.
When Joy and John realized in Kashgar that Abul was the Sabahs’
only son, and then found out that Niyasam was Aisha’s only wife, they
didn’t feel right about secretly poisoning Abul or kidnapping and killing the child, leaving Aisha and Niyasam to their grief. Sons were held
in very high esteem in this part of the world, and to the grief of too
many families, many of them died in their first year. Abul had survived
for a year and they knew he would reach manhood. They felt that since
they were going to take the boy from the Sabahs one way or another,
they had to do it in a morally acceptable way in this culture, and compensate them handsomely.
Joy knew she was just trying to make it easier to kill the child.
In answer to John’s question, Niyasam blurted, “No!” Her reaction
was so obvious, from her expression and the sharp slice of her hand
through the air, that even John understood it. She looked at Aisha.
Before Aisha could respond, John said, “If you sell your son to us,
he will live happily in the United States and become a citizen there. He
will be rich and happy. I own a company that is very large and imports

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

403

and exports all over the world, and Abul would inherit this company.
He could easily make trips here to visit you.”
When the chain of translations got to him, Aisha began to shake his
head vigorously, but John continued, “We will pay you 18,000 Uighuristan som for your child.” They had discussed the amount they would
offer before arriving here. This was the equivalent of about $6,000,
which in local currency would make the couple very rich. The average
local income was about thirty dollars a year.
Fadi gaped at Joy when she put that in Chinese. He asked her to repeat it, and she did, thinking, Now I bet he thinks he should have held
out for more before agreeing to be our translator.
When he heard the figure, Aisha sat staring at them, obviously
stunned. Niyasam, who had heard the conversation from the other
room, came in to stand behind him. She stared at the back of his head.
Her face resigned, she began to cry. By local Muslim custom, she had
no choice in the matter, and knew by Aisha’s voice that he had decided
to sell their child. But he was middle-Asian, and nothing gets sold
without haggling. He seemed to think for several moments, and said,
“No, I can’t sell the child. He is too valuable to us.”
In preparation for just this response, they had made a list of which
neighboring families had children near the same age. “Well,” John said,
“we’ll look around. Maybe we can find another child. We know the
Abliz and Yusup families have beautiful children, and we will take a
look at them, now that you have aroused our interest in buying a local
child.”
Aisha and Fadi and Joy began an exchange, often punctuated by
Joy appearing to ask John about a figure.
Joy was stunned herself when the dickering ended and she and John
had actually bought the child for what amounted to about $7,500. They
had talked to two banks before the trip, and were told that they would
find it almost impossible to convert American dollars into so much local currency here. Therefore, they had done so through their business
and the National Currency Exchange in New York, which at their request sent the money to them in San Francisco by courier. Throughout
the trip to Kashgar, Joy had carried the money in a waterproof pouch
that looked like it contained, and did at the top, women’s menstrual
wear. No man here or in India would have touched it unless at gunpoint, and only if death were a certain alternative.
With Niyasam in tears, a stern-faced Aisha accepted the money.
While he counted it with shaking hands, Niyasam ran into the other

404

R.J. Rummel

room and emerged in minutes with her arms full of blankets and baby
clothes, which she almost threw at Joy. “Go,” she said, sobbing. “Go,
quick.”
Aisha yelled something at her, but Joy carried Abul over to her and
lifted him for her to say her farewell. Niyasam took the child and lovingly kissed his face, hugged him, and now keening in sobs she handed
him back to Joy. As she did so, Abul started crying. Joy took him, cuddled him, and tried to soothe him. She was no longer acting, but
weeping along with Niyasam as she moved toward the door. John tried
to say something to Niyasam, but his voice broke. They left the house.
Joy and John didn’t look at each other as she gave the crying child
to him to hold while she mounted her horse. Without looking at Joy, he
lifted the child into her arms. The continuous keening of Niyasam was
a dagger in her heart. Before riding off, Joy told Aisha, “You can have
more children. I wish you all the happiness in this world with them, and
may you and your family forever be blessed by God.”
Still stern-faced, Aisha was nevertheless holding back tears, and
was afraid to speak. He nodded, and they rode off.
John had hardly said a word since buying the child. Now he finally
broke his silence. Raising his voice above Abul’s crying, John exclaimed, “I feel like shit.”
Joy had no response. She sniffled almost the whole way back to the
Guesthouse. Lulled by the horse ride, Abul soon stopped crying and
looked around with curiosity at the horses, the scenery, and his new parents. In their room at the Guesthouse, Joy put the child on their bed—a
spring mattress on a bed of bricks—and she and John sat on the floor.
They planned to take the boy into the desert and give him an injection of pentobarbital, which they had brought with them. He would die
without pain or discomfort, and they would bury the body in the desert.
“Okay,” John said in a strained voice. “Here he is. Here we are.
This is it. The moment we’ve waited for, planned for . . .” He looked at
the baby on the bed. “We now have in our hands the way of forever
preventing Sabah’s nuclear strike and takeover of the world in this universe, under the banner of Sabahism.”
As though trying to give both of them courage, John whispered,
“He will kill nearly two billion people.” His voice climbed to what
sounded like a lament. “Shall we do it tonight and get it over with?”
Joy just looked at him.
“Don’t look at me that way,” John huffed, his jaw hard, his face
suddenly lined. He started to rub his neck.

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

405

Joy continued to look at him. A tear ran down her face.
“The goddam stupidest thing we did was not contracting a professional to do this.” John almost sounded disgusted, but the softness in
his eyes betrayed him. “Out of pity for the family, we got ourselves
personally involved. Now look at you. For humanity’s sake, we’ve got
to carry this through. I repeat, this child will grow into a man who will
kill billions of people. Think of that. Keep the image of what you saw
on the DVD in your mind. Remember Lora and Mark. They died just
hoping for this day. They sacrificed their last earthly moments together
working for this day.”
John looked from Joy to the child, who was now sleeping on his
back, with his angelic round face toward them.
“He’s just a baby,” Joy moaned.
John shouted, “Shit. Do I have to do this myself?”
Joy stared at the baby’s face.
John just sat on the floor, obviously miserable. “I’ll do it tonight,”
he finally whispered. “I’ll do it alone.”
By late afternoon, Joy had stopped crying and had resigned herself to
what they—John—had to do. He picked up soup and goat’s milk for Abul
to keep him quiet. Neither of them felt like eating, however. As Joy fed
Abul, she could not describe adequately the new feelings this baby boy
stirred in her. She had never before cooed over a child or animal, but she
did so now. She hadn’t known she had baby talk in her. It just came out
naturally, and at first she didn’t realize what she was doing, until John said
sadly, “My dear warrior, you should hear yourself.”
Late in the evening, John came over to the bed where Joy was rocking Abul in her arms, and said quietly, “Its time, sweetheart.”
Joy had killed without a touch of regret or sadness. But those had
all been grown men who had chosen their path, who knew what they
were doing and the risks they took. Abul was a child, a baby. She tried
to steel her emotions as she put Abul down. None of her warrior training was up to this.
She stood and moved aside to let John pick up Abul. He lifted him
in one arm, and picked up the bag containing the candy, pentobarbital,
and a trowel to dig a hole in the sand. Abul had awakened and was gurgling while he tried to pull John’s hat off. When he succeeded and it
landed on the floor, he gurgled louder and waved his hands happily.
John stood for a long time by the door, looking down at the child.
Joy did nothing to stop him, but tears ran down her face as she
stood back from the door, her hands falling at her sides, her head
slightly tilted.

406

R.J. Rummel

This tableau seemed to Joy to stretch for hours. She stared at John’s
face. She could see the tears began to trickle from his eyes as his face
seemed to sag, transformed by the horror of the job he had to do.
He looked up from Abul and stared at Joy for a long moment. Silent
words passed between them. She felt the beating of her heart and the
throb of her tension headache; the tears on her cheek felt hot in the chill
air. Her eyes focused on the lone tear falling down John’s cheek.
He sighed, looked back down at Abul, and put down his bag. He
gave Abul a hug and kissed him on the forehead. He turned from the
door and brought Abul over to her. She reached out with welcoming
arms.
“Here, mother. Take your son,” John said, wearing the happiest expression she seen on his face since this trip started.
His words filled her mind. She screamed out of pure joy and utter
relief.
“Thank you. Oh, thank you!” She kissed the child. John hugged
them both and kissed Joy.
“We’re adopting him,” Joy shouted at John, finally revealing what
she now knew had been well hidden inside her—the desire for motherhood.
That was it. They had made the decision, and now had to work it
out within their general mission. They celebrated that night over a
strong alcoholic drink made of sorghum that John bought in the
Guesthouse. John had to wake up their translator and the manager to
get it, but when he explained that it was for the celebration of motherhood, the manager was happy to open the cabinet where he kept
the liquor.
Afterward, when Joy and John were in bed with the sleeping Abul
between them, she told him, “I know our mission is at the center of our
life. I know that we must succeed, even if it’s the death of us. I know
what this child would have done to the world if he had grown up here. I
know this, sweetheart, but as human beings we are made up of intangibles that will not bow to reason. I know what had to be done, and that’s
why I stood back from what I could not do myself. But if you had murdered this child, you would also have killed something in my heart. Did
you know this?”
John reached across the sleeping child and took her hand. “If I had
murdered this child, I would have killed what I believe in my heart that
I am. If you had been willing to kill the child, I would have gone along.
That you would not, that you showed such compassion for him, just

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

407

showed me why I love you.” John gently picked up Abul and placed
him on the other side of her, and pulled her to him. “Hello, my love,”
he whispered in her ear, nibbling on it.
“Hello, my love,” Joy said.
They shamelessly introduced their son to his new parents.

aaa
They would now adopt a child. But something was missing and,
Joy thought, My lovely man is oblivious to it.
Her heart’s intuition went after big game. It took over, while her
dormant mind watched, hoping.
The next morning, just for exercise, they took Abul on an early
morning walk, without their translator. “There is this little problem,”
Joy said as soon as possible after they returned to the Guesthouse.
Molding her face into a most serious look, she pointed out, “We are
unmarried, yet we will adopt a child. This generation is not as accepting of live-in relationships as ours was—will be, that is. Aren’t you
afraid of what this will do to our adopted son-to-be?”
“I hadn’t thought of that.” John mulled this over. “But we have a
mission and travel frequently, and I don’t want to create more difficulty
for ourselves than necessary. We’ve already added a new level of complications with Abul. But I think hiring a nanny can take care of many
of those. As to how he will be treated, we can invent a cover story
about something happening to his parents.”
He’s putting me on. But unsure, her heart let it hang there. If he
wasn’t joking, she didn’t want to push him too hard yet. He would see
what was beautiful and necessary himself, she hoped.
John seemed unusually quiet for a few minutes until, almost absentmindedly, it seemed, he said, “Of course, we could get married—”
Yippee, he got it!
“—but, you know, if our future enemies know we’re married, they
could use that against me or you, or even Abul, depending on the circumstances.”
So, screw them.
“And,” he continued relentlessly, “with our relationship being simply employer and employee, while we keep Abul in the background,
they presumably would not know about our love for each other and
thus will have one less lever to exploit.”
Her mind bowed to her heart and got out of the way. She put a concerned look on her face, and placed her hand on her chest. “Even if we

408

R.J. Rummel

travel together, I will be doing a lot of things independent of you; I’ll
have my own work to do in Paris, London, Rome, Peking—you know.
I won’t be wearing a wedding ring. I’m afraid I’m going to have a lot
of men hitting on me. Of course, dearest, they won’t get anywhere.”
John looked concerned, then jealous, then happy over his solution.
“I’ve got it. I’ll buy you a garish wedding ring to wear when you go out
alone. As we did in China.”
Joy’s heart thumped. “Why not make it a real wedding ring?”
John went on, “Better yet, I could hire a woman in each place to
chaperone you.”
When he leaned forward to look into her eyes, she finally saw the
dimples at the sides of his mouth. They deepened, and soon he was
grinning from ear to ear. He quickly erased it and, deadpan, asked,
“Woman, are you proposing to me?”
Her heart beating rapidly, she put on an insulted look and responded, “Of course not. What makes you think I would propose to
you, presumptuous man?”
“Good, that’s my role.” His grin returned. John rose, came over to
her, got down on one knee, and took her hand. “I love you more than
anything in this world,” he said. “Will you marry me, my darling?”
Joy’s heart, her mind, her stomach, all of her, exploded in emotional fireworks. She had dreamed of this moment. She had tried to
help him come to it. Almost playfully. But when it came, she couldn’t
believe the passion that suddenly overwhelmed her.
Joy’s eyes filled with happy tears. She kissed him all over his face.
“Yes, my dearest. Yes, a thousand times yes, I love you so much.”
She put Abul on the bed and threw herself on him and they rolled
on the floor holding each other, and kissed, and caressed each other,
and finally, inevitably, as though to consecrate their new and glorious
relationship, they made love on the floor like teenagers discovering its
joys for the first time.
“For shame,” he said, gasping for breath afterward. “We’re not
even married yet.”
She caressed his chest and said in as sexy a voice as she could,
“Just wait until our honeymoon for what I’ve been saving up for you.”
Laughing, he replied, “We’ll be arres—”
Flash. Thunder. Pain.
Nothingness.

Epilogue

E

ven before all the debris from the explosion had settled, the two
terrorists of the New Islamic Front hurried toward the Guesthouse. One clambered over the fallen bricks and pulled himself
into a large hole in the shattered wall, disappearing into the smoky interior. Minutes later, he came out of the front entrance carrying a heavy
bag and gesturing and exclaiming about the horrible explosion. He
melted into the growing crowd and joined his fellow terrorists on the
other side. They quickly strode down the street and ducked into the
small brick house nearby that a supporter owned.
They were greeted by a nervous looking Fadi, who immediately
asked in Uighur, “I heard the blast—did it kill them?”
“Yes,” the older man exclaimed. “Your bomb killed them all.”
“The child, Sabah?”
“Yes, him too.” The man tossed the heavy bag on the floor. “This is
their weapons and valuables.”
As Fadi eagerly opened the bag, he commented, “Devil take those
foreign infidels. They will steal no more Muslim children. Better that
Abul is dead than be made a heathen.”

aaa
Outside, as the crowd in front of the Guesthouse began to disperse,
an unusually tall couple stood looking toward the destruction.
Her face pale, the woman cried quietly into the chest of the black
man. In oddly accented English, she whispered, “Our timing was off.
How could the coordinates be so wrong?”
The man held her tight and stroked her back. “It was a narrow window of opportunity we had. Only seconds. As for Joy and John, they
struggled for ten years against the probabilities. One can walk among
poisonous snakes only so many times without being bitten.”
She lifted up her head, and the shawl covering her head slipped a
little, revealing blond curly hair. She focused wet blue eyes on where
the window had been. “So sad. We must risk this again.”

410

R.J. Rummel

The man pointed toward the destruction. “Like them, the probabilities may not be kind to us. But if we fail again, at least Abul Sabah died
with them.”
“Right now it doesn’t make me any happier,” she murmured.
They turned and walked toward the building the terrorists had entered. Minutes later, the two emerged from the building with the heavy
bag the terrorist had carried from the Guesthouse. The man slung it
over his shoulder and held it there with one hand. With the other he
gently took hold of the woman’s hand and they walked into the distance to where they could be unobserved.

Afterword
You may find my description of the nuclear attack on the democracies impossible, or at least as improbable as a large asteroid striking
earth this year. That may be true for this year, but as dictatorships with
nuclear weapons or the desire to obtain them continue to exist, a nuclear attack of some kind is an increasing possibility. Indeed, many
democratic leaders fear it. This supreme and growing danger are one
reason the American coalition is now using covert and overt force in a
global war to prevent any more actual or possible enemy states, and
their allied terrorist gangs from acquiring nuclear weapons and the capability to deliver them. It is the major reason the United States invaded
and occupied Iraq and is democratizing the country. And not chancing
that this is enough, the United States is preparing a missile defense
against nuclear tipped missiles; and in collaboration with many other
democracies, it is working on a homeland defense against just such
“suitcase” nuclear weapons as those exploded in this novel.
The rise of an Islamic “Prophet” in Middle Asia and a coup by his
followers also is possible, as happened in this novel in Uighuristan—
witness the Iranian revolution and the seizure of absolute power by
Ayatollah Khomeini in 1979; the 1996 seizure of power in Afghanistan
by the fundamentalist Islamic Taliban (upon whom I have modeled Sabahism). Moreover, a coup in China is always a possibility, as is so for
every regime that lives by the sword. It already happened in China in
1976 when Hua Guofeng seized power from Mao’s wife Jiang Qing
and nephew, and arrested numerous ministers and Mao supporters. It
could happen again, but this time by a dictator less conservative about
the exploitation of China’s nuclear weapons.
As to the story told by Mark Twain about Nzanba’s horrible experience in the Congo Free State—from the bloody invasion of his village,
the forced search for rubber, soldiers cutting off hands to prove they did
not waste a bullet, to the deadly chain linked portage—it is what actually was inflicted on hundreds of thousands of Congolese. Millions
more died in other kinds of slave labor, exploitation, repression, and
outright murder. Possibly 10 million were murdered or more from 1885
when The Berlin Conference formally recognized the Congo Free State

412

R.J. Rummel

(now the Democratic Republic of the Congo—formerly Zaire) to 1908
when Belgium took it over as a colony. The Congo Free State was the
private land, not a colony, of King Leopold II of Belgium to do with
whatever he wanted.
And the massive killing did not stop when Belgium took it over.
But, amazingly, although the death toll is many millions, the incredible terror, slavery, and death imposed on the Congo natives by one
man has been virtually ignored in general history books, and particularly surprising, by those on genocide and mass murder. This neglect
cannot be due to lack of historical information. There was a vigorous
international movement at the time led by the Congo Reform Movement, as noted in the novel, and involving many notables of the day,
such as Mark Twain (yes, he really was a member), Joseph Conrad,
Booker T. Washington, and Bertrand Russell.
The hero of this humanitarian struggle is Edmund Dene Morel, as
he is in this novel. He created the Congo Reform Movement, and published his West African Mail. First a clerk and freelance economic
reporter, and subsequently an unknown shipping company executive
who dealt with the Congo, he came to see the horrors of King Leopold’s rule there, and fought to focus international attention and public
opinion on it. He stimulated debates over what to do about the Congo
that involved the legislatures and leaders of the United States, England,
France, and Germany. He became Leopold’s most formidable enemy
and was largely responsible for Belgium finally taking over legal control. I hope that in this novel, I treated this great man and humanitarian
with the respect he is due.
This democide in the Congo far surpassed in human corpses most
every democide in the 20th Century except by Stalin, Mao, and Hitler.
This mind-boggling democide has been sucked into a black memory
hole. Why this should be so is beyond this Afterword, but should be the
subject of research in itself.
To add embarrassment to this neglect, the French in their Congo
they took over in 1900 (now the Republic of the Congo) copied Leopold's system of rule and exploitation and thus may have murdered
several million Africans as well. No work on genocide that I have read
mentions this either.
Just to see how far off I was in my eight-year search for all 20th
Century democide, I checked all the tables in my Statistics of Democide
and tabulated cases of colonial democide I recorded there. For colonies
by Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and

Nuclear Holocaust Never Again

413

the United Kingdom, in Africa and Asia, 1900 and after, my grand democide total was 870,000 murdered, 1900-1987. This number alone
measures a human catastrophe, but is nonetheless puny in comparison
with just the many millions murdered by Leopold in his private Congo
Free State. I had only a low of 25,000 killed for this from 1900-1908. I
recorded no democide for Belgium, although I now know that it might
have been responsible for close to a million once it took over the
Congo. And I got just 22,000 forced laborers murdered by the French
in building a railroad in the French Congo.
Now, we have these estimates:
Britannica article on the "Congo Free State"
claims that the population declined from 20 or 30
million to 8 million.
A 1904 report by Roger Casement estimated
that as many as 3 million Congolese died since
1888—cited in Gilbert's History of the Twentieth
Century; also in Colin Legum, Congo Disaster
(1972).
Peter Forbath, The River Congo (1977),
claims that at least 5 million killed.
John Gunther, Inside Africa (1953), estimates
5-8 million deaths.
Adam Hochschild, Leopold's Ghost (1999),
estimates 10 million, or half the original population from 1885 to 1920.
Fredric Wertham, A Sign For Cain: A Exploration of Human Violence (1966), estimates that
the population of the Congo dropped from 30
million to 8.5 million.
I have reevaluated the colonial toll, therefore. Where exploitation of
a colony's natural resources or portering was carried out by forced labor
(in effect slavery of a modern kind), as it was in all the European and
Asian colonies, then the forced labor system built in its own death toll
from beatings, whippings, coercion, terror, and forced deprivation.
There were differences in the brutality of the system, the British being
the least brutal and Leopold and the French, Germans, and Portuguese
the worst. We all know what the Soviet gulag was like. These colonizers turned Africa into one giant gulag, with each colony being a
separate camp.

414

R.J. Rummel

As John Banks estimated in this novel, over all colonized Africa
and Asia 1900 to independence, the democide probably was near 50
million. This is way above my original 870,000. Even 50 million may
be too conservative. If this figure were roughly close, however, then I
must raise my total murdered by governments in the 20th Century from
174,000,000 to 223,000,000. I will send a message back in time to inform John and Joy of this.
I know they will weep. We all should.
My statistics mentioned above are at www.hawaii.edu/powerkills.
R.J. Rummel
Professor Emeritus
Kaneohe, Hawaii
rummel@hawaii.edu

