Bar Hopping
or
A Romantic Comedy in Nine Parts
by
Robert Boyczuk

I.
THE OPENING OF OUR STORY IN WHICH WE
FIND OURSELVES IN THE MIDST OF A CONVIVIAL
COMPANY, BECOME ACQUAINTED WITH OUR HERO,
AND ARE WITNESS TO HIS BUDDING DESIRE.
I watch her watching Stan.
The drafts are beginning to work their crawling magic, and Stan,
who's a big Polish guy, laughs deeply, his gut shaking ho ho ho, now talking
too fast while we listen too slow. Stan who started all this anyway, telling
tales of the bars to come, pulling the map he has drawn and photocopied
from the pocket of his huge, faded coveralls, smoothing it on the table, its
corner drinking in a small pool of beer. Eyes up and down watching him,
not just hers, nearly everyone's. Only a few familiar faces, looking mostly
new to this, listening. Scuzzy, he says in the voice too loud, You ain't seen
nothing yet! He tosses back another draft and bangs the empty glass down on
the table, his seventh, and suddenly a tumbling jumble of everyone all at once
talking, telling their own bad bar stories: this is too tame, too pathetic, a
wimpy whiny pale imitation of a bar, a stop unworthy of our pub crawl, Stan
the affable host having done it again, everyone laughing and drinking now,
still uncertainly, not quite at ease yet, no that will happen two or three bars
from now, but talking anyway, the button down office suits and starched
1

skirts beginning to melt away, the fluorescent corridors fading in dim smoky
light, the knots coming undone beneath the sagging stained ceiling tiles, all
of us working towards that moment of incoherent perfection.
She sits quietly, pulling lightly at her beer, listening while the
stories wash around her like an ocean lapping at her ankles, one after
another, tugging for an instant, before receding. She remains aloof, apart,
her gaze distant and insoluble, her eyes shining as if she sees something past
what is here. I do not know her, have never seen her before. But that is not
so unusual. Not so unlikely, so improbable. It is a large office, and I am a
small person, she is far down the table, and it is still too early to tell.

II. IN WHICH OUR HERO VISITS YET ANOTHER
PUBLIC HOUSE AND CONDUCTS A PRIVATE
CONVERSATION WITH HIS CLOSE FRIEND
REGARDING THE DISPOSITION OF A CERTAIN
YOUNG LADY'S AFFECTIONS.
Side by side we stand, Stan pissing forever, a steady golden stream
that tells the tale of five bars of two beers each, a thrumming porcelain sound
that never ends.
Who? he says.
In the jeans and suede jacket, I say. Lumberjack shirt that looks like
it was taken out of the plastic bag this morning.
Michelle?
Yeah, I shrug. I guess so. Brown eyes, black hair.
Yeah, he says. Michelle. I think she works in marketing. Pretty
sure anyway. He belches. She's cute.
Cute? I think, listening to the dull splattering of his urine and hard,
miserly word cute, thinking, No, it is too small a term for her, all wrong, not
generous enough. Michelle: loose-stranded hair piled atop a face round and
fine featured; a short scattering of lines that radiate from the folded corners
of eyes like pensive thoughts; skin that's warm, almost glowing, almost
orange in these poorly lit interiors, a darker flush creeping high across high
cheeks keeping pace with her beer; the smooth perfection of her throat as she
bends head back to laughter, a softness I imagine brushing beneath my cheek,
my lips, my tongue. Michelle.
Yeah, I say. She seeing anyone?
Don't think so. At least she didn't come with anyone, he says, and
smile sighs. If I weren't married ....
2

!! I say.
He laughs. Don't worry.
But then my stream falters, dries up, his still thundering away, now
reading on the wall an unsteady scrawl: 'Drunkenness shows the mind of a
man, as a mirror reflects his person. Aeschines.' I clear my throat. Sure is
cute, I say just to have something in my mouth, though it sounds stupid even
to me, and walk, with the exaggerated care of too many beers, out the
creaking plywood door.

III. A BRIEF INTERLUDE DURING WHICH OUR
HERO REFLECTS ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH AND
GOODNESS.
I love them: the Edgewater, the Drake, the Black Bull, the Duke of
Cannaught, the Claremont, even the lowly Rex. Love them because they
admit no lies, are too tired for the untruths of life, too dark for
misunderstanding, too smoke filled for the mistaken belief of clear thought.
Those who live here know what I mean: empty brief faces staring incuriously
at the apparition we are before them, then sliding back into a beery
contemplation of a line of endlessly rising bubbles. We do not belong, yet
there is no resentment in their glances, only dull glassy-eyed resignation, as
if they listen to a jackhammer thump thump thumping miles away. No, no
lies here, no pretend smiles, only heavy brown panelling and a wall-eyed
patron nodding off, waiters poised with another two drafts, trays filled with
the cracked glass truth of beer.
And she is far too beautiful.
Michelle, I think thinking of her. Beautiful Michelle.

IV. WHEREIN OUR HERO BELIEVES HE MAKES HIS
INTENTIONS REGARDING THE YOUNG LADY KNOWN
TO HER THOUGH THEY ARE SCARCE VISIBLE TO
THE NAKED EYE.
Piling into the next bar, scramble for seats, dragging of tables
together to form a long snake of dissipation. New bar, though it hardly
matters, same waiters, same middle-aged men wrapped in white shirt and
black pants, change belts slung wide and low beneath broad belly rolls of
flesh, lugging endless trays of watery draft. Same cosy wafting stale
3

warmness on this cool summer night, sign overhead, NO DRUG SELLING,
and smudged glasses, a little chip in the lip of this one, just like the last bar.
Sinking gratefully, at last, into hard wooden seat across and down from her.
Playing it cool, talking to those I know, corner eyeing her, watching, always
watching, hoping my desperation does not light up my eyes like a display
window.
A toast! Stan shouts into the rhubarb of conversation, I loving him
for it, that glorious son of a bitch, loving these times and bars like he does,
their warm smoky uncaringness. To the regulars and the novices, he cries, of
the Fourth Annual Queen Street Pubs Crawl!
Arms extend, glasses rise like chalices, clinks and sloshed beer fill
the air, Stan the first to follow his own toast. And in the rush I catch her eye,
and she half-smiles back, a reach and flat click of contact, even through this
insulating distance, a jolt of electricity leaps across glass, bounds down my
arm and smashes into my chest, heart catching like the grinding of gears,
stutters as if to stop, coughs and returns to life, beating with a new rhythm of
blood and need, when she half-smiles back.
Here's to those who wish us well,
and those who don't can go to hell,
for we are the men who've turned to vice,
gone-or-rheaa and syph-ill-ice,
we've had them all by Jesus Christ!
Gentlemen, the Queen!
Stan's words are a chorus in the background, oh wonderful wellworn words, heard a hundred times before. We are the self-same in this,
Stan and I, we loving these tumbledown places with their warm beer glow,
their silent quick waiters appearing to fill your emptiness without a sound,
without a question, these beer-fueled, thought-stopping moments when
anything, anything, seems possible.

V.
A RESPITE IN THIS BRANNIGAN DURING
WHICH A MOST FORTUNATE ENCOUNTER OCCURS.
A tug at my arm.
Come on, Stan hisses, walking at the back of the pack, me shuffling
like a lonely slave down to the next bar, trapped by friends and fear and
4

distance from her, without the courage of adequate beer. Come on, he says
again, dragging me off between lightless buildings, and out of her sight.
In the alley a spliff appears unannounced, cradled in fingers held
low, the slow curl of its smoke drifting between our huddled bodies, a single
tiny serpent's eye red glowing in the night. Away from her I feel like a
drowning man who's just lost sight of land.
What? Stan says. What'd you say?
Nothing. Nothing.
Here, joint passed to me, and I drink it greedily, knowing I need its
not-caring balance, thinking the next bar, yeah, I'll make my move then,
pulling it as deep as it will go, letting it drive away my uncertainty and
excuses, surrendering to its promise of things that will come, waiting for the
first tightening of my scalp and shiver crawl along the flesh of my arms.
Tap on my shoulder, and suddenly I'm awake, still clutching the
spliff between my fingers as I'm drifting off, and I hold it out, eyes still
closed, saying Sorry.
Then, startling me, a soft brushing of finger tips whisper along the
back of my hand like a light dusting of snow, from behind, not Stan, slipping
the stick free, a delicate touch, not Stan's.
Open eyed, I stare at her. The line of her jaw, her cheek, are
flawless brush strokes in this smoked stunned air as she leans into our three,
calf and thigh pressed solid against mine, me not daring a move, impaled,
backs like puzzle pieces locked against the world. Breast softly rising against
my arm as she inhales deeply, eyes narrowed, pursing full lips I ache to
touch. And she holds it. Impossibly long without movement, a statue of
perfection knit of shadows. I hold my breath too, waiting, waiting. Exhaling
at last, a dam bursts somewhere, all at once blood rushing through my head,
my ears and beyond, me giddy and faltering in the cradle of darkness. She
rubs against me like a cat, and I hardly notice the sigh (hers or mine?)
venturing a small pressure, and she smiles, firm and not moving, like a
promise, a pledge, a vow. She is a drug more potent than any I have known,
and I inhale her through my eyes as she takes another toke, drawing in the
dreamy darkness of the alley, the tendrils of her rushing into my lungs, my
blood, my brain.
She passes the joint to Stan with a sudden, unexpected laugh that
makes my heart lurch like a Mexican bus; she turns and her lips graze my
cheek, a caress, the beat of a hummingbird's wings, and she is gone, a hole in
the night.
Pressed in my open palm a folded piece of paper.
The joint has burned to the quick, and Stan fumbles in his pockets,
finding the clip, attaching it and raising the roach to his lips, now drawing
5

the last life of it into his gullet, wreathing us with comfortable clouds of
smoke, cheeks distended as he puffs, face lit in the tiny redness as the joint
pulses like an angry eye, while I curl my hand carefully into a fist round this,
our tenuous connection.

VI. A REFLECTION BY OUR HERO ON THE NATURE
OF LOVE AND THE ROLE OF SPIRITS IN
FORTIFYING COURAGE, STRENGTHENING SOCIAL
POISE AND ENHANCING GRACE.
Oh the pangs of love and fear! But how, when, where? First
another bar, first another beer. Soon, soon, I will speak to her, not just yet,
savouring the simplicity of this wordless connection, the flawless silence that
won't admit anything but purity of intention: without words there can be no
lies. Chairs distant, she glances at me, but it is still too early, and I don't
watch, feeling her eyes trailing after me in the cluttered clattering now of this
staggering bar, while I, full of plans and notions, drink in silent fervour,
clutching her crumpled slip of unread paper like a weighty charm, waiting
for the perfect moment, waiting for my chance.

VII. A VISIT TO THE ESTEEMED ESTABLISHMENT
OF THE DRAKE; OUR HERO SUFFERS A TEMPORARY
SETBACK AND LEARNS THE EXACTING COST OF
HESITATION.
He is too tall, as they always are, his clothes too clean, his poise too
exact, wearing his not-belonging with pride. Behind him, stained red velvet
wallpaper with scratches of black that look like the devil's head over and
over, wrought iron fixtures holding burnt out bulbs, a country and western
band floats, like an island, as he swings through a ring of pensioners in
cowboy clothes, me sinking sullenly into my beer, lower and lower, the
sounds of twanging lost love wash over me, me, (she smiled, she smiled, I
know she did so long ago), watching a wagon wheel bolted to the wall that
seems to spin spin spin ...
... and laughing, she spins past like a leaf on the tongue of the wind,
twisting in faster circles her face flushed, in the arms of another, while
drowning, I sink slowly into my drink, a lonely slip of paper hanging limply
in my hand.
6

VIII.
WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS,
ILLUSTRATES HOW OUR HERO MIGHT BENEFIT BY
HEEDING THE WORDS OF THE GREAT BARD: 'THIS
IS THE MONSTROSITY OF LOVE, LADY, THAT THE
WILL IS INFINITE AND THE EXECUTION
CONFINED.'
We never spoke so she never lied, will not lie with me but in the lies
I wove. Too late in this growling alcoholic haze, Stan absorbed in passionate
debate with his hat, while under the table lie scattered, bloated beer bodies,
and I struggle to hold collapsing walls back, unthinking of her, no, instead
considering the message of the table as if it means everything, the brown,
peeling table top, its cool rings of beer, pitted and scratched with obscure
pen-knife text, cratered with undecipherable cigarette burns, running fingers
over this blistered landscape, real words humming round with their own
obscure messages, not watching them through slitted snake eyes as they
entangle, unwatching through bottom of my glass, they leaving hand in hand,
I undrink the last drops, the motion of glass remembered by a wash of pissedout colour, a cold unburning brush-stroked after image passing, while
conversation washes round like a heaving river, carrying me along, lost in
swirling cold, thinking someplace, somewhen, she stands on a stage reading
poetry that makes no sense, her ragged paper soaking in a pool of beer before
me, fibers growing heavy with amber liquid, thick wormy letters inching
across the page: Buy me a beer?

IX. THE CONCLUSION OF OUR HISTORY IN WHICH
AN UNEXPECTED AND PROPITIOUS EVENT REUNITES
OUR YOUNG LOVERS AT THE FINAL ALE HOUSE; A
GREAT FEAST AND JOYOUS CELEBRATION ENSUES.
... glaring single moment of certainty, words large like semaphores:
SHE. IS. GONE. Stumble-stepping down the street, slipping through
another blurred door, shhhhhh, outside tires sighing on cement, head abuzz,
drifting above the press, strange fearful shifting faces, to fill, there, at last, an
empty space. Finger circles round old glass rings, sweat on wet, waiting,
treading water, really, until the fist is softened by a single finger raised for
the same ....
7

This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0
Human-readable License:
You are free:

●
●

to Share — to copy, distribute and transmit the work
to Remix — to adapt the work

Under the following conditions:

●

Attribution. You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the
author or licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they endorse you or
your use of the work).

●

Noncommercial. You may not use this work for commercial purposes.

●

Share Alike. If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may
distribute the resulting work only under the same or similar license to this one.

For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the license terms of this
work. The best way to do this is with a link to this web page.
Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission from the copyright
holder.
Nothing in this license impairs or restricts the author's moral rights.

Legal License in Full:

CREATIVE COMMONS CORPORATION IS NOT A LAW FIRM AND DOES
NOT PROVIDE LEGAL SERVICES. DISTRIBUTION OF THIS LICENSE
DOES NOT CREATE AN ATTORNEY-CLIENT RELATIONSHIP.
CREATIVE COMMONS PROVIDES THIS INFORMATION ON AN "AS-IS"
BASIS. CREATIVE COMMONS MAKES NO WARRANTIES REGARDING
THE INFORMATION PROVIDED, AND DISCLAIMS LIABILITY FOR
DAMAGES RESULTING FROM ITS USE.

License
THE WORK (AS DEFINED BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS
CREATIVE COMMONS PUBLIC LICENSE ("CCPL" OR "LICENSE"). THE WORK IS
PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT AND/OR OTHER APPLICABLE LAW. ANY USE OF THE
WORK OTHER THAN AS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS LICENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS
PROHIBITED.
BY EXERCISING ANY RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED HERE, YOU ACCEPT AND
8

AGREE TO BE BOUND BY THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. TO THE EXTENT THIS
LICENSE MAY BE CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTRACT, THE LICENSOR GRANTS YOU
THE RIGHTS CONTAINED HERE IN CONSIDERATION OF YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF
SUCH TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

1. Definitions

a."Adaptation" means a work based upon the Work, or upon the Work and other pre-

existing works, such as a translation, adaptation, derivative work, arrangement of music
or other alterations of a literary or artistic work, or phonogram or performance and
includes cinematographic adaptations or any other form in which the Work may be recast,
transformed, or adapted including in any form recognizably derived from the original,
except that a work that constitutes a Collection will not be considered an Adaptation for
the purpose of this License. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a musical
work, performance or phonogram, the synchronization of the Work in timed-relation with
a moving image ("synching") will be considered an Adaptation for the purpose of this
License.
b."Collection" means a collection of literary or artistic works, such as encyclopedias and
anthologies, or performances, phonograms or broadcasts, or other works or subject matter
other than works listed in Section 1(g) below, which, by reason of the selection and
arrangement of their contents, constitute intellectual creations, in which the Work is
included in its entirety in unmodified form along with one or more other contributions,
each constituting separate and independent works in themselves, which together are
assembled into a collective whole. A work that constitutes a Collection will not be
considered an Adaptation (as defined above) for the purposes of this License.
c."Distribute" means to make available to the public the original and copies of the Work
or Adaptation, as appropriate, through sale or other transfer of ownership.
d."License Elements" means the following high-level license attributes as selected by
Licensor and indicated in the title of this License: Attribution, Noncommercial,
ShareAlike.
e."Licensor" means the individual, individuals, entity or entities that offer(s) the Work
under the terms of this License.
f."Original Author" means, in the case of a literary or artistic work, the individual,
individuals, entity or entities who created the Work or if no individual or entity can be
identified, the publisher; and in addition (i) in the case of a performance the actors,
singers, musicians, dancers, and other persons who act, sing, deliver, declaim, play in,
interpret or otherwise perform literary or artistic works or expressions of folklore; (ii) in
the case of a phonogram the producer being the person or legal entity who first fixes the
sounds of a performance or other sounds; and, (iii) in the case of broadcasts, the
organization that transmits the broadcast.
g."Work" means the literary and/or artistic work offered under the terms of this License
including without limitation any production in the literary, scientific and artistic domain,
whatever may be the mode or form of its expression including digital form, such as a
book, pamphlet and other writing; a lecture, address, sermon or other work of the same
nature; a dramatic or dramatico-musical work; a choreographic work or entertainment in
dumb show; a musical composition with or without words; a cinematographic work to
which are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to cinematography; a work
of drawing, painting, architecture, sculpture, engraving or lithography; a photographic
work to which are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to photography; a
work of applied art; an illustration, map, plan, sketch or three-dimensional work relative
to geography, topography, architecture or science; a performance; a broadcast; a

9

phonogram; a compilation of data to the extent it is protected as a copyrightable work; or
a work performed by a variety or circus performer to the extent it is not otherwise
considered a literary or artistic work.
h."You" means an individual or entity exercising rights under this License who has not
previously violated the terms of this License with respect to the Work, or who has
received express permission from the Licensor to exercise rights under this License despite
a previous violation.
i."Publicly Perform" means to perform public recitations of the Work and to
communicate to the public those public recitations, by any means or process, including by
wire or wireless means or public digital performances; to make available to the public
Works in such a way that members of the public may access these Works from a place
and at a place individually chosen by them; to perform the Work to the public by any
means or process and the communication to the public of the performances of the Work,
including by public digital performance; to broadcast and rebroadcast the Work by any
means including signs, sounds or images.
j."Reproduce" means to make copies of the Work by any means including without
limitation by sound or visual recordings and the right of fixation and reproducing
fixations of the Work, including storage of a protected performance or phonogram in
digital form or other electronic medium.

2. Fair Dealing Rights. Nothing in this License is intended to reduce, limit, or restrict any uses free
from copyright or rights arising from limitations or exceptions that are provided for in connection
with the copyright protection under copyright law or other applicable laws.
3. License Grant. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, Licensor hereby grants You a
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright)
license to exercise the rights in the Work as stated below:
a.
b.

c.
d.

to Reproduce the Work, to incorporate the Work into one or more Collections, and to
Reproduce the Work as incorporated in the Collections;
to create and Reproduce Adaptations provided that any such Adaptation, including any
translation in any medium, takes reasonable steps to clearly label, demarcate or otherwise
identify that changes were made to the original Work. For example, a translation could be
marked "The original work was translated from English to Spanish," or a modification
could indicate "The original work has been modified.";
to Distribute and Publicly Perform the Work including as incorporated in Collections;
and,
to Distribute and Publicly Perform Adaptations.

The above rights may be exercised in all media and formats whether now known or hereafter devised.
The above rights include the right to make such modifications as are technically necessary to exercise
the rights in other media and formats. Subject to Section 8(f), all rights not expressly granted by
Licensor are hereby reserved, including but not limited to the rights described in Section 4(e).

4. Restrictions. The license granted in Section 3 above is expressly made subject to and limited by
the following restrictions:
a.

You may Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work only under the terms of this License.
You must include a copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) for, this License
with every copy of the Work You Distribute or Publicly Perform. You may not offer or
impose any terms on the Work that restrict the terms of this License or the ability of the
recipient of the Work to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the
License. You may not sublicense the Work. You must keep intact all notices that refer to
this License and to the disclaimer of warranties with every copy of the Work You
10

b.

c.

d.

Distribute or Publicly Perform. When You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work, You
may not impose any effective technological measures on the Work that restrict the ability
of a recipient of the Work from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under
the terms of the License. This Section 4(a) applies to the Work as incorporated in a
Collection, but this does not require the Collection apart from the Work itself to be made
subject to the terms of this License. If You create a Collection, upon notice from any
Licensor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from the Collection any credit as
required by Section 4(d), as requested. If You create an Adaptation, upon notice from any
Licensor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from the Adaptation any credit as
required by Section 4(d), as requested.
You may Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation only under: (i) the terms of this
License; (ii) a later version of this License with the same License Elements as this
License; (iii) a Creative Commons jurisdiction license (either this or a later license
version) that contains the same License Elements as this License (e.g., AttributionNonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 US) ("Applicable License"). You must include a copy
of, or the URI, for Applicable License with every copy of each Adaptation You Distribute
or Publicly Perform. You may not offer or impose any terms on the Adaptation that
restrict the terms of the Applicable License or the ability of the recipient of the Adaptation
to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the Applicable License.
You must keep intact all notices that refer to the Applicable License and to the disclaimer
of warranties with every copy of the Work as included in the Adaptation You Distribute
or Publicly Perform. When You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Adaptation, You may
not impose any effective technological measures on the Adaptation that restrict the ability
of a recipient of the Adaptation from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient
under the terms of the Applicable License. This Section 4(b) applies to the Adaptation as
incorporated in a Collection, but this does not require the Collection apart from the
Adaptation itself to be made subject to the terms of the Applicable License.
You may not exercise any of the rights granted to You in Section 3 above in any manner
that is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or private
monetary compensation. The exchange of the Work for other copyrighted works by means
of digital file-sharing or otherwise shall not be considered to be intended for or directed
toward commercial advantage or private monetary compensation, provided there is no
payment of any monetary compensation in con-nection with the exchange of copyrighted
works.
If You Distribute, or Publicly Perform the Work or any Adaptations or Collections, You
must, unless a request has been made pursuant to Section 4(a), keep intact all copyright
notices for the Work and provide, reasonable to the medium or means You are utilizing:
(i) the name of the Original Author (or pseudonym, if applicable) if supplied, and/or if the
Original Author and/or Licensor designate another party or parties (e.g., a sponsor
institute, publishing entity, journal) for attribution ("Attribution Parties") in Licensor's
copyright notice, terms of service or by other reasonable means, the name of such party or
parties; (ii) the title of the Work if supplied; (iii) to the extent reasonably practicable, the
URI, if any, that Licensor specifies to be associated with the Work, unless such URI does
not refer to the copyright notice or licensing information for the Work; and, (iv) consistent
with Section 3(b), in the case of an Adaptation, a credit identifying the use of the Work in
the Adaptation (e.g., "French translation of the Work by Original Author," or "Screenplay
based on original Work by Original Author"). The credit required by this Section 4(d)
may be implemented in any reasonable manner; provided, however, that in the case of a
Adaptation or Collection, at a minimum such credit will appear, if a credit for all
contributing authors of the Adaptation or Collection appears, then as part of these credits
and in a manner at least as prominent as the credits for the other contributing authors. For
the avoidance of doubt, You may only use the credit required by this Section for the
purpose of attribution in the manner set out above and, by exercising Your rights under

11

e.

this License, You may not implicitly or explicitly assert or imply any connection with,
sponsorship or endorsement by the Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties,
as appropriate, of You or Your use of the Work, without the separate, express prior
written permission of the Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties.
For the avoidance of doubt:

i.Non-waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in

f.

which the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory
licensing scheme cannot be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to
collect such royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this
License;
ii.Waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in which
the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing
scheme can be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect such
royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License if
Your exercise of such rights is for a purpose or use which is otherwise than
noncommercial as permitted under Section 4(c) and otherwise waives the right
to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme; and,
iii.Voluntary License Schemes. The Licensor reserves the right to collect
royalties, whether individually or, in the event that the Licensor is a member of
a collecting society that administers voluntary licensing schemes, via that
society, from any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License that
is for a purpose or use which is otherwise than noncommercial as permitted
under Section 4(c).
Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the Licensor or as may be otherwise permitted by
applicable law, if You Reproduce, Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work either by
itself or as part of any Adaptations or Collections, You must not distort, mutilate, modify
or take other derogatory action in relation to the Work which would be prejudicial to the
Original Author's honor or reputation. Licensor agrees that in those jurisdictions (e.g.
Japan), in which any exercise of the right granted in Section 3(b) of this License (the right
to make Adaptations) would be deemed to be a distortion, mutilation, modification or
other derogatory action prejudicial to the Original Author's honor and reputation, the
Licensor will waive or not assert, as appropriate, this Section, to the fullest extent
permitted by the applicable national law, to enable You to reasonably exercise Your right
under Section 3(b) of this License (right to make Adaptations) but not otherwise.

5. Representations, Warranties and Disclaimer
UNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRITING AND TO
THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, LICENSOR OFFERS THE
WORK AS-IS AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND
CONCERNING THE WORK, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE,
INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR THE ABSENCE OF
LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE OF
ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW
THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO THIS EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY
TO YOU.

6. Limitation on Liability. EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW,
IN NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY FOR
ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY
DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS LICENSE OR THE USE OF THE WORK, EVEN IF
LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
12

7. Termination
a.

b.

This License and the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically upon any
breach by You of the terms of this License. Individuals or entities who have received
Adaptations or Collections from You under this License, however, will not have their
licenses terminated provided such individuals or entities remain in full compliance with
those licenses. Sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 will survive any termination of this License.
Subject to the above terms and conditions, the license granted here is perpetual (for the
duration of the applicable copyright in the Work). Notwithstanding the above, Licensor
reserves the right to release the Work under different license terms or to stop distributing
the Work at any time; provided, however that any such election will not serve to withdraw
this License (or any other license that has been, or is required to be, granted under the
terms of this License), and this License will continue in full force and effect unless
terminated as stated above.

8. Miscellaneous
a.
b.
c.

d.
e.

f.

Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work or a Collection, the Licensor
offers to the recipient a license to the Work on the same terms and conditions as the
license granted to You under this License.
Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation, Licensor offers to the
recipient a license to the original Work on the same terms and conditions as the license
granted to You under this License.
If any provision of this License is invalid or unenforceable under applicable law, it shall
not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of the terms of this License, and
without further action by the parties to this agreement, such provision shall be reformed to
the minimum extent necessary to make such provision valid and enforceable.
No term or provision of this License shall be deemed waived and no breach consented to
unless such waiver or consent shall be in writing and signed by the party to be charged
with such waiver or consent.
This License constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the Work
licensed here. There are no understandings, agreements or representations with respect to
the Work not specified here. Licensor shall not be bound by any additional provisions that
may appear in any communication from You. This License may not be modified without
the mutual written agreement of the Licensor and You.
The rights granted under, and the subject matter referenced, in this License were drafted
utilizing the terminology of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works (as amended on September 28, 1979), the Rome Convention of 1961, the
WIPO Copyright Treaty of 1996, the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty of
1996 and the Universal Copyright Convention (as revised on July 24, 1971). These rights
and subject matter take effect in the relevant jurisdiction in which the License terms are
sought to be enforced according to the corresponding provisions of the implementation of
those treaty provisions in the applicable national law. If the standard suite of rights
granted under applicable copyright law includes additional rights not granted under this
License, such additional rights are deemed to be included in the License; this License is
not intended to restrict the license of any rights under applicable law.

Creative Commons Notice
Creative Commons is not a party to this License, and makes no warranty
whatsoever in connection with the Work. Creative Commons will not be liable to
You or any party on any legal theory for any damages whatsoever, including
without limitation any general, special, incidental or consequential damages arising
in connection to this license. Notwithstanding the foregoing two (2) sentences, if
13

Creative Commons has expressly identified itself as the Licensor hereunder, it shall
have all rights and obligations of Licensor.
Except for the limited purpose of indicating to the public that the Work is licensed
under the CCPL, Creative Commons does not authorize the use by either party of
the trademark "Creative Commons" or any related trademark or logo of Creative
Commons without the prior written consent of Creative Commons. Any permitted
use will be in compliance with Creative Commons' then-current trademark usage
guidelines, as may be published on its website or otherwise made available upon
request from time to time. For the avoidance of doubt, this trademark restriction
does not form part of this License.

Creative Commons may be contacted at http://creativecommons.org/.

14

