The Reality War
by
Robert Boyczuk
Magic! Bertwold thought, grinding his teeth and staring at the castle
wedged neatly -- and quite impossibly -- in the heart of the pass. Nothing good
ever comes of magic! Beside him, Lumpkin, his crew chief, mined his nose
abstractly, evincing no interest whatsoever in the castle.
The two men stood at the juncture where the road turned from gravel to
dirt. All work had ceased; picks, shovels, and wheelbarrows lay in the long grass
next to the idle road crew. Behind them the paving machine huffed in a quiet
rhythm, its bellows rising and falling, as if it were a beast drifting off to sleep.
The digging and grading machines had already been shut off and lay like giant,
inanimate limbs on the road. Bertwold had fashioned them thus -- in the shapes
of human arms and legs -- to assuage the King's distrust of machines. But now
their very forms irritated Bertwold, reminding him of all the hoops he had already
had to jump through to win the Royal contract.
And now this.
Clasping his hands behind his back, Bertwold stared miserably at the
castle.
Its outer walls were fashioned of basalt, rising seamlessly from the
ground to a height of nearly ten rods. Each corner boasted a square tower
surmounted by an enormous ivory statue. Curiously, all four of the carvings
appeared to be of imperfect figures, each lacking one or more limbs. The statue
on the nearest corner was missing a head and sporting two truncated stumps
where there should have been arms. Within the castle itself, visible above the
crenellations of the walls, were apical towers of coloured emerald and ruby glass;
and between them, the tops of ovate domes that shone with the lustre of gold and
sparkled with the cool radiance of silver. Thin, attenuated threads, the colour of
flax, (walkways Bertwold reckoned, though they were empty) wound round and
1

connected the buildings in an intricate pattern that was both complex and
beautiful to behold -- and, he thought with a slight degree of irritation in his
engineer's mind -- altogether impossible.
"How long has it been there?" he asked at last.
"We're not sure, boss," Lumpkin said. "It was there when we came out
this morning to start work."
"Have you sent anyone to ... " Bertwold hesitated, not sure exactly what
might be appropriate in this case. "... to, ah, ring the bell?"
"Well, no, sir. I tried to order a man to do it, but they're scared of its
magic, you see...."
Turning to Lumpkin, Bertwold tapped him on the chest with his
forefinger. "Then you go find out who lives in that thing, and what they're doing
there. You, personally. Don't send a labourer." Lumpkin opened his mouth, as if
to say something, but Bertwold cut him off. "Or I'll find someone else who's
hungry for a promotion." Lumpkin clamped his mouth shut. "In the meantime,
I'll get the men back to work. We're still at least half a league from the castle, and
there's plenty of road yet to lay. As far I know, there's nothing in the contract that
prevents your men from working in the presence of the supernatural."
Lumpkin, now a shade paler, nodded and swallowed hard. Spinning on
his heel, he stumbled away, the gravel crunching under his bootsoles.
Bertwold sighed. He had not counted on this when he had won the
King's commission to build the greatest road the land had ever seen. He looked at
the castle, imagining the pass as it had been yesterday and the day before, and
every day before for as long as men remembered, a wide, inviting V of sky that
gave onto the tablelands beyond.
Why would anyone want to drop a castle there?
Lady Miranda peered through the arrow slit. Ants, she thought, watching
as a clutch of figures emerged from a tent and scattered, busy with their
unfathomable, pointless tasks. Insects.
She looked at her right hand, then at her left, and pursed her lips.
Between the two there weren't enough fingers remaining to end this quickly.
Perhaps if she asked Poopsie....
No, she thought, he'd never agree. He was still off somewhere sulking.
It had been as much as she could do to convince him to move the castle from that
horrid swamp to where they were now, even though he'd undershot their
destination by over a hundred leagues. If she had been the one with the talent for
moving it would have been done right; but hers was transubstantiation, of little
use in such endeavours. She knew he should have offered his entire leg and not
just the shin, for the gods were capricious and not entirely to be trusted. But that
was Poopsie, always trying to cut corners, to save a finger here, a toe there, and
2

ending up paying a much higher price for it in the long run. She'd wanted to warn
him, but had, with difficulty, held her tongue. Now he'd have to go an entire arm
or the other leg to unstick them if they ever wanted to leave this absurd spot.
And they must.
The mortals would never leave them alone until both she and Poopsie
had been whittled down to their trunks. Humans were ants, swarming over their
betters and bearing them down by dint of sheer numbers. Crush a hundred and a
thousand would return. Their thick-headedness was simply incomprehensible.
Like the one who had disturbed her sleep yesterday morning.
Lumphead, he had called himself. Lumphead, indeed! A thoroughly nasty, bug of
a man. Imagine, the nerve, asking her to move the castle! Never! she had
shouted, outraged at the impudence of the request, though it was the very thing
for which she wished. How dare he! Her anger rekindled for an instant as she
remembered his effrontery -- and how she had reacted instinctively, without
thinking. Then she smiled, recalling the startled look on Lumphead's face as she
had reached out and touched his nose, and broccoli had sprouted in its place.
It had been worth her little toe.
Bertwold tried hard not to stare at Lumpkin's nose.
Instead he watched his three sappers wrap burlap around the explosives
before carefully packing them on small, two-wheeled carts. Another coiled
varying lengths of fuse around his shoulder.
"Ready, sir."
Bertwold nodded at the fusilier who had addressed him. "Then let's get
on with it."
"Yes, sir!"
The men lifted the handles to their carts and began jogging along the dirt
path towards the castle, the wheels raising small clouds of dust. Ha! Bertwold
thought as he watched his men draw closer to the base of the wall, Let them
magic their way out of this!
Lady Miranda's beauty was legendary. At least in her presence.
Studying herself in the mirror, she daubed an exact amount of rouge
beneath her eyepatch. She frowned, then turned her head so that her face was in
profile, her patch blending in with the dramatic shadows and angles of her
sculpted features. She had changed into a slinky black velvet number that
matched the colour of the patch. Yes, she decided, perhaps I can use it to good
effect. The patch certainly added to her air of mystery, making her flawless skin
appear even more striking. Picking up a silver-handled brush, she began stroking
raven hair that fell to the small of her back. She smiled. Ya still got it, baby, she
thought. Then, with just a slight degree of irritation: Lord knows I might need it
3

soon. She sighed. Certainly she'd been careful, very careful, to dole out her
magic in small doses over the years, saving it for only the most pressing
occasions. Her appearance had, after all, been her saving grace: it was how she'd
attracted Poopsie -- and his countless predecessors. She'd managed to remain
relatively whole while her suitors had whittled themselves down to slivers of flesh
to gain her favour. But Poopsie had reached the point where he was becoming
more and more reluctant to do so. He, along with his ardour, was thinning out.
That's what had landed them in this cursed mess in the first place.
The mirror chimed, snapping Miranda out of her reverie; its surface
shimmered like a wind-blown lake, distorting her reflection. A moment later a
pasty-faced cherub wearing a headset appeared where her reflection had formerly
been. "Ladyship," it intoned in a thin, reedy voice. "The bugs are restless." The
cherub disappeared and was replaced by a scene outside the castle. Several
figures toiled along the road, dragging wooden carts behind them. The view
narrowed, drawing in on the men. Visible, some rods behind, and exhorting the
men on loudly, was that hideous Lumpy fellow whose nose she'd transformed the
previous day; and beside him stood another man, a head taller, and broad of
shoulder. A breeze flicked his locks of golden hair restlessly in the wind.
Miranda ordered her mirror cherub to zoom in.
She sucked in a breath. He was a big fellow. A towering, bear of man,
arms locked defiantly across a barrel chest, a scowl twisting up his face. And a
striking face it was. Eyes grey as sea mist, nose long and straight, cheeks
prominent and sculpted like her own. And four perfect, fully-formed limbs.
Miranda's heart skipped a beat. Why, she wondered with no small amount of
bitterness, couldn't more immortals look like that?
"Milady, the ants draw nigh ...."
A V creased Miranda's brow; she shifted her attention back to the figures
dragging the carts. Explosives, she suddenly realized with distaste.
She expelled a sharp breath and cursed loudly. They would be at the
gates in a few minutes. It was too late to find Poopsie.
Gathering up her skirts, she dashed out of her sitting room and down the
stairs, taking them two at a time and emerging in the courtyard. She ran over to
the front gate and knelt in the dirt, her velvet gown forgotten. Placing her palm
flat on the ground, she concentrated on the two remaining fingers of her left
hand and began chanting under her breath. Almost immediately her fingers
stretched, then liquefied, soaking into the earth and transmuting the hard-packed,
washed out dirt to a lumpy beige mass centred around her palm. It glistened in
the sunlight. The transmutation grew, milk-white circles forming in pockets on its
surface. It continued to spread, now moving away from Miranda, following the
path under the gate and out towards the men trotting up the road.

4

Bertwold watched the sapper slip and fall. The man tried to rise, but the
more he struggled the further he sank into the ground. He managed to drag
himself up slightly on the protruding edge of his cart, but his efforts only mired
the cart deeper. He wiped his face with the back of his arm and spat something
from his mouth. "Oatmeal!" he screamed.
"What did he say?" asked Bertwold.
"Ootmal," said Lumpkin, his voice altered since his nose had been turned
to broccoli. "The rood's ben tooned to ootmal."
"Oh," Bertwold said. "I see."
Two of the men -- along with the cart -- had already slipped beneath the
surface. Another had managed to half-swim, half-crawl to safety at the side of the
road where the ground was firmer.
Bertwold stared at the castle and ground his teeth.
A moment later there was a muffled roar. The oatmeal road exploded
upwards like a fountain; it showered down in thick droplets splattering all those
who had gathered to watch, a large lump narrowly missing Bertwold and plopping
wetly atop Lumpkin's skull.
Miranda reached the ramparts just in time to see the ensuing explosion.
She laughed aloud as the oatmeal rained down on her enemies. Chew on that,
silly mortals! she thought. Vulgar food for vulgar pests! That big one didn't seem
quite so haughty now that he was wearing a suit of oatmeal.
Miranda felt exhilarated, alive. And something else, too. A strange, yet
not wholly unpleasant, tingling. Perhaps this was just what she needed. Nothing
like a bit of a excitement to shake the dust from your bones.
She clambered onto the thick ledge of the crenel so she would be visible
to those below. Then she waved, looking directly at the big man, laughing and
knowing her laugh would be carried clearly on the tongue of the wind to those
annoyingly perfect ears ....
There was no denying she was beautiful.
Bertwold stared through his brass telescope at the infuriating women.
She sat on the parapet, brushing her hair as if nothing were amiss, acknowledging
his presence by blowing him an occasional raspberry. Cheeky impertinence! he
thought. He was angry at her -- and angry at himself for finding that damned
eyepatch so fascinating!
"Weel?"
"Well, what?" Bertwold answered irritably. He stepped back from the
telescope, and made a mental note that, at a more discreet moment, he would
suggest a thorough steaming might help Lumpkin in the preservation of his
wilting nose.
5

"Whoot shuld I teel the mun?"
Bertwold turned. Some of the crew were playing cards, others stood in
small groups, talking in low voices. Bertwold stared at a digging machine, its oak
bucket cupped in the shape of human hand, resting uselessly on the side of the
road.
"Assemble the men," he said. "I have an idea."
Bertwold stood behind the machine, pleased that its design and
construction had proceeded so smoothly. It had taken only a day, remarkable,
really, when he thought about it. Perhaps his men shared the same agitation to get
on with things that dogged him; or maybe they were just anxious to complete the
road and return to their families. Whatever the case, the guilds had worked cooperatively for once, and would have posted their first injury-free day had it not
been for the knifing.
Bertwold walked the length of his new machine, checking the work.
Inside the frame from the levelling machine, they had placed the arm from the
digging machine, hinged on a massive, metal pin. Bertwold nodded at the end of
his inspection, deciding it would make a passable catapult.
He surveyed the castle wall with his telescope, settling on a spot midway
between the towers.
The men stood ready.
Bertwold barked an order and three bare-chested men bent to the task of
turning a large windlass that drew the catapult's arm lower. A ratchet snicked in
time to the men's grunts. When the arm would go no lower, a second crew
wrestled a round, black bomb into the cupped palm at the end of the arm.
Lumpkin, who Bertwold had placed in charge of the catapult, jotted a few quick
calculations on a pad he held in his hand, and directed the men to angle the cart
ever so slightly. A moment later, he turned to Bertwold and said, "Weady, Sur!"
Bertwold nodded.
"Fur!" Lumpkin shouted at a burly man holding a mallet.
The man raised his eyebrows in a quizzical look.
"Fur, I said!"
"Beg your pardon?"
"Fire," Bertwold said quietly.
"Oh," the man said, then turned and knocked the ratchet stay free with
his mallet.
The arm flashed upwards, and the cart jerked sharply, its wheels
momentarily lifting off the ground. Bertwold watched the bomb arc towards the
castle.
It struck near the top of the wall and exploded, the thunderous sound
rushing back to them a second after the flash. A section, just above the point at
6

which the missile struck, slowly tumbled backwards and out of sight, leaving a
small, but noticeable gap, like a missing front tooth.
The men cheered, and Bertwold turned to look at Lumpkin. Though it
was hard to tell, he thought he could detect a smile of satisfaction beneath the
green mass of broccoli.
"Aieee!" shrieked Miranda, dancing backwards when the wall tumbled
down, narrowly missing her and burying Poopsie, who had been seated in the rose
garden. "Aieee!" she said again. Then, recovering her composure, she stamped
her feet in indignation. How dare they! she thought. The insolent insects! "That's
it!" she said to the rubble heap that had been Poopsie, "Now, I'm really mad!"
"Now, now, Miranda, better not to get yourself worked up." Poopsie's
voice was barely audible from beneath the debris. "They're only doing what
mortals usually do. Let's think about this thing rationally ...."
"No!" Miranda shouted as a large section of the fallen wall began to stir,
loose dirt and stones trickling off its edges. "I will not let this go unpunished!"
The chunk of wall floated upwards, then hovered. Another piece began to shift.
"Please, Miranda, before you go throwing away perfectly good body
parts on a pointless gesture." Poopsie's voice was clearer now, and Miranda
recognized the wheedling tone. She knew it was his own precious body parts he
was really worrying about. "After all, we're the ones who landed in the middle of
their pass. It's not as if they came here just to raze the castle." A geyser of dirt
and stones shot from the hole and fell to the ground, forcing Miranda to hop back
two more steps.
"Are you taking their side?"
Poopsie clambered from the pit as best he could on his one good leg,
covered in dirt but otherwise unhurt. "No, dearheart. I'm just saying you have to
see it from their point of view." The stone slabs suspended in the air dropped
back into the hole with a whump.
"Hmph," she said. She eyed him closely, wondering what part of himself
he had sacrificed to escape the rubble. He shook his head like a wet dog, and dirt
sprayed out in all direction; it was then she saw his left ear was missing.
"Just give me a moment to gather my thoughts, and I'll move the castle
like you wanted," he said.
There was another thunderous explosion and part of the castle wall to
Miranda's left cascaded downwards, shattering the glass roof of the aviary. A
flock of brightly coloured birds, including her favourite gryphon, took wing,
rising over the wall and scattering on the wind.
"I've decided that I like it here," Miranda said. "I think we should stay."
"Stay? No, don't be silly." Poopsie bent down and placed his hand on
the ground at Miranda's feet. "Brace yourself," he said.
7

But before he could do anything, Miranda had seized his hair, and in an
instant, and at the cost of her big toe, had transmutated him to a parrot with a tiny
wooden leg.
"Awk!" Poopsie squawked, flapping his wings and hopping about on his
one good leg.
"There!" Miranda said petulantly. "Now you shan't be able to work your
magic until I release you!"
Another explosion rocked the castle, and Miranda stepped up to the wall,
placing her palm on it.
"Awk! Miranda, wait!" Poopsie screeched, but it was already too late,
for her long raven locks were melting away as she worked her magic, running
down her cheeks and neck like trails of blackened butter, leaving streaks that
shone darkly in the sun.
Bertwold watched as a fourth projectile misfired, shattering uselessly
against the wall and dropping to the ground in a curl of smoke. Already there
were two large gaps near the summit of the wall and a irregular tear where the
third bomb had hit beneath the tower. He did a quick count of the remaining
ammunition -- fourteen missiles -- and decided that it would be sufficient to finish
the job. He ordered them to concentrate their fire to the right of the largest
breach.
"Fur!" Lumpkin shouted.
The bomb tore up and away, dwindling to a small dot. It struck -- but
much to Bertwold's consternation, neither fell nor detonated. Instead it stretched
the dark surface of the wall as if it were made of rubber. A moment later, the wall
snapped back in their direction and the black dot began to grow rapidly.
Oh, oh, Bertwold thought.
Lumpkin bolted down the road, leaving a trail of florets in his wake.
Bertwold overtook him just before the bomb struck.
He was pitched, head over heels, into a deep ditch they'd been using as a
latrine. A series of rapid explosions followed. The ground shook beneath him.
Dirt rained down, then smoking bits of debris, sizzling as they extinguished in the
fetid water. A moment later a dark cloud boiled around him, choking him and
making his eyes water. He struggled to his feet.
"Sur?"
Bertwold blinked back tears.
"Butwuld?"
The smoke dissipated, and Bertwold could make out the blurry face of
Lumpkin who stood on the bank above him. Lumpkin's clothes were singed and
torn, and the tip of his broccoli was blackened, but otherwise he seemed unhurt.
"The catapult?" Bertwold asked grabbing Lumpkin's shirt and bunching
8

the material in his fist. Then, before Lumpkin could answer, Bertwold pulled
himself up the shallow embankment, throwing his foreman off balance, so that,
with a yelp, he tumbled into latrine.
Bertwold staggered up the slope of the bank. Before him, where the
catapult and stockpile of ammunition had been, there was an enormous, smoking
crater.
"Got them!" Miranda lifted the hem of her gown and did a little jig.
"Maybe now he'll understand who he's dealing with!"
Poopsie shook his head ruefully, ruffling his feathers, scratching behind
his left ear with his tiny wooden leg. "I wouldn't count on it," he squawked, and
flapped onto Miranda's shoulder. "Please, Randy, just change me back and I'll get
us out of here. Let's leave before something serious happens ...."
Miranda shooed him away with a wave of her hand. She crossed her
arms, and her expression hardened. "No. He started it. Now let him finish it -- if
he can!"
"What are they doing?" Lady Miranda wondered aloud. For the last five
days the annoying humans had left them in relative peace. Poopsie chewed
quietly on a cracker, but refrained from commenting.
Miranda leaned forward between the merlons of the parapet, about to
drum her fingers in consternation when she remembered her digits were all gone.
It only added to her pique.
"Awk, Randy," Poopsie's squawked in her ear, "they're not worth the
effort. Awk, awk! Let them be."
Miranda winced; every time Poopsie talked he was sounding more like a
parrot. And it was getting harder and harder to coax him from the trees.
"Awk! Change me back, and let's be on our way. Awk!"
"No," she said. "Not until this is finished." She gave him another
cracker.
What were the bugs up to?
She stared down the valley at the mortals' camp and shook her head in
bemusement. They'd dismantled all their their limb-shaped construction vehicles.
At first, Miranda had thought they'd given in, and were simply packing up to
leave; but instead of slinking away, they had erected an enormous pavilion and
dragged the disassembled parts of the machines underneath its broad canvases.
Miranda bit her lip so hard she drew blood. The pain surprised her, made her
curse softly under her breath at the waste of a perfectly good blood wish. It's
their fault, she thought, her anger slowly rising as she dabbed at her lip with a
lace handkerchief. And they shall pay.

9

Bertwold admired his latest invention.
It had taken them the better part of a week to build the thing. In the
process, they'd had to cannibalize every single construction machine. And they'd
also exhausted their supplies. For the last two days his men had worked on empty
stomachs and Bertwold had spent almost as much time mollifying their growing
discontent as he spent overseeing the construction work. But it had been worth it,
he thought. This was the best machine he'd ever built.
"Fire up the boilers," he said to Lumpkin.
At Bertwold's words, Lumpkin jumped. He looked drawn, and more
than a little nervous, and this Bertwold could understand, having seen the other
men eyeing Lumpkin's nose hungrily. Bertwold's own stomach rumbled. For a
moment his vision misted over, and he could only see the yellow of a rich cheese
sauce running over green of broccoli, and his mouth began to water ....
He shook his head to clear it.
Focus, he admonished himself. You'll need all your wits to operate the
machine.
"Awk!" Poopsie flapped his wings, screeching as he circled the room in
agitated motion. "Awk!"
"What is it?" Miranda sat before her mirror; she had spent the morning
in the cellar, rooting through old trunks, trying on wigs.
"Follow me! Follow me!" Poopsie shrieked. Then he darted beneath the
door jamb and flew out of sight.
Miranda leapt to her feet and sped after him, out onto the parapet where
he perched, his little wooden leg tapping an agitated tattoo on the crenel.
"Look!" he squawked, pointing a wing.
Miranda turned. Her jaw fell open.
The roof of the human's pavilion had been rolled back, revealing a huge
machine fabricated in the form of a man. It was sitting up, as if it had just woken.
Steam curled slowly from vents in its neck. As Miranda watched, there was a
piercing whistle, and the machine rumbled to its feet, towering over the camp, its
face now level with hers. With a grinding noise it teetered, steadied itself, took
one lurching step, then another, walking in an exaggerated gait, moving
cautiously along the edge of the oatmeal swamp, heading towards the castle.
Poopsie hopped on her shoulder. "Quick!" Poopsie screamed in her ear.
"Change me back! Change me back! I'll get us out of here! Awk!"
Miranda raised her arm to bat him away, then stopped abruptly. "Okay,"
she said. She plucked him from her shoulder with her good arm -- the one with
two remaining fingers -- and he yelped, a strangled sort of sound that Miranda felt
vibrate through his windpipe. She closed her eyes and concentrated; her arm
began to dissolve, to fuse with Poopsie.
10

He grew.
Already larger than Miranda, he continued to grow with each passing
second as her arm disintegrated. By the time she was up to her elbow he was a
forty foot-high parrot, his wooden leg the size of a small tree. When she finally
withdrew, only a small flap of flesh left where her arm used to be, Poopsie's head
extended past the castle's highest tower.
"Now!" Miranda shouted, pointing to the man-machine. "Get him!"
Poopsie blinked, once, twice, and cocked his head. His eyes were dull
and remote, and Miranda could no longer detect any sign of human intelligence in
them. "Poopsie?" she asked. "You there?"
Poopsie screeched, an ear-splitting reverberation that shook the castle
down to its foundations. He launched himself from the parapet, his wings beating
so hard that Miranda was nearly blown from the wall. He swooped past the
machine, and dove towards the clutch of workers in the encampment. At the last
second he banked and climbed into the sky, a tiny figure with a bright green nose
struggling in his talons. In seconds he'd dwindled to a small dot on the horizon.
Oops, Miranda thought.
As if enraged, the man-machine leapt forward, its whistle shrieking in
anger.
The parrot was monstrous, huge, large enough to knock even this
machine over.
Bertwold watched it dive towards him and he froze, his hands on the
levers, unable to move. It grew larger and larger, until he could see nothing else,
and he covered his eyes, waiting for the moment of impact that would topple him
to his death. But nothing happened. Or at least nothing dire. The machine
rocked gently as the parrot swooped past. When Bertwold lowered his arm the
eyeholes showed only empty sky. He pulled a lever, and the head swung round a
full circle. But the bird was nowhere to be seen.
"Right," Bertwold said. "That's it for you!" He reached for a lever.
The motors roared; steam vented in screeching whistles. The machine
jerked forward, breaking into a mechanical trot. Then it lurched sickeningly.
Although the engines continued to bellow, the machine had come to a standstill.
Bertwold grabbed another lever, pulling sharply on it; the machine
roared even louder, and this time he could hear its metal joints squeal deafeningly
under the stress. A rivet popped out of a plate above his head and shot across the
chamber, ricocheting off the opposite wall and clattering noisily to the floor.
Bertwold eased up on the lever, and the machine seemed to sigh; then it settled on
an awkward angle, the landscape ahead of him tilted a few degrees. What the ....?
Bertwold unstrapped himself and took two quick steps to the right
eyehole. Far below, the machine's feet had already disappeared, swallowed in the
11

golden-brown, lumpy earth.
Bertwold cursed aloud. In his anger, he'd forgotten about the rotting
oatmeal!
He dashed back, and worked furiously at the controls, but no matter what
he did, no matter how hard he pulled or pushed the groaning levers, he couldn't
free the machines' legs. His beautiful new machine continued to sink. As he
sweated and cursed and sweated some more, the landscape rose, bit by infuriating
bit, before him.
Bertwold stood beside his machine, just beyond the edge of the deadly
oatmeal. Only the machine's head was visible, it chin nestled firmly in the brown
morass. Bertwold felt like crying. Instead, he continued to brush oatmeal from
his jerkin in as dignified a manner as he could muster. It left sad brown streaks
wherever it touched.
Down the road the encampment was deserted; his men had abandoned
him. One giant parrot and they fled like frightened children. Bertwold shook his
head. He had expected better of them, especially of Lumpkin, always faithful
Lumpkin. Oh well, he thought. Wherever he's gone, he's probably better off now.
"Haloooo ..." The voice startled Bertwold. It was a woman's voice, a
mellifluous, lilting tone that made his blood quicken. It had issued from behind
the castle gate. "Is anyone out there?"
Bertwold turned and cleared his throat. "Yes?"
"Um," the voice began, "I'm in a bit of a fix. I was wondering if you
could, ah, possibly give me a hand."
Bertwold strode up to the gate. In its centre was a square peephole that
was shut. "What sort of help?" When there was no answer, Bertwold said, "Why
don't you open the gate?"
"I'm afraid I can't," the voice said. "You see, that's my problem."
"Then at least open the peephole so I can see who it is that I'm
addressing."
"Oh, well, if you insist!" The voice sounded annoyed, almost petulant.
There was a rasping sound followed by a grunt. Then the small wooden square
swung inward. Bertwold's heart faltered. Framed in the opening was the
beautiful face he had watched through his telescope, although now a wig sat
askew atop her striking face. Bertwold gaped; the woman blushed. Then she
inclined her head in a fetching manner, hiding her eyepatch in half-shadow.
Bertwold sucked in a sharp breath.
"I'm afraid I can't open the door," she said in a forlorn voice that rent
Bertwold's heart. "I'm trapped." She stepped back and he could see that she had
only one arm, and that arm had no fingers. "I managed to pull the bolt on the
peephole with my teeth, but the gate is barred." She gave him a melting look.
12

"I'm afraid you'll have to find your own way in."
Bertwold's heart sang in his chest.
Fall was nearly played out, and winter would soon be upon them; large
flakes of snow drifted down and settled on the ground. The pass, paved road and
all, would soon be closed until spring. Miranda stared at the castle, at her castle,
and the causeway that had been cut through it like a tunnel, and felt a brief,
almost imperceptible, flash of something that might have been anger.
But it passed quickly.
As if sensing her agitation, Bertwold reached out and put his arm around
her shoulders. She turned and smiled at him.
It had been his idea to come back here, and she could see it troubled him
no less than her. The way he had looked at his machine, or the head of it, anyway,
that poked above the ground in the midst of the inexplicable broccoli patch. It
was, she thought, quite clever, still widely regarded as his best work, something
of which he could rightly be proud.
"Ready?" she asked and he nodded.
They walked back to their carriage. When she reached out to open the
door, he closed his fingers over her wrist. "Problems?" he asked.
She drew her brow up in puzzlement.
"The cold," he tapped her arm. "I was worried about the temperature.
How's it holding up?"
She flexed her arm, curling her fingers, all five of them, into a fist and
released them. An almost inaudible whirring followed her movements. "Works
perfectly," she said, reaching out and pulling his head to hers until their lips
touched lightly. "Just like magic."

13

This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0
Human-readable License:
You are free:

●
●

to Share — to copy, distribute and transmit the work
to Remix — to adapt the work

Under the following conditions:

●

Attribution. You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the author
or licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they endorse you or your use
of the work).

●

Noncommercial. You may not use this work for commercial purposes.

●

Share Alike. If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may distribute
the resulting work only under the same or similar license to this one.

For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the license terms of this work.
The best way to do this is with a link to this web page.
Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission from the copyright
holder.
Nothing in this license impairs or restricts the author's moral rights.

Legal License in Full:

CREATIVE COMMONS CORPORATION IS NOT A LAW FIRM AND DOES
NOT PROVIDE LEGAL SERVICES. DISTRIBUTION OF THIS LICENSE DOES
NOT CREATE AN ATTORNEY-CLIENT RELATIONSHIP. CREATIVE
COMMONS PROVIDES THIS INFORMATION ON AN "AS-IS" BASIS.
CREATIVE COMMONS MAKES NO WARRANTIES REGARDING THE
INFORMATION PROVIDED, AND DISCLAIMS LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES
RESULTING FROM ITS USE.

License
THE WORK (AS DEFINED BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS CREATIVE
COMMONS PUBLIC LICENSE ("CCPL" OR "LICENSE"). THE WORK IS PROTECTED BY
COPYRIGHT AND/OR OTHER APPLICABLE LAW. ANY USE OF THE WORK OTHER THAN
AS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS LICENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS PROHIBITED.
BY EXERCISING ANY RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED HERE, YOU ACCEPT AND
14

AGREE TO BE BOUND BY THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. TO THE EXTENT THIS LICENSE
MAY BE CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTRACT, THE LICENSOR GRANTS YOU THE RIGHTS
CONTAINED HERE IN CONSIDERATION OF YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF SUCH TERMS AND
CONDITIONS.
1. Definitions

a.

"Adaptation" means a work based upon the Work, or upon the Work and other preexisting works, such as a translation, adaptation, derivative work, arrangement of music or
other alterations of a literary or artistic work, or phonogram or performance and includes
cinematographic adaptations or any other form in which the Work may be recast,
transformed, or adapted including in any form recognizably derived from the original,
except that a work that constitutes a Collection will not be considered an Adaptation for the
purpose of this License. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a musical work,
performance or phonogram, the synchronization of the Work in timed-relation with a
moving image ("synching") will be considered an Adaptation for the purpose of this
License.

b.

"Collection" means a collection of literary or artistic works, such as encyclopedias and
anthologies, or performances, phonograms or broadcasts, or other works or subject matter
other than works listed in Section 1(g) below, which, by reason of the selection and
arrangement of their contents, constitute intellectual creations, in which the Work is
included in its entirety in unmodified form along with one or more other contributions,
each constituting separate and independent works in themselves, which together are
assembled into a collective whole. A work that constitutes a Collection will not be
considered an Adaptation (as defined above) for the purposes of this License.

c.

"Distribute" means to make available to the public the original and copies of the Work or
Adaptation, as appropriate, through sale or other transfer of ownership.

d.

"License Elements" means the following high-level license attributes as selected by
Licensor and indicated in the title of this License: Attribution, Noncommercial, ShareAlike.

e.

"Licensor" means the individual, individuals, entity or entities that offer(s) the Work under
the terms of this License.

f.

"Original Author" means, in the case of a literary or artistic work, the individual,
individuals, entity or entities who created the Work or if no individual or entity can be
identified, the publisher; and in addition (i) in the case of a performance the actors, singers,
musicians, dancers, and other persons who act, sing, deliver, declaim, play in, interpret or
otherwise perform literary or artistic works or expressions of folklore; (ii) in the case of a
phonogram the producer being the person or legal entity who first fixes the sounds of a
performance or other sounds; and, (iii) in the case of broadcasts, the organization that
transmits the broadcast.

g.

"Work" means the literary and/or artistic work offered under the terms of this License
including without limitation any production in the literary, scientific and artistic domain,
whatever may be the mode or form of its expression including digital form, such as a book,
pamphlet and other writing; a lecture, address, sermon or other work of the same nature; a
dramatic or dramatico-musical work; a choreographic work or entertainment in dumb
show; a musical composition with or without words; a cinematographic work to which are
assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to cinematography; a work of drawing,
painting, architecture, sculpture, engraving or lithography; a photographic work to which
are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to photography; a work of applied
art; an illustration, map, plan, sketch or three-dimensional work relative to geography,

15

topography, architecture or science; a performance; a broadcast; a phonogram; a
compilation of data to the extent it is protected as a copyrightable work; or a work
performed by a variety or circus performer to the extent it is not otherwise considered a
literary or artistic work.

h.

"You" means an individual or entity exercising rights under this License who has not
previously violated the terms of this License with respect to the Work, or who has received
express permission from the Licensor to exercise rights under this License despite a
previous violation.

i.

"Publicly Perform" means to perform public recitations of the Work and to communicate
to the public those public recitations, by any means or process, including by wire or
wireless means or public digital performances; to make available to the public Works in
such a way that members of the public may access these Works from a place and at a place
individually chosen by them; to perform the Work to the public by any means or process
and the communication to the public of the performances of the Work, including by public
digital performance; to broadcast and rebroadcast the Work by any means including signs,
sounds or images.

j.

"Reproduce" means to make copies of the Work by any means including without
limitation by sound or visual recordings and the right of fixation and reproducing fixations
of the Work, including storage of a protected performance or phonogram in digital form or
other electronic medium.

2. Fair Dealing Rights. Nothing in this License is intended to reduce, limit, or restrict any uses free
from copyright or rights arising from limitations or exceptions that are provided for in connection with
the copyright protection under copyright law or other applicable laws.
3. License Grant. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, Licensor hereby grants You a
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright) license
to exercise the rights in the Work as stated below:
a.
b.

c.
d.

to Reproduce the Work, to incorporate the Work into one or more Collections, and to
Reproduce the Work as incorporated in the Collections;
to create and Reproduce Adaptations provided that any such Adaptation, including any
translation in any medium, takes reasonable steps to clearly label, demarcate or otherwise
identify that changes were made to the original Work. For example, a translation could be
marked "The original work was translated from English to Spanish," or a modification
could indicate "The original work has been modified.";
to Distribute and Publicly Perform the Work including as incorporated in Collections; and,
to Distribute and Publicly Perform Adaptations.

The above rights may be exercised in all media and formats whether now known or hereafter devised.
The above rights include the right to make such modifications as are technically necessary to exercise
the rights in other media and formats. Subject to Section 8(f), all rights not expressly granted by
Licensor are hereby reserved, including but not limited to the rights described in Section 4(e).
4. Restrictions. The license granted in Section 3 above is expressly made subject to and limited by the
following restrictions:
a.

You may Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work only under the terms of this License. You
must include a copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) for, this License with
every copy of the Work You Distribute or Publicly Perform. You may not offer or impose
any terms on the Work that restrict the terms of this License or the ability of the recipient of
the Work to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the License. You

16

b.

c.

d.

may not sublicense the Work. You must keep intact all notices that refer to this License and
to the disclaimer of warranties with every copy of the Work You Distribute or Publicly
Perform. When You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work, You may not impose any
effective technological measures on the Work that restrict the ability of a recipient of the
Work from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the
License. This Section 4(a) applies to the Work as incorporated in a Collection, but this does
not require the Collection apart from the Work itself to be made subject to the terms of this
License. If You create a Collection, upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the extent
practicable, remove from the Collection any credit as required by Section 4(d), as
requested. If You create an Adaptation, upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the
extent practicable, remove from the Adaptation any credit as required by Section 4(d), as
requested.
You may Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation only under: (i) the terms of this
License; (ii) a later version of this License with the same License Elements as this License;
(iii) a Creative Commons jurisdiction license (either this or a later license version) that
contains the same License Elements as this License (e.g., Attribution-NonCommercialShareAlike 3.0 US) ("Applicable License"). You must include a copy of, or the URI, for
Applicable License with every copy of each Adaptation You Distribute or Publicly Perform.
You may not offer or impose any terms on the Adaptation that restrict the terms of the
Applicable License or the ability of the recipient of the Adaptation to exercise the rights
granted to that recipient under the terms of the Applicable License. You must keep intact all
notices that refer to the Applicable License and to the disclaimer of warranties with every
copy of the Work as included in the Adaptation You Distribute or Publicly Perform. When
You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Adaptation, You may not impose any effective
technological measures on the Adaptation that restrict the ability of a recipient of the
Adaptation from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the
Applicable License. This Section 4(b) applies to the Adaptation as incorporated in a
Collection, but this does not require the Collection apart from the Adaptation itself to be
made subject to the terms of the Applicable License.
You may not exercise any of the rights granted to You in Section 3 above in any manner
that is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or private monetary
compensation. The exchange of the Work for other copyrighted works by means of digital
file-sharing or otherwise shall not be considered to be intended for or directed toward
commercial advantage or private monetary compensation, provided there is no payment of
any monetary compensation in con-nection with the exchange of copyrighted works.
If You Distribute, or Publicly Perform the Work or any Adaptations or Collections, You
must, unless a request has been made pursuant to Section 4(a), keep intact all copyright
notices for the Work and provide, reasonable to the medium or means You are utilizing: (i)
the name of the Original Author (or pseudonym, if applicable) if supplied, and/or if the
Original Author and/or Licensor designate another party or parties (e.g., a sponsor institute,
publishing entity, journal) for attribution ("Attribution Parties") in Licensor's copyright
notice, terms of service or by other reasonable means, the name of such party or parties; (ii)
the title of the Work if supplied; (iii) to the extent reasonably practicable, the URI, if any,
that Licensor specifies to be associated with the Work, unless such URI does not refer to
the copyright notice or licensing information for the Work; and, (iv) consistent with Section
3(b), in the case of an Adaptation, a credit identifying the use of the Work in the Adaptation
(e.g., "French translation of the Work by Original Author," or "Screenplay based on original
Work by Original Author"). The credit required by this Section 4(d) may be implemented in
any reasonable manner; provided, however, that in the case of a Adaptation or Collection,
at a minimum such credit will appear, if a credit for all contributing authors of the
Adaptation or Collection appears, then as part of these credits and in a manner at least as
prominent as the credits for the other contributing authors. For the avoidance of doubt, You
17

e.

may only use the credit required by this Section for the purpose of attribution in the manner
set out above and, by exercising Your rights under this License, You may not implicitly or
explicitly assert or imply any connection with, sponsorship or endorsement by the Original
Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties, as appropriate, of You or Your use of the Work,
without the separate, express prior written permission of the Original Author, Licensor and/
or Attribution Parties.
For the avoidance of doubt:

i.

Non-waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in which
the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing
scheme cannot be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect
such royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License;

ii.

Waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in which the
right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme
can be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect such royalties
for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License if Your exercise
of such rights is for a purpose or use which is otherwise than noncommercial as
permitted under Section 4(c) and otherwise waives the right to collect royalties
through any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme; and,

iii. Voluntary License Schemes. The Licensor reserves the right to collect

f.

royalties, whether individually or, in the event that the Licensor is a member of a
collecting society that administers voluntary licensing schemes, via that society,
from any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License that is for a
purpose or use which is otherwise than noncommercial as permitted under
Section 4(c).
Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the Licensor or as may be otherwise permitted by
applicable law, if You Reproduce, Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work either by itself
or as part of any Adaptations or Collections, You must not distort, mutilate, modify or take
other derogatory action in relation to the Work which would be prejudicial to the Original
Author's honor or reputation. Licensor agrees that in those jurisdictions (e.g. Japan), in
which any exercise of the right granted in Section 3(b) of this License (the right to make
Adaptations) would be deemed to be a distortion, mutilation, modification or other
derogatory action prejudicial to the Original Author's honor and reputation, the Licensor
will waive or not assert, as appropriate, this Section, to the fullest extent permitted by the
applicable national law, to enable You to reasonably exercise Your right under Section 3(b)
of this License (right to make Adaptations) but not otherwise.

5. Representations, Warranties and Disclaimer
UNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRITING AND TO THE
FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, LICENSOR OFFERS THE WORK ASIS AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING
THE WORK, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING, WITHOUT
LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR THE ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS,
ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT
DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, SO THIS EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.
6. Limitation on Liability. EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW, IN
NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY FOR ANY
SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES
18

ARISING OUT OF THIS LICENSE OR THE USE OF THE WORK, EVEN IF LICENSOR HAS
BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
7. Termination
a.

b.

This License and the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically upon any breach
by You of the terms of this License. Individuals or entities who have received Adaptations
or Collections from You under this License, however, will not have their licenses
terminated provided such individuals or entities remain in full compliance with those
licenses. Sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 will survive any termination of this License.
Subject to the above terms and conditions, the license granted here is perpetual (for the
duration of the applicable copyright in the Work). Notwithstanding the above, Licensor
reserves the right to release the Work under different license terms or to stop distributing
the Work at any time; provided, however that any such election will not serve to withdraw
this License (or any other license that has been, or is required to be, granted under the terms
of this License), and this License will continue in full force and effect unless terminated as
stated above.

8. Miscellaneous
a.
b.
c.

d.
e.

f.

Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work or a Collection, the Licensor offers
to the recipient a license to the Work on the same terms and conditions as the license
granted to You under this License.
Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation, Licensor offers to the
recipient a license to the original Work on the same terms and conditions as the license
granted to You under this License.
If any provision of this License is invalid or unenforceable under applicable law, it shall not
affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of the terms of this License, and
without further action by the parties to this agreement, such provision shall be reformed to
the minimum extent necessary to make such provision valid and enforceable.
No term or provision of this License shall be deemed waived and no breach consented to
unless such waiver or consent shall be in writing and signed by the party to be charged with
such waiver or consent.
This License constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the Work
licensed here. There are no understandings, agreements or representations with respect to
the Work not specified here. Licensor shall not be bound by any additional provisions that
may appear in any communication from You. This License may not be modified without
the mutual written agreement of the Licensor and You.
The rights granted under, and the subject matter referenced, in this License were drafted
utilizing the terminology of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works (as amended on September 28, 1979), the Rome Convention of 1961, the WIPO
Copyright Treaty of 1996, the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty of 1996 and the
Universal Copyright Convention (as revised on July 24, 1971). These rights and subject
matter take effect in the relevant jurisdiction in which the License terms are sought to be
enforced according to the corresponding provisions of the implementation of those treaty
provisions in the applicable national law. If the standard suite of rights granted under
applicable copyright law includes additional rights not granted under this License, such
additional rights are deemed to be included in the License; this License is not intended to
restrict the license of any rights under applicable law.
Creative Commons Notice
Creative Commons is not a party to this License, and makes no warranty whatsoever

19

in connection with the Work. Creative Commons will not be liable to You or any
party on any legal theory for any damages whatsoever, including without limitation
any general, special, incidental or consequential damages arising in connection to
this license. Notwithstanding the foregoing two (2) sentences, if Creative Commons
has expressly identified itself as the Licensor hereunder, it shall have all rights and
obligations of Licensor.
Except for the limited purpose of indicating to the public that the Work is licensed
under the CCPL, Creative Commons does not authorize the use by either party of the
trademark "Creative Commons" or any related trademark or logo of Creative
Commons without the prior written consent of Creative Commons. Any permitted
use will be in compliance with Creative Commons' then-current trademark usage
guidelines, as may be published on its website or otherwise made available upon
request from time to time. For the avoidance of doubt, this trademark restriction does
not form part of this License.
Creative Commons may be contacted at http://creativecommons.org/.

20

